Part I: Administrative Ordinances
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Borough of Waldwick
of a general and permanent nature, adopted by the Mayor and Borough
Council of the Borough of Waldwick, as, revised, codified, and consolidated
into titles, chapters and sections by the Borough Clerk and consisting of
Chapters 1 through 99, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved,
adopted, ordained and enacted as "The Code of the Borough of Waldwick, in
the County of Bergen and the State of New Jersey."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances
passed by the Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough of Waldwick prior
to the enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are expressly
saved from repeal or continued in force and effect as shall hereafter be set
forth by reference.
§ 1-3. When effective.
All provisions of the Code of the Borough of Waldwick, in the County of
Bergen and State of New Jersey shall be in full force and effect on and after
the effective date of this ordinance.
§ 1-4. Repeal of ordinances not contained in or inconsistent with
provisions of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, adopted by the Mayor
and Borough Council of the Borough of Waldwick in force on the date
of the adoption of this ordinance and not contained in the Code of the
Borough of Waldwick, in the County of Bergen and the State of New Jersey,
or which are inconsistent with any provisions contained in such Code, are
hereby repealed as of the effective date of this adopting ordinance, except
as hereafter provided.
§ 1-5. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
1-4 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provisions of the Borough of Waldwick prior to the effective
date of this ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough of
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:3
§ 1-6. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Borough of Waldwick for
adoption and revision as part of the Code of the Borough of Waldwick, in
the County of Bergen and State of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4,
certain grammatical changes and other minor changes were made in one
(1) or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Mayor and Borough
Council of the Borough of Waldwick that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code of the Borough of Waldwick, in the county of Bergen and
State of New Jersey, as if the ordinances so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
§ 1-7. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code of the Borough of Waldwick, in the County of Bergen
and State of New Jersey in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office
of the Borough Clerk of the Borough of Waldwick and shall remain there
for the use and examination of the public until final action is taken on
Waldwick, or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action suit or other proceeding pending or
any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this date of this
ordinance brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough
of Waldwick.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Mayor and Borough Council.
E. Any ordinance of the Borough of Waldwick providing for the laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or other public place
within the Borough of Waldwick or any portion thereof.
F. Any ordinance or resolution of the Borough of Waldwick appropriating
money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the
Borough of Waldwick or other instruments or evidence of the borough's
indebtedness.
G. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
I. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
J. Any ordinance of the Mayor and Borough Council adopted on final
passage after November 25, 1969.
§ 1-5 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 1-7
1:4
this ordinance; and if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be
certified to by the Clerk of the Borough of Waldwick by impressing thereon
the Seal of the Borough of Waldwick, as provided by law and such certified
copy shall remain on file in the office of the Borough Clerk, to be made
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while the
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-8. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code of the
Borough of Waldwick, in the County of Bergen and State of New Jersey,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Mayor and Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated in such Code, so that reference to "The Code of the Borough
of Waldwick, in the County of Bergen and State of New Jersey" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code of the
Borough of Waldwick, in the County of Bergen and State of New Jersey shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing the said Code, as amendments
and supplements thereto.
§ 1-9. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Clerk or someone authorized and
directed by the Borough Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the
book containing the Code of the Borough of Waldwick, in the County of
Bergen and State of New Jersey, required to be filled in the office of the
Borough Clerk for the use of the public. All changes in said codes and all
ordinances adopted by the Mayor and Council subsequent to the 25th day
of November, 1969, which shall be specifically adopted as a part of the
Code, shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-10. Sale of Code book; supplements provided.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code of the Borough of Waldwick,
in the County of Bergen and State of New Jersey may be purchased from
the Borough Clerk of the Borough of Waldwick upon the payment of a fee
to be set by resolution of the Mayor and Council, who may also arrange, by
resolution, for procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-11. Publication, filing.
The Borough Clerk of the Borough of Waldwick, pursuant to law, shall cause
to be published in the manner required, a copy of this adopting ordinance in
a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough of Waldwick. Sufficient
copies of the Code of the Borough of Waldwick, in the County of Bergen
and State of New Jersey shall be maintained in the office of the Borough
§ 1-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:5
Clerk for inspection by the public at all times during regular office hours.
The enactment and application of this adopting ordinance, coupled with
availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be
deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the code for all purposes.
§ 1-12. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or part thereof to
be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to
affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-13. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-14. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Borough
of Waldwick to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of
this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than
five hundred dollars ($500) or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90)
days, or both, in the discretion of the Magistrate imposing the same.
§ 1-14.1. Penalties for violation. [Amended 2-28-06 by Ord. No.
2-06; 12-12-06 by Ord. No. 24-06]
Where no specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of any such
provision of this Code or of any other ordinance or resolution of the Borough
or of any rule, regulation or order promulgated pursuant to such Code or
other Borough ordinance shall be punished by one or more of the following:
A. Imprisonment in the County jail for any term not exceeding ninety (90)
days; or
B. By a fine not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.)
C. By a period of community service not exceeding ninety (90) days
D. Each day a violation exists in the following chapters shall be deemed
and taken to be a separate and distinct offense:
Chapter 54 Housing Standards
Chapter 59 Littering
Chapter 75 Sewer Use
§ 1-11 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 1-14.1
1:6
§ 1-15. Effective date of this ordinance.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately after final approval and
publication according to law.
Chapter 80 Soil Removal
Chapter 82 Street and Sidewalk Uses
Chapter 83 Street Construction Specifications
Chapter 97 Zoning
E. For each and every violation of the provisions of chapter 97 entitled
zoning, the owner, contractor or other persons interested as general
agent, architect, building contractor, owner or tenant or any other
persons who commit, take part or assist in any violation of this chapter
shall be held for the fines and penalties listed in sections A through C
above at the discretion of the court.
§ 1-14.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7
Chapter 2
BOROUGH ADMINISTRATOR
§ 2-1. Creation of office.
The office of the Borough Administrator is hereby created for the Borough
of Waldwick, Bergen County, New Jersey, pursuant to the provisions of this
ordinance.
§ 2-2. Nomination and appointment; term.
The Borough Administrator shall be nominated by the Mayor and appointed
with the advice and consent of the Council. And the term of office of the
Borough Administrator shall be at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council.
§ 2-3. Filling of vacancies.
Any vacancy in said office shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor and
Council in the manner prescribed in Section 2-2 of this Chapter.
§ 2-4. Absence or disability.
During the absence or disability of the duly appointed Borough
Administrator, the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Waldwick may
by resolution, appoint an officer or regular employee of the municipality
to perform such duties of the Borough Administrator. Such absence or
disability shall be limited to three (3) months after which time such absence
or disability may be deemed a vacancy. All absences other than for approved
sick days, shall be without pay unless otherwise agreed by resolution of the
Mayor and Council.
§ 2-5. Removal.
The Borough Administrator may be removed by a two-thirds vote of the
Mayor and Council of the Borough of Waldwick. The resolution of removal
shall become effective three (3) months after its adoption by the Mayor and
Council. The Mayor and Council may provide that the resolution shall have
immediate effect; provided, however, that the Mayor and Council cause to
be paid to the Administrator forthwith any unpaid balance of their salary
and salary for the next three (3) calendar months following adoption of this
resolution.
§ 2-6. Qualifications and requirements.
A. The Borough Administrator shall be appointed on the basis of their
executive and administrative abilities and qualifications with special
regard to education, training and experience in governmental affairs.
The Administrator shall possess at least a Bachelor's Degree in a
relevant subject area and at least five years experience in local
government.
§ 1-15 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 2-6
1:8
§ 2-7. General duties and responsibilities.
The Borough Administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the
Borough of Waldwick, and they shall be responsible to the Mayor and
Council as a whole for the proper and efficient administration of the
business affairs of the Borough. The duties and responsibilities shall relate
to the general management of all Borough business, excepting therefrom
those duties and responsibilities conferred upon other Borough officials by
State statute and other applicable laws, rules and regulations promulgated
by the State and County agencies, decisional law or ordinance of the
Borough of Waldwick
§ 2-8. Specific duties.
The Borough Administrator shall perform all of the following described
duties and such other duties as shall be assigned to them from time to time
by resolution of the Mayor and Council.
B. The Borough Administrator need not be a resident of the Borough at the
time of their appointment.
C. No elected member of the Governing Body shall be eligible for
appointment as the Borough Administrator during their term of office
nor within one year after the expiration of said term.
A. The Borough Administrator shall supervise and direct business
activities of all Borough departments, including the direction of central
purchasing and recommend to the Mayor and Council the employment
and replacement of personnel as may be required in said department.
B. They shall serve as personnel officer of the Borough. As part of that
capacity the Borough Administrator shall recommend personnel to the
Mayor and Council for employment and promotion by the Borough. The
Borough Administrator shall recommend to the Mayor and Council the
discharge of any employee. They may discipline or suspend any
employee under their direct supervision pursuant to applicable civil
service procedure. No person shall be disciplined, suspended, or
recommend to be discharged, without just cause. Any employee
disciplined or suspended by the Borough Administrator shall have the
right to appeal such action to the Mayor and Council.
They shall administer and negotiate on behalf of the Borough all labor
contracts and maintain comprehensive personnel files and evaluation
systems of job performance and duties of all employees.
C. They shall prepare and submit to the Mayor and Council before the
close of the fiscal year, or on such alternate date as the Mayor and
Council shall determine a proposed budget for the next fiscal year, and
an explanatory budget message. In preparing the proposed budget, the
Borough Administrator shall obtain from the head of each department,
agency, board or officer, estimates of revenues and expenditures and
§ 2-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-8
1:9
other supporting data as requested. The Borough Administrator shall
review such estimates and may revise them before submitting the
proposed budget to the Mayor and Council.
D. They shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after its
adoption by the Mayor and Council and the implementation of the work
programs contained in the budget.
E. They shall execute and enforce the laws of the State of New Jersey and
ordinances and resolutions of the Borough of Waldwick as the Mayor
and Council may prescribe.
F. They shall attend all meetings of the Mayor and Council and their
committees, boards or bodies as directed, with a right to take part in
the discussion, and they shall receive notice of all regular and special
meetings of the Mayor and Council.
G. They shall prepare the regular and workshop agendas for each meeting
of the Mayor and Council and shall supply facts pertinent thereto and
deliver same to the Mayor and Council at least three (3) days prior to
the date of the meeting.
H. They shall keep the Mayor and Council informed as to the conduct of
Borough affairs, submit periodic reports, either in writing or orally, on
the condition of the Borough finances and such other reports, either in
writing or orally, as the Mayor and Council shall request, and shall
make such recommendations to the Mayor and Council as they deem
necessary and advisable for the welfare of the Borough.
I. They shall submit to the Mayor and Council, as soon as possible after
the close of the fiscal year, a complete written report on the
administrative activities of the Borough for the proceeding year.
J. They shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, contracts,
permits, licenses and privileges granted by the Borough or to the
Borough are complied with.
K. They may recommend the employment of experts and consultants to
perform work and render advice in connection with the operation of the
dedicated utilities or work projects in the Borough subject to final
approval by the Mayor and Council.
L. They shall attend to the letting of contracts, in due form of law and
supervise the performance and faithful execution of the same, except
insofar as such duties are expressly imposed upon some other Borough
officer or official by statute or ordinance or resolution.
M. They shall see that all money owed to the Borough is promptly paid, and
that the proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of
all of the Borough's claims.
N. They shall be the purchasing officer of the Borough, and they shall
purchase in accordance with the provisions of the governing statutes
§ 2-8 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 2-8
1:10
§ 2-9. Salary.
The Borough Administrator shall receive as salary, such sums as may be
fixed and adopted by the Mayor and Council in the annual Salary Ordinance
of the Borough.
and sound purchasing practices, all supplies and equipment for various
agencies, boards, departments and other offices of the Borough. The
Mayor and Council may, at various times by resolution, describe the
amount above which the purchases exceeding said amount must
receive prior approval of the Committee Chairman or the Council.
All purchases shall be in accord with the state statutes. The Mayor
and Council may also set by resolution the amount above which all
purchases will require three (3) or more competitive price quotations.
They shall keep an account of all purchases and shall from time to
time when directed by the Mayor and Council, make a full written
report thereof. They shall also issue rules and regulations governing
the requisition and purchase of all municipal supplies and equipment,
consistent with the provisions of this ordinance.
O. They shall review and recommend all bills and vouchers for payment
prior to final approval by the Mayor and Council.
P. All complaints regarding services or personnel of the Borough shall be
referred to the office of the Borough Administrator. They shall
investigate and dispose of such complaints and shall keep a written
record of such complaints and the action taken in response thereof, and
shall provide a copy thereof to the Mayor and Council.
Q. They shall maintain a continuing review and analysis of the budget
operations, work programs and cost of municipal services.
R. They shall, at the request of the Mayor and Council, assess the duties
and responsibilities of any elected or appointed official and any
department of the Borough, submitting their report relating thereto to
the Mayor and Council for such further actions as the Mayor and
Council may deem advisable.
S. They shall keep the Mayor and Council informed as to the federal aid
projects and state aid projects and any other aid programs for which
the Borough of Waldwick may qualify.
T. They shall analyze the cash needs of the Borough and recommend to
the Mayor and Council the prudent investment of Borough funds as
temporarily may be in excess of the amounts needed to meet Borough
obligations.
U. They shall supervise and continually review the Borough's insurance
program and make periodic reports thereof to the Mayor and Council.
V. They shall perform such duties as may be assigned to them from time to
time by the Mayor and Council.
§ 2-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-10
1:11
§ 2-10. Conflict of interest.
The Borough Administrator shall devote full time to the interests of the
Borough and shall not engage in any other occupation or employment while
employed by the Borough, except as approved by the Mayor and Council.
The Borough Administrator shall not engage in any political activity, nor
shall make any financial or other contributions to any local political
campaign, nor lobby the elected officials on behalf of a political party or
campaign. However, nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit
the Borough Administrator from providing recommendations to the elected
officials of the municipality on issues of concern to the municipality or
appearing before any other governmental body on behalf of the Borough
when authorized or directed to do so.
§ 2-11. Limitation of powers.
Nothing in this ordinance shall derogate from or authorize the Borough
Administrator to exercise the power and duties of the elected and appointed
officials of the Borough.
§ 2-12. Severability.
If any article, section, subsection or sentence, clause or phrase of the
ordinance shall be held to be invalid for any reason, such decision shall not
affect the remaining portions of this ordinance.
§ 2-13. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect after final passage and publication as
required by law.
Chapter 2A
THIRD-PARTY PAYROLL DISBURSEMENT
§ 2A-1. Purpose.
The purpose and intent of these regulations is to abide by the requirements
of N.J.S.A. 52:27D-20.1 and N.J.A.C. 5:30-17.1 et seq., governing electronic
disbursement controls for payroll purposes.
§ 2A-2. Definitions.
A. APPROVAL OFFICER — person(s) responsible for authorizing and
supervising the activities of the payroll service.
B. PAYROLL SERVICE — Third-party payroll service organization.
C. MUNICIPALITY — Borough of Waldwick, Bergen County.
§ 2-10 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 2A-3
1:12
§ 2A-3. Authorization.
§ 2A-4. Borough requirements.
§ 2A-5. Payroll service requirements.
A. Borough of Waldwick, Bergen County, is authorized to use a payroll
service to prepare payment documentation, take possession of Borough
funds, and make such disbursements itself on behalf of the Borough.
B. The following payroll service providers shall be required to comply with
these regulations:
(1) Payroll service providers who use their own customized
programming process to execute disbursement for the Borough;
(2) Payroll service providers who use a third-party processor to
execute disbursements for the Borough.
A. The appointment of a payroll service shall be pursuant to the Local
Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq., and shall require the
contractor to do the following, not by way of limitation: data collection,
agency report preparation, calculation of withholding, direct deposit of
payroll disbursements, and/or transfer of Borough funds to contractor's
account for subsequent disbursement of payment.
B. Any renewal or extension of a contract under these regulations shall be
by resolution.
C. The Chief Financial Officer is hereby appointed the approval officer and
is responsible for authorizing and supervising the activities of the
payroll service and shall further be charged with the reconciliation and
analysis of all general ledger accounts affected by the activities of the
disbursing organization.
D. If required by the contract between the Borough and the payroll
service, the payroll service is permitted to hold Borough funds pending
transmittal to a payee.
A. A payroll service must meet all of the following requirements:
(1) Report any irregularities that may indicate potential fraud,
noncompliance with appropriate laws, dishonesty or gross
incompetence on the part of the approval officer;
(2) Report circumstances that could jeopardize its ability to continue
operations or otherwise interrupt the services provided to the
Borough.
B. A payroll service must meet the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:30-17.5,
requiring that the approval officer be assured that the servicer has its
own internal controls and appropriately guard against theft and other
adverse conditions.
§ 2A-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2A-5
1:13
§ 2A-6. Establishment of service.
Upon the adoption of these regulations, the Borough Administrator, with
the assistance of the Chief Financial Officer and the Borough Attorney, as
necessary is hereby authorized and directed to enter into a contract for
payroll service in accordance with all local public contracting laws and
N.J.A.C. 5:30-17. Appointment of the payroll service shall be by separate
resolution of the Borough.
§ 2A-7. Repealer.
If any section, paragraph, subsection, clause or provision of this Ordinance
shall be adjudged by the courts to be invalid, such adjudication shall apply
only to the section, paragraph, subsection, clause or provisions so
adjudicated, and the remainder of the Ordinance shall be deemed valid and
effective.
§ 2A-8. Severability.
Any ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions of this
Ordinance are repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 2A-9. Effective date.
This Ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication in
accordance with the applicable law.
Chapter 3
(RESERVED)
Chapter 4
BOROUGH OFFICIALS; APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF
OFFICE
§ 4-1. Borough Attorney.
The Borough Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the Council, for a term of one (1) year, and until his successor
shall have qualified. He shall be an attorney at law of New Jersey, but need
not be a resident of the Borough. In lieu of appointment of an individual
attorney, the Mayor may, with the advice and consent of the Council, appoint
a firm of attorneys, all principals of which shall be attorneys at law of New
Jersey. The Borough Attorney shall not receive a fixed salary, but shall be
C. All contracts entered into pursuant to these regulations and the laws
authorizing the same shall comply with the requirements of N.J.A.C.
5:30-17.6, which sets out a series of mandatory contractual terms and
conditions.
§ 2A-5 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 4-1
1:14
compensated as may be agreed upon and authorized by the Council, plus
such fees and charges as shall be deemed reasonable.
§ 4-2. Borough Auditor.
The Borough Auditor shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council for a term of one (1) year and until a successor
shall have qualified. The Borough Auditor shall be a registered municipal
accountant of New Jersey, but need not be a resident of the Borough. In
lieu of appointment of an individual auditor, the Mayor may, with the advice
and consent of the Council, appoint a firm of auditors, all principals of
which shall be qualified under the laws of New Jersey to prepare the annual
municipal audit. The Borough Auditor shall not receive a fixed salary, but
shall be compensated as may be agreed upon and authorized by the Council,
plus such fees and charges as shall be deemed reasonable.
§ 4-3. Borough Engineer.
The Borough Engineer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council for a term of one (1) year and until a successor
shall have qualified. The Borough Engineer shall be a licensed professional
engineer of New Jersey, but need not be a resident of the Borough. In lieu
of appointment of an individual engineer, the Mayor may, with the advice
and consent of the Council, appoint a firm of engineers, all principals of
which shall be licensed professional engineers of New Jersey. The Borough
Engineer shall not receive a fixed salary, but shall be compensated as may
be agreed upon and authorized by the Council, plus such fees and charges
as shall be deemed reasonable.
A. Powers and duties. The Borough Attorney shall have such powers and
perform such duties as are provided for the office of the Borough
Attorney by general law or ordinance of the Borough. The Borough
Attorney shall represent the Borough in judicial and administrative
proceedings in which the Borough or any of its offices or agencies may
be a party or have an interest. The Borough Attorney shall give legal
counsel and advice.
A. Powers and duties. The Borough Auditor shall be an independent
contractor and perform such duties as are required of the office of the
Borough Auditor by general law. The Borough Auditor shall be
responsible for performing an annual audit as required and in
accordance with the Local Fiscal Affairs Law of the State of New Jersey.
A. Powers and duties. The Borough Engineer shall have such powers and
perform such duties as are provided for by the office of the Borough
Engineer by general law or ordinance of the Borough. The Borough
Engineer shall give engineering advice when required by the Mayor
and Council, and requested by the Planning Board and the Zoning
Board of Adjustment and shall, in general, serve as the engineering
advisor to the Mayor and Council, and if requested by the Planning
§ 4-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-3
1:15
§ 4-4. Borough Prosecutor.
The Borough Prosecutor shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council for a term of one (1) year. The Borough
Prosecutor shall be an attorney at law of New Jersey, but need not be a
resident of the Borough. The Borough Prosecutor shall be compensated as
may be agreed upon and authorized by the Council, plus such fees and
charges as shall be deemed reasonable.
§ 4-5. Public Defender.
Board and the Zoning Board of Adjustment on all matters requiring
such advice.
A. Powers and duties. The Borough Prosecutor shall represent the State of
New Jersey and the Borough in any proceedings before the Waldwick
Municipal Court. The Borough Attorney shall represent the Borough of
Waldwick on any appeals from the Waldwick Municipal Court where
violations of Borough ordinances are the subject matter of the appeal.
A. Appointment, term and compensation. The Mayor shall appoint the
Public Defender with the advice and consent of the Borough Council.
The term of office of the Public Defender shall be for one (1) year, or for
a part of a year commencing on their appointment and terminating at
the reorganizational meeting of the Council in January of each year. The
compensation for the Public Defender shall be established in the
appointment resolution considered by the Council.
B. Qualifications and duties. The Public Defender shall be an attorney at
law of the State of New Jersey admitted to practice in this state for a
period of no less than one (1) year. The duties of the public defender
shall be to defend all cases within the jurisdiction of the court brought
against indigent defendants in the municipal court of the Borough,
whenever such defendants are entitled to such representation by law or
whenever such representation is deemed necessary or desirable in the
interest of justice and in the discretion of the Judge of the municipal
court. In every instance the public defender shall be assigned to each
case by order of the court.
C. Disqualifications. In the event that the public defender is disqualified,
or otherwise unavailable to act, in a particular case, he shall report the
disqualification to the judge of the municipal court, who shall select a
substituted Public Defender from among those qualified attorneys
practicing law in the Borough of Waldwick. This substitute shall serve
for that single case, and be compensated at a rate proportionate to the
annual compensation of the public defender. The cost of such
substitution shall be charged against the annual operating budget for
the municipal court.
§ 4-3 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 4-6
1:16
§ 4-6. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon final passage and publication as
required by law.
Chapter 4A
CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER
§ 4A-1. Creation of office.
The Office of Chief Financial Officer is hereby created for the Borough of
Waldwick, Bergen County, New Jersey, pursuant to the provisions of this
ordinance.
§ 4A-2. Nomination and appointment; term.
The Chief Financial Officer shall be nominated by the Mayor and appointed
with the advise and consent of the Council and the term of office of the Chief
Financial Officer shall be in accordance with state law (NJSA 40A:9-140.8).
§ 4A-3. Filling of vacancies.
Any vacancy in said office shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor and
Council.
§ 4A-4. Removal.
The Chief Financial Officer may be removed in accordance with provisions
of State Civil Service Law.
§ 4A-5. Qualifications and requirements.
§ 4A-6. Duties and responsibilities.
The Chief Financial Officer of the Borough of Waldwick shall be responsible
to the Mayor and Council as a whole for the proper and efficient
administration of the financial affairs of the Borough. The duties and
responsibilities relate to general management of all Borough finances,
accepting therefrom those duties and responsibilities conferred upon other
Borough officials by State statutes, other applicable laws, rules and
regulations promulgated by the State and County agencies, decisional law
or ordinance of the Borough of Waldwick.
a) The Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed on the basis of their
executive and financial administrative abilities and qualifications and
must be certified as a municipal finance officer in accordance with State
statutes.
b) The Chief Financial Officer shall be required to renew the State
certification every two years in order to retain the title.
§ 4-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4A-7
1:17
§ 4A-7. Salary.
The Chief Financial Officer shall receive a salary in such sums as may be
fixed and adopted by the Mayor and Council in the annual salary ordinance
of the borough. In the salary ordinance for the year 1989, salary shall be as
defined in said ordinance for the position of Treasurer and hereafter shall
be defined specifically for the position of Chief Financial Officer.
§ 4A-8. Effective date.
Effective date for this ordinance shall take effect after final passage and
publication as required by law.
Chapter 5
CIVIL SERVICE PROCEDURES
§ 5-1. Adoption of schedules by reference.
The schedules as described herein be and they hereby made a part of this
ordinance.
Editor's Note: Adoption of provisions of civil service act of the State of New
Jersey approved by electors at referendum on 11-2-54.
Editor's Note: Schedules referred to herein were set forth in the preamble
and read as follows:
Schedule 1. Complete list of employees by departments, together with their
dates of last permanent employment, their present status, salary, title and
divisional classifications; their permanent comparable civil service titles
and their proposed status, title and divisional classification.
Schedule 3. Containing an alphabetical list of titles for the said municipality
in the classified service with the divisional classification; an alphabetical
list of titles for the said municipality in the unclassified service, with the
statutory or other provision placing the position in the unclassified service ;
class specifications for positions in the classified service.
Schedule 5. Containing recommended rules for the installation and
administration of civil service in and for the Borough of Waldwick.
§ 5-2. Filing of schedules with Borough Clerk.
The aforementioned schedules be filed with the Clerk of the Borough of
Waldwick coincident with the passage of this ordinance.
§ 5-3. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith be and the same
are hereby repealed.
§ 4A-7 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 5-4
1:18
§ 5-4. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication as provided by law.
Chapter 6
CLAIMS, PAYMENT OF
§ 6-1. Processing procedures.
All claims for the payment of moneys by the Borough of Waldwick not
otherwise provided for by separate ordinance shall be approved or
disapproved in the following manner only:
§ 6-2. Disbursements.
All disbursements of moneys in payment of claims certified and approved as
hereinabove provided shall be made in the following manner only:
A. All claims shall be submitted to the Mayor and Council on vouchers to
be obtained by claimants from the Borough Clerk.
B. Every such voucher shall set forth the amount of the claim and the
nature of the services rendered or the supplies or materials supplied by
the claimant, shall be signed by the claimant and filed with the Borough
Clerk.
C. Every such voucher, after filing with the Borough Clerk, shall be
certified by the head of the Borough department for which the services
were rendered or to which the materials or supplies were delivered.
D. Every such voucher, over $500, after certification by the head of the
Borough department, shall be signed by the chairman of the committee
charged with the operation of such Borough department. (Amended
9-28-99 by Ord. No. 13-99).
E. Every such voucher, over $500, shall thereafter be submitted to the
Chairperson of the Borough Finance Committee and in their absence
the next ranking member of the Finance Committee for consideration
and signature, and if approved shall be considered and signed
thereafter by the Mayor. (Amended 9-28-99 by Ord. No. 13-99; 2-28-06
by Ord. No. 3-06).
F. Payment of each such voucher certified and approved as above shall be
authorized only upon the adoption of a resolution of the Mayor and
Council authorizing and directing payment of such voucher.
G. Any claim not approved as hereinabove provided shall be deemed to be
disapproved.
§ 5-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-2
1:19
Chapter 7
COURT, MUNICIPAL
§ 7-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established in and for the Borough of Waldwick a Municipal
Court to be known as the "Municipal Court of the Borough of Waldwick",
pursuant to Chapter 264, laws of 1948, as supplemented and amended.
§ 7-2. Compensation.
The judge of said Court shall be compensated by an annual salary, which
shall be fixed by ordinance adopted by the governing body of the
municipality, and shall be in lieu of any and all other fees.
§ 7-3. Application for representation by Public Defender. [Added
4-12-94 by Ord. No. 5-94; amended 2-24-98 by Ord. No. 4-98]
The Municipal Court Judge shall approve all applications for appointment,
on a per case basis, of a municipal public defender to represent indigent
persons as required by law.
Those persons applying for representation by the municipal public defender
shall pay an application fee of $200 at the time of presentation of an
application for the public defender. The Municipal Court Judge may,
however, in his discretion, waive any required application fee in whole or
in part if the Judge determines, in his discretion, that the application fee
represents an unreasonable burden on the person seeking representation.
§ 7-4. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect when passed and published as required by
law.
Chapter 8
(RESERVED)
Chapter 9
DRUG ABUSE COUNCIL
A. By check or draft prepared by the Borough Clerk and signed by the
Mayor, Clerk and Collector-Treasurer of the Borough; or in the absence
of any of them, by the person or persons duly qualified and acting in the
capacity of Mayor, Clerk or Collector-Treasurer and authorized by law
to perform the duties of such Mayor, Clerk or Collector-Treasurer.
§ 6-2 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 9-1
1:20
§ 9-1. Council created; title.
A Council shall be created within the office of the Mayor which shall be
known as the "Drug Abuse Council of the Borough of Waldwick."
§ 9-2. Purposes and functions.
The purposes and functions of the Council shall include but not be limited
to the following:
§ 9-3. Membership.
The membership of the Drug Abuse Council shall consist of at least seven
(7) members, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Borough Council. Each of the seven (7) members of the Drug
Abuse Council who is appointed shall serve for a term of one (1) year.
§ 9-4. Compensation; Council expenses.
Each member of the Council shall serve without salary. However, each
member shall be reimbursed for necessary out-of-pocket expenses upon
proper submission of a voucher where authorized by the Mayor and Council
and within the appropriations provided the Council in the Borough budget.
Further, the purposes described in 9-2 of this ordinance shall also be
financed upon proper submission of vouchers where authorized by the
Mayor and Council within the appropriations provided in the Borough
budget.
§ 9-5. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict or in contradiction with
this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict or
contradiction.
§ 9-6. Severability.
If any part of this ordinance is found to be invalid for any reason, such
invalidity shall not affect the balance of the ordinance.
A. Study problems of drug abuse within the Borough of Waldwick.
B. Create and/or participate in educational programs concerning drug
abuse for youth, parents, citizens groups and clergy of the Borough of
Waldwick, including the establishment of or participation in a
therapeutic dialogue program.
C. Advise the Mayor and Council on the implementation and enforcement
of various drug abuse programs.
D. Prompt public and widespread dissemination of all the latest
information and knowledge concerning the causes of drug abuse and
their elimination, and the positive prevention of drug abuse.
§ 9-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-7
1:21
§ 9-7. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon final passage and publication as
required by law.
Chapter 10
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
§ 10-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq. and amendments and supplements
thereof, there is hereby established in the Borough of Waldwick an
Environmental Commission, to be known as the "Waldwick Environmental
Commission".
§ 10-2. Membership; term.
The Environmental Commission shall consist of not less than five (5) nor
more than seven (7) members, to be appointed by the Mayor. The Mayor
shall designate one (1) of the members to serve as Chairman and presiding
officer. One (1) member shall be a member of the Waldwick Planning Board,
and one (1) member shall be a member of the Borough of Waldwick's Board
of Adjustment, and all members shall be residents of the Borough. The term
of office of the first Commissioners shall be as provided by law, and all
subsequent appointments of members, except to fill vacancies, shall be for
terms of three (3) years as provided by law. Members of said Commission
shall serve without compensation.
§ 10-3. Powers.
The Environmental Commission shall have power to study and make
recommendations concerning open space and such other powers as
provided by law.
§ 10-4. Expenses of Commission.
The Borough Council may appropriate funds for the expenses incurred by
the Environmental Commission.
§ 10-5. Records; annual report.
The Environmental Commission shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and shall make an annual report to the Borough Council.
§ 10-6. Severability.
If any article, section, subsection or sentence, clause or phrase of the
ordinance shall be held to be invalid for any reason, such decision shall not
affect the remaining portions of this ordinance.
§ 9-7 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 10-7
1:22
§ 10-7. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect after final passage and publication as
required by law.
Chapter 11
FEES AND BONDS, WAIVERS OF
§ 11-1. Waiver of fees authorized.
The Mayor and Council at any regular or special meeting shall have the
right to waive all fees to be collected by any Borough official or board under
any ordinances of the Borough of Waldwick, in accordance with 11-3 of this
ordinance.
§ 11-2. Waiver of posting of bonds authorized.
The Mayor and Council at any regular or special meeting shall have the
right to waive the posting of any bonds under any ordinances of the Borough
of Waldwick, in accordance with 11-3 of this ordinance.
§ 11-3. Power to waive fees and bonds upon application.
The Mayor and Council shall have the power to waive the collection of all
fees by any public official or board, or the posting of any bonds under any
ordinances of the Borough of Waldwick, upon application being made to it
by any charitable, religious, veterans' or eleemosynary organization.
§ 11-4. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith be and the same
are hereby repealed.
§ 11-5. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon publication and final passage as
required by law.
Chapter 12
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 12-1. Title of ordinance; short title; definition.
A. This ordinance shall be entitled, "An ordinance to establish, maintain,
regulate and control the Volunteer Fire Department of the Borough of
Waldwick, in the County of Bergen, and State of New Jersey."
B. Short title. This ordinance shall be known as the "Waldwick Volunteer
Fire Department Ordinance."
§ 10-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-2
1:23
§ 12-2. Establishment and composition of Department; appointment
of Public Safety Committee.
§ 12-3. Company: composition, selection of officers and members.
[Amended 8-27-02 by Ord. No. 15-02]
A. The Waldwick Volunteer Fire Department shall consist of one (1) or
more companies, as the Mayor and Council of the Borough shall
approve by resolution.
B. The Public Safety Committee as established by the by-laws of the Mayor
and Council of the Borough of Waldwick, shall have the following duties
and powers:
(1) The Chairman of Public Safety shall be the administrative head of
the Fire Department, as established by this ordinance, subject to
the ultimate control of the Mayor and Council.
(2) The Vice Chairman of Public Safety shall act only in the case of the
absence of the Chairman of Public Safety.
A. The company shall consist of as many officers and members of all
categories as the Waldwick Volunteer Fire Department shall from time
to time deem necessary, subject to the approval of the Mayor and
Council of the Borough.
B. The officers of the company shall be selected as set forth in the by-laws
of the Waldwick Volunteer Fire Department.
C. The term of the officers of the company shall be as set forth in the bylaws
of the Waldwick Fire Department.
D. Upon certification by the Department that a member has been elected,
the Secretary shall submit in writing the name of such officer-elect to
the Mayor and Council for their approval. Should the Mayor and
Council disapprove of the seating of such office-elect, the election of
such officer-elect shall be set aside and the Department shall conduct
new nomination and election meetings with fifteen (15) days of the
receipt of written disapproval.
E. The ranks of the line officers of the Waldwick Volunteer Fire
Department shall be as follows:
1. Chief
2. First Assistant Chief
3. Second Assistant Chief
4. First Captain
5. Second Captain
6. (2) First Lieutenant
§ 12-2 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 12-3
1:24
§ 12-4. Membership: qualifications, applications, classification,
certificates and badges.
7. (2) Second Lieutenant
F. The ranks of the company officers of the Waldwick Fire Department
shall be as follows:
1. President
2. Vice-President
3. Secretary
4. Treasurer
5. (3) Department Trustees
6. (9) Sickness & Distress Trustees
A. The Volunteer Fire Department of the Borough of Waldwick shall
consist of as many firemen as may from time to time be confirmed by
the Mayor and Borough Council; and no person shall be considered a
member of such Fire Department or entitled to any privileges as such
unless his name has been submitted to and approved by the Mayor and
Council.
B. General requirements. Persons who seek to be members of the
Waldwick Volunteer Fire Department shall have the following
qualifications at the time of their application:
(1) A member shall be a legal resident of the United States of America.
(2) Be a resident of the Borough of Waldwick or a nonresident who is
employed in the Borough of Waldwick and has been so employed
for at least sixty (60) days prior to the date of application; provided,
however, that the sixty day requirement will not apply to active
members of other fire departments who transfer to the Waldwick
Fire Department.
(3) Be not less than eighteen (18) years of age unless the applicant
meets the criteria as established by the Fire Department by-laws
for junior membership.
(4) Be in good health and of sound mind and body, to be evidenced by a
certificate to that effect duly attested to by a licensed physician of
the State of New Jersey.
C. Procedure of application for membership. The application procedure
for membership, shall be as contained in the by-laws of the Waldwick
Volunteer Fire Department.
D. Classification of members. The classification of members shall be as set
for the in the by-laws of the Waldwick Fire Department.
§ 12-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-5
1:25
§ 12-5. Fire police.
The Fire Department shall contain a fire police unit wherein certain
members of the Fire Department, as appointed by the Chief and approved
by the Mayor and Council, shall be authorized to maintain law and order
at fires emergencies and special events to which they may be detailed, and
be further designated by the Mayor and Council as special fire police, as
provided by the New Jersey Statutes.
§ 12-6. Authority to adopt bylaws.
The members of the Fire Department shall have the authority to formulate
their bylaws subject to the approval of the Mayor and Council. Subsequent
amendments to these by-laws shall also have the approval of the Mayor and
Council.
§ 12-7. Restrictions on use of Department property.
No person or persons shall enter the Department quarters or headquarters,
handle any Department property, equipment or apparatus, unless
authorized to do so or accompanied by or having the special permission of
an officer or authorized member of the Department, except that members
of the governing body shall have authority to inspect Fire Department
equipment.
§ 12-8. Mutual assistance.
The Chief of the Waldwick Volunteer Fire Department and the officers
thereof are hereby authorized to extend aid and assistance to neighboring
communities on request for fire protection or emergency services, or to
establish a mutual aid system in accordance with the laws of the State of
New Jersey.
§ 12-9. Insurance and compensation protection. [Amended 10-25-05
by Ord. No. 12-05; 10-25-11 by Ord. No. 14-11]
A. Insurance.
(1) In order to provide adequate compensation for injury for members
of the Fire Department, the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Waldwick shall provide employer's liability insurance coverage in
accordance with State Statute.
(2) The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Waldwick shall provide
adequate liability insurance covering the operation of all
Department vehicles and its authorized drivers, and shall also
provide liability coverage for the use and maintenance of buildings
and equipment owned or used by the Department.
B. Compensation other than insurance and liability.
§ 12-5 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 12-9
1:26
§ 12-10. Severability.
If any article, section, subsection or sentence, clause or phrase of the
ordinance shall be held to be invalid for any reason, such decision shall not
affect the remaining portions of this ordinance.
Chapter 13
(RESERVED)
Chapter 14
HEALTH, BOARD OF
§ 14-1. Establishment.
There shall be in and for the Borough of Waldwick a Board of Health, in
accordance with the provisions of the Act of the Legislature of New Jersey,
entitled " Title 26:3, Local Boards of Health, of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey, and the several supplements thereto and acts amendatory thereof."
§ 14-2. Composition; terms of office. [Amended 4-23-02 by Ord. No.
4-02; 8-14-12 by Ord. No. 12-12]
The said Board of Health shall consist of seven (7) members and two (2)
alternate members. A minimum of two (2) shall be appointed each year
and shall hold said office for the term of three (3) years, except in the
(1) The Mayor and Council may provide compensation for the faithful
performance of duties of various Line and Company Officers as
contained within the salary ordinance and resolution of the
Borough.
(2) Mayor and Council shall also provide suitable compensation to
members of the Department for loss of clothing and other personal
effects suffered in the process of fire fighting, emergencies and
services. Personnel with a fire, drill and extra duty percentage for
the year: at or above sixty percent (60%) shall receive $500; those
with a percentage falling at forty percent (40%) to under sixty
percent (60%) shall receive $400; those with a percentage falling at
twenty six percent (26%) to under forty percent (40%) shall receive
$250; those with a percentage falling at ten percent (10%) to under
twenty-six percent (26%) shall receive $200; and those less than
ten percent (10%) shall receive zero. The year shall consist of a
twelve month period commencing on November 1st and running
through October 31st of the subsequent year.
The total allocation from the Borough of Waldwick for this purpose
shall not exceed $22,500 annually. The funds are to be distributed
according to highest percentage until they are exhausted.
§ 12-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-2
1:27
case of vacancies which shall be filled for the unexpired term. The terms of
the alternate members shall be for two (2) years, except the terms of the
alternate members first appointed shall be two years for Alternate No. 1 and
one year for Alternate No. 2, so that the term of not more than one alternate
member shall expire in any one year. A vacancy occurring otherwise than
by expiration of term shall be filled by the appointing authority for the
unexpired term only. All members of said Board hereafter appointed shall
be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council, and
shall hold said office for the term of three (3) years, except in the case of
vacancies, which shall be filled for the unexpired term.
§ 14-3. Rules and regulations authorized; election of President.
Said Board of Health shall adopt rules and regulations for its own
government and shall elect a President from among its own members.
§ 14-4. Authority to make appointments.
Said Board of Health shall appoint a Registrar of Vital Statistics and Clerk,
and may also appoint such officers or assistants as said Board of Health may
deem necessary; all appointees of said Board of Health shall be governed by
the rules of said Board, and they may be removed for cause by said Board.
§ 14-5. Indebtedness limited to appropriation.
The said Board of Health shall not contract any debt or debts of any kind
beyond the amount of the appropriation made for its use by this Council.
§ 14-6. Repeal of prior ordinance.
This ordinance repeals Ordinance No. 2-19, entitled "Board of Health,"
adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Waldwick, November
19, 1919.
§ 14-7. When effective.
This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon passage and
publication as required by law.
Chapter 15
(RESERVED)
Chapter 16
INDEMNIFICATION AND DEFENSE OF MUNICIPAL
OFFICIALS
§ 14-2 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 16-1
1:28
§ 16-1. Definitions. [Amended 3-25-08 by Ord. No. 5-08]
MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL — A present or former municipal employee,
appointee, official, elected official or member of the various boards,
agencies, commissions of the Borough of Waldwick and members of
WALVAC.
§ 16-2. Civil actions.
§ 16-3. Criminal actions.
A. The Borough of Waldwick is hereby authorized to provide for the
necessary means for the defense of any action or legal proceeding
brought against its municipal officials and to indemnify such municipal
officials to the extent hereinafter set forth and shall save harmless and
protect such persons from any financial loss resulting from litigation.
B. The Borough of Waldwick is authorized to indemnify a municipal official
for exemplary or punitive damages if the governing body determines
that the acts committed by the official upon which the damages are
based did not constitute actual fraud, actual malice, willful misconduct
or an intentional wrong.
C. The obligation of the Borough of Waldwick to defend and indemnify its
officials shall be limited to actions or legal proceedings arising out of
and directly related to the lawful performance of the municipal official's
duties, and shall be limited to those circumstances under which the
Borough itself would be liable for the acts of its municipal officials
under the doctrine of respondent superior.
A. The Borough of Waldwick is authorized to provide for the defense of a
criminal action brought against a municipal official, provided that such
a defense is authorized by statute, municipal ordinance or by resolution
and provided further that the criminal action was not instituted as a
result of a complaint on behalf of the Borough. A defense shall only be
provided for criminal charges arising out of and directly related to the
lawful performance of the municipal official's duties.
B. The Borough of Waldwick shall reimburse a municipal officer the
reasonable costs of defending a criminal action arising out of or directly
related to the lawful performance of the duties of the municipal official,
provided that:
1. It is authorized by State statute, municipal ordinance or by
resolution, and provided that the criminal proceedings have been
dismissed or result in a final disposition in favor of the municipal
official.
2. The Mayor and Council determines that there is no good cause to
dismiss the municipal official because of the incident or related
incidents forming the basis of the criminal proceedings.
§ 16-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-4
1:29
§ 16-4. Limitations.
The Mayor and Council shall not provide indemnification or the defense of
any claim or action if:
§ 16-5. Methods to provide for defense.
If the Mayor and Council determines to provide a defense as authorized in
this chapter, it may do so by:
§ 16-6. Additional provisions.
In addition to the provisions hereof, all officials of the Borough shall be
entitled to indemnification as provided in all applicable State legislation.
§ 16-7. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as required
by law.
Chapter 17
A. The act or omission complained of was not within the scope of the
municipal official's employment or authority.
B. The act or omission complained of was because of actual fraud, willful
misconduct or actual malice.
C. The defense of the action or proceeding would create a conflict of
interest between the Borough and the official involved.
D. There exist policies of insurance, either obtained by the Borough or by
another by virtue of which the municipal official is entitled to a defense
of the action in question from the insurer.
E. The municipal official has failed to deliver to the Mayor and Council,
within fifteen (15) days of the time he or she is served with any
summons, complaints, process, notice, demand or pleading, the original
or copy of such document or thereafter fails to cooperate with the
Borough in the defense or the matter.
F. The official fails to request the defense of any action.
G. The action was brought by the Borough.
A. Using the services of the Borough Attorney;
B. Hiring an attorney of its choice and paying the same directly, or
C. Reimbursing the municipal official for reasonable attorney's fees
expended or obligated to be expended by such official in the defense of
the act.
§ 16-4 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 16-7
1:30
LICENSES AND PERMITS, GENERALLY
§ 17-1. Approval or denial of a license or permit.
§ 17-2. Suspension or revocation of license or permit.
(a) Where the approval of any Borough officer or State officer is required
prior to the issuance of any license or permit, such approval must be
presented to the Licensing Official before any license or permit is
issued.
(b) No license or permit shall be approved by any Borough officer or issued
by the Licensing Official (1) if it appears that the conduct of the activity
for which a license or welfare of the public, or any regulation, law or
ordinance applicable to such activity, and (2) unless the applicant, if he
is the owner thereof, pays any delinquent property taxes or
assessments on the property wherein the business or activity for which
the license or permit is sought or wherein the business or activity is to
be conducted.
(a) Any license or permit issued by the Borough may be suspended or
revoked by the Administrator or Council for any of the following causes:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement contained in the
application or made in carrying on the licensed or permitted
activity;
2. Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor where the conviction
relates adversely to the activity authorized by the Borough;
3. Conducting such activity in such manner as to constitute a breach
of the peace, or a menace to the health, safety or welfare of the
public, or a disturbance of the peace or comfort of residents of the
Borough; upon recommendation of the appropriate official;
4. Expiration or cancellation of any required bond or insurance;
5. Actions unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license or permit
granted;
6. Violation of any regulation or provision of these Revised
Ordinances applicable to the activity for which the license or
permit has been granted, or any regulation or law of the state so
applicable;
7. Failure to continuously comply with all conditions required as
precedent to the approval of the license or permit; or
8. Failure of the licensee or permittee, if he is the owner of the
property upon which the licensed business or activity is conducted,
to pay the taxes due on the property for at least three consecutive
§ 16-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-2
1:31
§ 17-3. Repealer.
All ordinances of the Borough of Waldwick which are inconsistent with
the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
§ 17-4. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is
for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not
affect the remaining portions of this ordinance.
§ 17-5. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final passage, approval
and publication as required by law.
Chapter 18
OFFICE OF GRANTS ADMINISTRATION
§ 18-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established in and for the Borough of Waldwick a Grants
Administration Department to be known as the Office of Grants
Administration, who shall be headed by the Grants Administrator.
§ 18-2. Duties.
It shall be the general duties of the Grants Administrator to:
§ 18-3. Compensation.
The compensation of the employee of the Office of Grants Administration
shall be fixed by ordinance adopted by the governing body of the
municipality and they shall report to the Borough Administrator.
quarters, provided that upon payment of the delinquent taxes or
assessment, the license or permit shall be restored.
(b) The suspension or revocation of any license or permit shall not preclude
the imposition of a penalty for violation of any ordinance of the
Borough.
A. Research and make application to the Federal, State, County and other
non-profit philanthropic agencies for funding for projects being
considered by the Mayor and Council.
B. Prepare all required reporting documents necessary to receive funding
on a timely basis.
C. Maintain all records as required by the various agencies.
§ 17-2 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 18-4
1:32
§ 18-4. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon adoption and publication as required
by law.
Chapter 19
WALDWICK ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT
§ 19-1. Title and short title.
An ordinance to require the submission of a comprehensive written and
graphic statement regarding the impact of certain applications for
development upon the environment and the municipal infrastructure of
the Borough of Waldwick. This chapter shall be known as "The Waldwick
Borough Environmental Impact Statement (E.I.S.) Ordinance".
§ 19-2. Purpose.
The purpose of requiring an environmental impact statement is to permit
the Planning Board to assess the impact of a proposed project upon the
environment, particularly with respect to land, water, air, solid waste,
aquatic and terrestrial wildlife, social and economic life and aesthetics.
§ 19-3. When required.
§ 19-4. Submission format.
When an environmental impact statement is required, the applicant shall
retain one or more competent professionals to perform the necessary work.
All applicable material on file in the Borough pertinent to local conditions
shall be consulted. Any additional material pertinent to evaluation of
regional impacts shall also be considered. Furthermore, as much original
research as necessary shall be conducted to develop the environmental
impact statement. All environmental impact statements shall consist of
written and graphic materials which clearly present the information
required by this ordinance.
§ 19-5. Content.
The environmental impact statement (E.I.S.) shall include the following:
a. An environmental impact statement is hereby required to be submitted
for all applications for preliminary major subdivisions and all
preliminary major site plans involving any new building and for soil
removal permits.
b. An environmental impact statement as required herein, shall also be
submitted for all public or quasi-public projects unless they are exempt
from the requirements of local law by supervening State, or Federal
law.
§ 18-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-5
1:33
a. Project Description. The purpose and scope of the proposed project
shall be indicated. The E.I.S. shall enumerate the benefits to the public
which will result from the proposed project and describe the suitability
of the site for the intended use. A description of the proposed project
shall be presented to indicate the extent to which the site must be
altered, the kinds of facilities to be constructed and the uses intended.
The resident population, working population and visitor population
shall be estimated. The compatibility or incompatibility of the proposed
project shall be described in relation to the following:
1. Borough Master Plan.
2. Master Plan of adjacent municipalities within 200 feet of the
proposed development.
3. Bergen County Master Plan.
4. Regional and State planning guides.
5. Other pertinent planning documents.
b. Site Description and Inventory. The E.I.S. shall provide a description of
environmental conditions on the site which shall include the following
items:
1. Types of soils. Each soil type located on the site and percolation
data.
2. Geology. The geologic formations and features associated with the
site.
3. Vegetation. The existing vegetation on the site showing the location
of major vegetative groupings such as woodlands, open fields and
wetlands.
4. Wildlife. The identification and description of any unique habitats
of endangered or protected species.
5. Subsurface Water. The subsurface water conditions on the site both
in terms of depth to ground water and water supply capabilities.
The location, of all existing water wells on the site and within 500
feet of the site shall be indicated.
6. Distinctive scenic and/or historic surfaces. A map describing those
portions of the site that can be considered to have distinctive scenic
and/or historic qualities.
7. Existing development features. Any existing features on the site
that are not considered to be part of the natural environment. This
may include, but not necessarily be limited to: roads, housing units,
accessory structures, utility lines, etc.
§ 19-5 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 19-5
1:34
8. Miscellaneous. The Planning Board may require an analysis of
existing air quality and noise levels as prescribed by the New
Jersey State Department of Environmental Protection.
c. Environmental Performance Controls. The E.I.S. shall describe what
measures will be employed during the planning, construction and
operation phases which will minimize or eliminate negative impacts
that could result from the proposed project. Of specific interest are:
1. Drainage plans which shall include soil erosion and sedimentation
controls.
2. Sewage disposal techniques.
3. Water supply and water conservation proposals.
4. Energy conservation measures.
5. Noise reduction techniques.
d. Impact. Discuss both the negative and positive impacts during and after
construction. Indicate those negative impacts that are unavoidable. The
specific concerns that shall be considered include the following:
1. Soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from surface run-off.
2. Flooding and flood plain disruption.
3. Degradation of surface water quality.
4. Ground water pollution.
5. Reduction of ground water capabilities.
6. Sewage disposal.
7. Solid waste disposal.
8. Vegetation destruction.
9. Disruption of wildlife habitats of endangered and protected
species.
10. Destruction of scenic and historic features.
11. Air quality degradation.
12. Noise levels.
13. Energy utilization.
e. Facilities impact. The E.I.S. shall contain a statement by the relevant
authorities as to the adequacy of the existing facilities available to serve
the proposed development dependent upon such facilities, including
the adequacy of existing public water facilities, recreational facilities
and sewage facilities. Should such facilities be determined to be
§ 19-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-5
1:35
§ 19-6. Disposition by the Board.
The Planning Board shall review the information furnished in the
environmental impact statement in the context of the overall design of the
proposed development and the relationship of the proposed development to
the environment. The information is to be used solely to help insure that the
proposed development will cause no reasonably avoidable damage to any
environmental resource.
§ 19-7. Planning Board review; conditions.
In reviewing an E.I.S., the Planning Board shall take into consideration
the effect of the proposed project upon all aspects of the environment,
including but not limited to sewage disposal, water quality, water supply,
preservation of trees and vegetation, protection of watercourses, protection
of air resources, protection of aquifers, protection of public lands and their
uses and ecosystems and the creation of any nuisance factors, the Planning
Board may submit such statement to such other governmental bodies and
to such consultants as it may deem appropriate. The Planning Board shall
reject the proposed project on an environmental basis only if it determines
that the proposed project will result in appreciable harm to the natural
environment, or will place an excessive demand upon the total resources
available for such project and for any future projects, or will result in
reasonably avoidable damage to any environmental resource.
§ 19-8. Fees.
See Chapter 48-19.8.
§ 19-9. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as required
by law.
inadequate to serve the proposed development, the applicant shall
indicate remedies, proposed by the applicant.
f. Licenses, Permits and Other Approvals, Required by Law. The applicant
shall list all known license, permits and other forms of approval
required by law for the development and operation of the proposed
project. The list shall include approvals required by the Borough, as
well as agencies of the County, State and Federal governments. Where
approvals have been granted, copies of said approvals shall be attached
to the E.I.S. Where approvals are pending, a note shall be made to that
effect.
g. Documentation. All publications, file reports, manuscripts or other
written sources of information which were consulted and employed in
compilation of the E.I.S. shall be listed. A list of all agencies and
individuals from whom pertinent information was obtained orally or by
letter shall be listed separately.
§ 19-5 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 19-9
1:36
Chapter 20
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 20-1. Establishment; membership. [Amended 3-9-04 by Ord. No.
4-04; 2-5-05 by Ord. No. 2-05]
§ 20-2. Designation of the Appropriate Authority. [Amended 2-25-03
by Ord. No. 5-03]
A. There is hereby established in and for the Borough of Waldwick a Police
Department which shall consist of the following 21 positions. There
shall be one Chief of Police, two Lieutenants, five Sergeants, and 13
police officers. In addition, there may be a one to one relationship of
police officers who are in training to take the positions of existing police
officer(s) who have given notice of a specific retirement date which is
not greater than six months from the date the replacement officer is
hired. Once a police officer of any rank has elected to take their
retirement and to accept any of the benefits including, but not limited
to, terminal leave, accumulated sick time, vacation time or personal
days, then and in that event, they cannot change their mind and seek to
return to active duty nor can they withdraw their application for
retirement. [Amended 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 11-2018]
B. The Borough Council may from time to time, appoint public safety
telecommunicators, school crossing guards, matrons and traffic
directors as deemed necessary.
C. Appointment of the Police Department shall be made by the Mayor and
confirmed by majority vote of the Council in compliance with civil
service and the laws of New Jersey. Promotion within the Police
Department shall be made by the same procedure. Special officers shall
be appointed annually in accordance with New Jersey law or such other
manner as is deemed necessary and proper.
A. The Borough Administrator shall be designated as the appropriate
authority as provided in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118. The Administrator shall be
responsible for the overall performance of the Police Department, and
shall promulgate rules and regulations for the governing of the Police
Department and the discipline of its members.
B. The Chief of Police shall review the rules and regulations on an ongoing
basis and may recommend changes or updated provisions to the
Appropriate Authority.
C. All officers and employees of the Waldwick Police Department shall
comply with the rules and regulations adopted for the government of
the Department and with the orders of their superior officers not
inconsistent therewith, as well as all policies and procedures
established by the Department, the Bergen County Prosecutor and the
Attorney General of New Jersey.
§ 19-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-3
1:37
§ 20-3. Chief of Police; powers and duties. [Amended 2-25-03 by
Ord. No. 5-03; 3-9-04 by Ord. 4-04]
The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Department and shall be
directly responsible to the Appropriate Authority for its efficiency and dayto-
day operations. Pursuant to policies established by the Borough Council,
the Chief of Police shall:
§ 20-4. Appointment of police officers.
All members of the Waldwick Police Department shall be appointed by
the Borough Council in accordance with the laws pertaining to, and rules
promulgated by 40A:14-118 et seq., the New Jersey Department of
Personnel; N.J.S.A. 11A-1 et seq., N.J.A.C. 4A:1-1 et seq. and the terms of
this chapter. Wherever N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 et seq. is in variance with any
provision of New Jersey Department of Personnel Law, Administrative Code,
Rules or Regulations the latter shall be controlling.
§ 20-5. Qualifications.
A. Administer and enforce rules and regulations of the Police Department
and any special emergency directive for the disposition and discipline
of department members.
B. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
Police Department.
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members and officers.
D. Delegate such authority as may be deemed necessary for the efficient
operation of the Police Department to be exercised under the Chief's
direction and control.
E. Report at least monthly to the Appropriate Authority in such form as
shall be prescribed by the Appropriate Authority on the operation of the
Police Department during the preceding month and make such other
reports as may be requested by the Appropriate Authority.
A. No Person shall be appointed a member of the Waldwick Police
Department unless he/she possesses the requisite qualifications
prescribed by the applicable statutes of New Jersey relating to age,
residence and other qualifications and eligibility requirements.
B. Each candidate for appointment to the Police Department must
satisfactorily pass such physical, psychological and psychiatric
examinations as may be required before physicians, psychologists or
psychiatrists designated by the Mayor and Council. Such examinations
shall be designed to determine, according to accepted medical and
psychological standards, the candidates fitness and ability to perform
the duties of a police officer without danger or impediment to the
health, safety and welfare of the candidate, fellow officers and the
§ 20-3 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 20-5
1:38
§ 20-6. Probationary period.
In order to better evaluate the aptitude, ability, quality and competence
of recruits each person hereafter appointed to the Police Department and
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 4A:4-5.2(d) shall first serve a probationary period
commencing from the date of their employment to a date one year following
completion of the Basic Police Training Class and receipt of a certification
from the Police Training Commission pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:17B-66 et seq.,
which period must be completed to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police and
the Mayor and Council before such appointees are eligible for appointment
as permanent members of the Police Department.
Each member who is to be appointed as a permanent member of the
department must possess a Police Training Commission certification as a
police officer. The holder of any probationary appointment may be dismissed
from office by the Mayor and Council at any time during such period of
probation, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 4A:2-2.1; 4A:2-4.1 and 4A:4-5.2(d).
§ 20-7. Complaint against employee; hearing.
Disciplinary action shall be taken against members of the Police
Department in accordance with the Borough's rules and regulations
adopted by resolution pursuant to 20-2 and N.J.A.C. 4A:2-2.1 et seq. No
permanent employee of the Police Department, sworn or civilian, shall
be removed from office or employment therein except after just cause,
and then only after a written complaint of the charge(s) of the cause(s)
shall have been preferred against such officer or employee, signed by the
person or persons making same and filed with the Appointing Authority.
Notwithstanding any provision of this ordinance, no person shall be
removed from office or employment except as prescribed by the applicable
public at large and the candidate's eligibility for inclusion in the Police
and Firemen's Retirement System.
C. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-123.1A and ordinance 1-95 of the
code of the Borough of Waldwick all duly qualified applicants for
appointment to the Police Department shall be classified in the
categories set forth below and appointed members in the order and
manner specified below:
(1) Residents of the Borough of Waldwick
(2) Other residents of Bergen County
(3) Other resident of the State of New Jersey
(4) All other qualified applicants
D. Residency status in Subsection C above is determined as of the "Closing
Date" of the application acceptance period by the New Jersey Division
of Personnel pursuant to N.J.A.C. 4A:4-2.11(b).
§ 20-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-7
1:39
rules and regulations of the Department of Personnel pursuant to N.J.A.C.
4A:2-2.1 et seq.
§ 20-8. Oath of office.
Before entering upon the duties and within five days after appointment,
each officer of the department shall take and subscribe an oath or
affirmation to faithfully and impartially discharge the duties of his/her
appointment as a member of the Police Department and in accordance with
the statutes of the State of New Jersey relating to the oath to be taken.
§ 20-9. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the officers and employees of the Police
Department shall be prescribed by the laws of this state, the ordinances and
resolutions of the Borough of Waldwick, and such rules and regulations as
may now or hereafter be adopted for the government and discipline of the
Department. All officers of the department shall have the authority to serve
and execute all process issued by the Municipal Judge of the Borough and
all other New Jersey Courts of competent jurisdiction in accordance with
the laws of New Jersey.
§ 20-10. Compensation.
The compensation of the Chief of Police and all other officers of the Police
Department shall be determined by the Borough Council by ordinance. Such
compensation shall be pursuant to contract in such amount or amounts shall
be negotiated between the individuals involved or their representatives and
the Borough Council or its representatives and approved as part of the
Borough budget.
The salaries and compensation of all other employees of the Police
Department shall be determined by the Borough Council by ordinance.
Chapter 21
(RESERVED)
Chapter 22
RECREATION, SUPERINTENDENT OF
§ 22-1. Establishment.
There be and is hereby created the office of Superintendent of Recreation
in and for the Borough of Waldwick.
§ 20-7 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 22-2
1:40
§ 22-2. Appointment by Mayor.
The appointment of such Superintendent of Recreation shall be made by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough Council and in
accordance with the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
§ 22-3. Duties.
It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Recreation:
§ 22-4. Compensation.
The salary to be paid said Superintendent of Recreation shall be in
accordance with a resolution passed by the Mayor and Borough Council
of the Borough of Waldwick, or in accordance with the annual Salary
Ordinance.
§ 22-5. Repealer.
The provisions of any ordinance or code of the Borough of Waldwick
inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 22-6. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
as required by law.
Chapter 23
RECYCLING DEPARTMENT
§ 23-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established in and for the Borough of Waldwick a Recycling
Department to be known as the Office of Recycling.
§ 23-2. Compensation.
The compensation of the employees of the Office of Recycling shall be fixed
by ordinance adopted by the governing body of the municipality and they
shall report to the Recycling Coordinator.
A. To take charge of the development, organization and administration of a
broad program of recreational activities and facilities for the Borough.
B. To conduct studies to determine community recreation needs.
C. To direct the acquisition and design the construction, operation and
proper maintenance of recreation facilities.
D. To make recommendations to the Mayor and Borough Council
concerning recreational facilities in the Borough.
§ 22-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-3
1:41
§ 23-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect when passed and published as required by
law.
Chapter 24
(RESERVED)
Chapter 25
(RESERVED)
Chapter 26
(RESERVED)
Chapter 27
WALVAC LEASE AGREEMENT
§ 27-1. Findings.
It is hereby determined that:
§ 27-2. Authorization and purpose of lease agreement; rights.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:12-14 and 12-15 and subject to the terms
and conditions hereinafter set forth, the Mayor and Clerk of the Borough
of Waldwick are hereby authorized to execute on behalf of the Borough a
lease agreement with Waldwick Volunteer Ambulance Corps, Inc., as lessee,
covering the first-floor area of the building owned by the Borough and
commonly known as "20 Whites Lane," Waldwick, New Jersey, and to be
used as a headquarters for Waldwick Volunteer Ambulance Corps, Inc.,
A. The first-floor area of the building erected by the Borough of Waldwick
on land owned by it which is commonly known or designated as "20
Whites Lane" is suitable for the purposes authorized by this ordinance
and is not otherwise needed for public use, dedicated or restricted
pursuant to law.
B. Waldwick Volunteer Ambulance Corps, Inc., sometimes known or
referred to as "Walvac" is a nonprofit corporation organized and
existing pursuant to Title 15 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
which, pursuant to the purposes of such incorporation, provides firstaid,
rescue and emergency services without charge for the benefit of all
residents of the Borough of Waldwick, thereby contributing
significantly to promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the
community.
§ 23-3 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 27-2
1:42
and for the purpose of garaging ambulances and rescue vehicles owned
by it. The rights of the lessee shall be nonexclusive as to common areas
designated and used as access for the remainder of the building.
§ 27-3. Continuation of services by Walvac.
The lease hereby authorized shall contain a provision whereby Waldwick
Volunteer Ambulance Corps, Inc., agrees and undertakes to continue to
provide emergency first-aid, ambulance and rescue services available to all
of the residents of Waldwick.
§ 27-4. Consideration for lease.
The consideration for the lease hereby authorized shall be the benefits to
the Borough and its residents of providing for the protection and promotion
of the health, safety and general welfare of the community.
§ 27-5. Term; renewal, termination. [Amended 3-25-08 by Ord. No.
5-08]
The initial term of the lease hereby authorized shall expire December 31,
2008, but shall be renewable at the option of the parties for twenty-four (24)
additional periods of one (1) calendar year each. The Borough shall have the
right to terminate the leasehold upon sixty (60) days' notice to the lessee
when, in the opinion of the Mayor and Council, such termination is in the
best interest of the Borough and its residents.
§ 27-6. Annual report.
In December of each year during which the agreement hereby authorized
is effective, Waldwick Volunteer Ambulance Corps, Inc., shall submit to the
Mayor and Council of the Borough a written report setting out the use to
which the leasehold was put during that year; the activities of Waldwick
Volunteer Ambulance Corp., Inc., undertaken in furtherance of the public
purpose for which the leasehold is granted; the approximate value or cost, if
any, of such activities in furtherance of such purpose; and an affirmation of
the continued tax-exempt status of Waldwick Volunteer Ambulance Corps.,
Inc., as a nonprofit corporation pursuant to both state and federal law.
§ 27-7. Enforcement of conditions.
The Borough Council of Waldwick shall be responsible for enforcement on
behalf of the Borough of the conditions of the agreement executed pursuant
hereto.
§ 27-8. When effective.
This ordinance shall become effective upon final passage and publication as
required by law.
§ 27-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-8
1:43
Part II: General Ordinances
Chapter 28
ALARMS
§ 28-1. Purpose.
WHEREAS, it is in the best interest of the community of the Borough of
Waldwick to provide standards and regulations relative to the operation of
alarms for the protection of residential and commercial properties;
§ 28-2. Definitions.
As used herein the following words and phrases shall be defined as
hereinafter indicated:
ALARM DEVICE — Shall mean any type of alarm system transmitting to a
private central station.
DIAL ALARM — Shall mean a type of alarm using telephone lines and
transmitting a pre-recorded alarm message directly to Police Headquarters.
LOCAL ALARM — Shall mean any alarm or device which, when activated,
produces a signal, but which is not connected to a central station.
PERSON — Shall be deemed to include any natural person, partnership,
corporation or any other legal entity.
SUBSCRIBER — Shall mean any person owning or possessing an alarm
device as defined in this ordinance.
FALSE ALARM — Shall mean any alarm activated by inadvertence,
negligence, the unintentional act of someone other than an intruder, or the
malfunction of the alarm equipment.
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE — Shall mean any member of the Police
Department of the Borough of Waldwick.
§ 28-3. Alarm devices.
§ 28-4. Local alarms.
(a) Any person may have an alarm device connected to any private central
station upon payment of the fees prescribed herein and compliance
with all other applicable provisions hereof.
(b) See Chapter 48:28-4(b).
(c) Completed applications shall be registered with the Borough Clerk.
(1) The annual charge shall be payable during the month of February
of each year, in advance, for each year or part thereof.
§ 27-8 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 28-4
1:44
§ 28-5. Dial alarms.
(a) The owner or operator of any Local Alarm shall register same with the
Borough Clerk prior to installation, annually during the month of
February for each year or part thereof during which the local alarm is in
operation.
(b) Registration shall be on a form to be provided by the Borough Clerk and
shall include the names, addresses and telephone numbers of persons
having access to the premises and capable of deactivating the local
alarm.
(c) See Chapter 48:28-4(c).
(d) No person shall cause or permit any local alarm to emit any sound for a
period in excess of 15 minutes, and any such emission for a period in
excess of 15 minutes shall, in addition to subjecting such person to the
penalties prescribed in Section 10 hereof, constitute a false alarm.
All Local Alarms installed after adoption of this ordinance shall be
equipped with a time relay device which limits the sounding of alarms
to 15 minutes or less.
(e) The owner or operator of any Local Alarm shall provide the Police
Department with the name, address, and telephone number of at least
two persons who will be available at all times, from whom the Police
Department may obtain a key for the purpose of deactivating the alarm,
or who will be able to enter the premises for such purpose.
(a) No person shall operate a Dial Alarm without first registering same with
the Borough Clerk, annually during the month of February for each year
or part thereof during which the dial alarm is in operation.
(b) Dial Alarms shall be registered with the Borough Clerk.
(c) See Chapter 48:28-5(c).
(d) No Dial Alarm shall be initially registered until a satisfactory test
thereof has been conducted by the Chief of Police or his designated
representative.
(e) No person shall operate a Dial Alarm which does not conform to the
requirements set forth below. In addition to any penalty imposed
pursuant to Section 10 hereof, any message transmitted by a Dial Alarm
not in conformance with the requirements set forth below shall
constitute a false alarm.
(i) Dial Alarms shall be coded so as to dial a specific number to be
furnished by the Chief of Police, and no Dial Alarm shall be coded to
dial the number of the general police switchboard of the Borough of
Waldwick.
§ 28-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-5
1:45
§ 28-6. False alarms.
§ 28-7. Installation on subscribers premises.
The subscriber shall retain the right to have the alarm company of his
choice install and service the alarm system on the subscriber's premises,
with the costs of said installation and service, in any event, to be borne
exclusively by the subscriber.
§ 28-8. Liability of the Borough limited.
§ 28-9. Notices.
(ii) Dial Alarms shall be coded to conform to a message prescribed by
the Chief of Police.
(iii) The total length of any message shall not exceed fifteen (15)
seconds.
(iv) Dial Alarm shall not be transmitted to Police Headquarters more
than three times per activation of the dial alarm device.
(v) All Dial Alarm devices shall be capable of disconnection to enable
the owner to call the Police Switchboard to indicate that a false
alarm has occurred.
(a) The Police Department of the Borough of Waldwick shall record the
date and location of each false alarm.
(b) For the first and second false alarm that shall occur within any calendar
year, a warning shall be issued by the Chief of Police or his designated
representative to the person owning or operating the alarm that caused
the false alarm.
(c) See Chapter 48:28-6(c).
(a) The Borough shall not be liable for any defects in operation of alarm
devices, Dial or Local Alarms, or for any failure or neglect to respond
appropriately upon receipt of any person in connection with the
installation and operation of equipment, or the relaying of such signals
and messages.
(b) The Borough shall assume no liability or responsibility to correct
defects in any equipment maintained by any private telephone company
or in any equipment installed on the subscriber's premises.
(a) The Borough Clerk shall forthwith, following the effective date of this
ordinance, mail a copy of this ordinance, together with a notice that the
annual service charge is due, to all subscribers who have had alarm
devices connected to the alarm console prior to the effective date of this
ordinance.
§ 28-5 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 28-9
1:46
§ 28-10. Penalties.
See Chapter 1:14.1.
§ 28-11. Severability.
In any section, clause, sentence, or other portion of this ordinance, or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance, shall for any reason be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment
shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this ordinance.
§ 28-12. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances.
All ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this
ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 28-13. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
as provided by law.
Chapter 29
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
(b) Copies of the ordinance shall be provided to all persons making
application for a connection of an alarm device or registering a dial
alarm or local alarm.
(c) The Borough Clerk shall record all charges paid pursuant to this
ordinance and shall mail notices to persons who are more than 30 days
in default of payment of any such charges.
§ 28-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-13
1:47

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 9-7-34 as Ord. No. 2-34]
§ 29-1. Purpose of ordinance.
This ordinance is for the purpose of regulating the sale, distribution and
consumption of alcoholic beverages in the Borough of Waldwick, in the
County of Bergen, in accordance with the provisions of the Act of
Legislature entitled "An Act Concerning Alcoholic Beverages," being
Chapter 436 of the Laws of 1933, its supplements and amendments, and in
accordance with the rules and regulations issued or to be promulgated by
the State Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage Control applicable thereto.
§ 29-2. Mayor and Council to authorize licenses, report to State
Commissioner.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Waldwick shall constitute the
authority for the administration of issuance of licenses under this ordinance
of all such licenses to said State Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage
Control.
§ 29-3. Applications for licenses.
No license shall be issued except after written application presented by the
proposed license, upon forms approved by the governing body, and after
conformity with publication of notice or otherwise, as required by said act
and this ordinance.
§ 29-4. Limitation on number of licenses. [Added 10-5-45 by Ord.
No. 1-45]
Not more than three (3) plenary retail consumption licenses and not more
than one (1) plenary distribution license shall be issued and outstanding in
the Borough of Waldwick at the same time, but this shall not prevent the
renewal of licenses presently outstanding or the transfer of such license and
the renewal of licenses so transferred.
§ 29-5. License fees.
(See Chapter 48:29-5.)
§ 29-6. Plenary retail consumption licenses: conditions of issuance.
The holder of a plenary retail consumption license shall be entitled, subject
to rules and regulations, to sell for consumption on the licensed premises
any alcoholic beverage by the glass or other open receptacles and also
to sell all alcoholic beverages in original containers for consumption off
the licensed premises. Such licenses shall not permit the sale of alcoholic
beverages in or upon any premises in which a grocery, delicatessen,
drugstore or other mercantile business is carried on, except the keeping
§ 29-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-6
1:49
of a hotel or restaurant or the sale of cigars and cigarettes at retail as an
accommodation to patrons or the retail sale of nonalcoholic beverages as
accessory beverages to alcoholic beverages.
§ 29-7. Plenary retail distribution licenses; conditions of issuance.
The holder of a plenary retail distribution license shall be entitled, subject
to rules and regulations, to sell any alcoholic beverage for consumption off
the licensed premises, but only in original containers
§ 29-8. License terms; payment of fees in advance.
All licenses shall be for a term of one (l) year from the first day of July in
each year, and all fees shall be paid in advance upon presentation of the
application.
§ 29-9. Licenses: transferability, transfer fee. [Amended 12-30-86 by
Ord. No. 23-86]
Licenses shall not be transferable. A separate license shall be required for
each specific place of business, and each license shall be effectual only for
the licensed premises mentioned therein; provided, however, that upon an
application for a transfer in the same manner as for an original application
and upon publication of intention to transfer in the same manner as the
case of an original application, the governing body may issue a transfer of
such license to a different place of business by endorsing such permission
upon such license and upon payment of a fee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
13:2-7.15 et seq.
§ 29-10. Suspensions and revocations.
Any license issued under this ordinance may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance or any of the provisions
of said act or said statutes heretofore mentioned or of any of the regulations
and rules prescribed by the State Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage
Control. Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance
with the provisions of said act by service of a five-day notice of charges
preferred against the licensee, as provided in said act, and affording a
reasonable opportunity for a hearing, and such suspension or revocation
shall carry the penalties and prohibitions provided for in said act.
§ 29-11. Interior light requirements.
All premises in which said alcoholic beverages shall be sold or otherwise
dispensed shall have reasonable access of light from the public highway,
and such premises shall be deemed to have reasonable access of light when
a normal-sized adult can, on inspection from the exterior, view the interior
of said licensed premises.
§ 29-12. Hours of operation restricted. [Amended 4-18-41 by Ord.
No. 1-41]
§ 29-6 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 29-12
1:50
§ 29-13. Admittance of minors.
No minor shall be allowed in any room in which any bar is located, unless
accompanied by a parent.
§ 29-14. Sale restrictions. [Repealed 2-26-74 by Ord. No. 3-74]
§ 29-15. Serving restrictions.
No person shall be served in any back room or side room which is not open
to the use of the public generally, except that in hotels guests may be served
in their rooms or in private or public dining rooms.
§ 29-16. Distance restrictions.
No license shall be issued for the sale of alcoholic beverages within two
hundred (200) feet of any church or public school or private schoolhouse
not conducted for pecuniary profit, except to manufacturers, wholesalers,
hotels, clubs and fraternal organizations which own or are actually in
possession of the licensed premises at the time of effectiveness of the
aforesaid act; provided, however, that this prohibition may be waived at the
issuance or renewal of such license, by the duly authorized governing body
or authority of such school or church, and such waiver shall be effective
until the date of the next renewal of said license, and provided also that
this prohibition shall not apply to the renewal of any license where no
such school or church was located within said prohibited distance of said
licensed premises at the time of issuance of said license, or as otherwise
excepted by the provisions of said act.
§ 29-17. Violations and penalties for unlawful procurement.
Any person, except an officer or other person authorized by and acting
pursuant to instruction from such officer, so doing in the course of and for
the purpose of enforcing said act, who shall knowingly purchase, receive or
procure any illicit beverage, on conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine
of not less than ten dollars ($10) and not more than one hundred dollars
($100) or imprisonment for not less than two (2) days and not more than ten
(10) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the
court.
A. No licensee shall sell, serve or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage or allow the consumption
of any alcoholic beverage on the licensed premises on New Year's Day
when it is a weekday between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.; on
New Year's Day when it is a Sunday between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and
11:00 a.m.; on other weekdays between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
11:00 a.m.; on other Sundays between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 11:00
a.m. [Amended 3-13-84 by Ord. No. 3-84]
B. The hours specified herein shall be deemed and construed to refer to
the prevailing time. [Amended 11-28-78 by Ord. No. 19-78]
§ 29-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-18
1:51
§ 29-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall knowingly violate any of the other provisions of this
ordinance and said act shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less
than fifty dollars ($50) and not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250)
or imprisonment for not less than ten (10) days and not more than ninety
(90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the
court.
§ 29-19. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect on July 1, 1934, after publication in the
manner required by law.
§ 29-18 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 29-19
1:52
ARTICLE II
Consumption and Possession in Public; Open Containers
[Adopted 4-27-76 as Ord. No. 7-76]
§ 29-20. Prohibited acts.
§ 29-21. Exception for special events.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 29-20, the Mayor and Council
of the Borough of Waldwick may, by resolution, issue a permit for the
possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in any designated park or
other public or quasi-public place under its jurisdiction at the designated
time or times in connection with a special event which shall have been
authorized by the Mayor and Council, except that with respect to school
grounds, the Board of Education shall have authority as to the issuance of
any such permit for a special event.
§ 29-22. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred ($500)
dollars or be imprisoned for not more than ninety (90) days, or both.
A. No person shall consume any alcoholic beverages within the limits of
the Borough of Waldwick nor have in his possession any opened
alcoholic beverage container with unconsumed alcoholic beverage
therein:
(1) While in or on a public street, lane, roadway, avenue, sidewalk,
public parking place, park, playground, recreation area, school
grounds or any other public or quasi-public place open to the public
or in any public conveyance.
(2) While in a private motor vehicle while the same is in motion or
parked in any public street, lane or public parking lot, or other
public or quasi-public place.
(3) While upon any private property not his own without the express
permission of the owner or other person having authority to grant
such permission.
B. No person within the limits of the Borough of Waldwick shall discard
alcoholic beverage containers upon any public street, lane, roadway,
avenue, sidewalk, public parking lot or place, park, playground,
recreation area, school grounds or any other public or quasi-public
place open to the public or in any public conveyance or upon any
private property not his own without the express permission of the
owner.
§ 29-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-23
1:53
§ 29-23. Severability.
The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence or provision of this ordinance
shall not affect the validity of any part of this ordinance which can be given
effect without such invalid part or parts.
§ 29-24. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
as required by law.
§ 29-23 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 29-24
1:54
ARTICLE III
Consumption by Persons Under the Legal Age
[Adopted 12-12-00 as Ord. No. 23-00]
§ 29-25. Consumption by persons under the legal age.
§ 29-26. Penalties.
1. No person shall offer or serve any alcoholic beverage to a person under
legal age in any public or quasi-public place within the Borough of
Waldwick. No person who has ownership or control of any premises,
whether public or quasi-public, or supervision of any event, shall
permit, suffer or allow the consumption of an alcoholic beverage by a
person under legal age in or upon any such premises or at any such
event with the Borough of Waldwick.
2. It is unlawful for any person under the legal age to consume alcohol, to,
without legal authority, knowingly possess or knowingly consume an
alcoholic beverage on private property.
3. The prohibition contained in this Section (2) shall not prohibit an
underaged person from consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage
in connection with a religious observance, ceremony or rite or
consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in the presence of and
with the permission of a parent, guardian or relative who has attained
the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages.
4. As used in this section, "guardian" means a person who has qualified as
a guardian of the underaged person pursuant to testamentary or court
appointment. "Relative" means the underaged persons' grandparent,
aunt or uncle, sibling, or any other person related by blood or affinity.
5. Nothing contained in this Article III shall prohibit possession of
alcoholic beverages by any such underaged person while actually
engaged in the performance of employment by a person who is licensed
under Title 33 of the revised statutes of the State of New Jersey, or
while actively engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a
culinary arts or hotel management program at a County vocational
school or post secondary educational institution; however, nothing in
this section shall be construed to preclude the imposition of a penalty
under this section, R.S. 33:1-81, or any other section of law against a
person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on or at
premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
1. Any violation of Article III shall be punished by a fine of $250.00 for a
first offense and $350.00 for any subsequent offense.
2. In addition to the fine authorized for this offense, the court may
suspend or postpone for six months the driving privilege of the
Defendant. Upon the conviction of any person, any suspension or
postponement of that person's driver's license, the court shall forward a
§ 29-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-26
1:55
§ 29-27. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph or subparagraph of this Ordinance
is declared invalid for any reason by any court with proper jurisdiction,
then such section, subsection, paragraph or subparagraph, shall be deemed
severable and such invalidation shall not affect the remaining portion of the
Ordinance.
§ 29-28. Repealer.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
report to the Division of Motor Vehicles stating the first and last day of
the suspension or postponement imposed by the court pursuant to this
section. If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence is less
than seventeen (17) years of age, the period of license postponement,
including a suspension or postponement of the privilege of operating a
motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day the sentence is imposed
and shall run for a period of six (6) months after the person reaches the
age of seventeen (17) years.
3. If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a valid
driver's license issued by the State, the court shall immediately collect
the license and forward it to the Division along with the report. If for
any reason the license cannot be collected, the court shall include in the
report the complete name, address, date of birth, eye color, and sex of
the person, as well as the first and last date of the license suspension
period imposed by the court.
4. The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the person
is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of license
suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in R.S. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive
a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt of a
written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a
violation of R.S. 39:3-40.
5. If the person convicted under such an ordinance is not a New Jersey
resident, the court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresident
driving privilege of the person based on the age of the person
and submit to the Division the required report. The court shall not
collect the license of a non-resident convicted under this section. Upon
receipt of a report by the court, the Division shall notify the appropriate
officials in the licensing jurisdiction of the suspension or postponement.
§ 29-26 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 29-28
1:56
Chapter 30
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 30-1. Licenses required; denial to certain convicted persons.
On and after the effective date of this ordinance, all automatic amusement
games of the type commonly known and designated as bagatelle, baseball or
pin amusement games or similar machines or devices operated, maintained
or used in any public or quasi-public place or in any building, store or
other place wherein the public is invited or wherein the public may enter,
and particularly, but not by way of limitation, all coin-operated automatic
amusement or skill devices of the type commonly known as bagatelle
games, baseball games or pin amusement games or similar machines or
devices operated, maintained or used as aforesaid, shall be licensed by the
Mayor and Council of the Borough of Waldwick and shall not be placed,
operated, maintained or used within the municipal limits of the said
Borough of Waldwick without first having obtained a license for that
purpose; provided, however, that no license shall be issued to any person
who shall have been convicted of a crime or of a violation of any ordinance
involving gambling, and provided further that if a license has been issued
and the person to whom it has been issued shall thereafter be convicted
of a crime or a violation of any ordinance involving gambling, said license
shall immediately be revoked by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Waldwick.
§ 30-2. Definitions.
PERSON — As used in this ordinance, shall mean any individual, firm,
member of firm, partnership, corporation, or any officers, director or
stockholder of said corporation.
AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT GAMES — A machine or device, automatic or
coin operated, whether mechanical, electrical or electronic, which shall
be ready for play by insertion of a coin or may otherwise be operated by
the public for a charge for use as a game, entertainment or amusement,
including pinball machines, electronic games, bowling machines,
mechanical game machine, skee-ball machines, or any device which utilizes
a video tube to reproduce symbolic figures and lines to be representative of
real games or activities, the object of playing of which is to achieve a score.
Excluded from this definition are music vending machines commonly known
as "juke boxes".
AMUSEMENT MACHINE ARCADE — A group of more than three
amusement games or amusement machines in the same place, location or
premises the operation of such games by the public constitutes the principal
use of the premises.
§ 30-3. Licenses.
(See Chapter 48:30-3.)
§ 29-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-4
1:57
§ 30-4. Application for licenses. [Amended 11-28-89 by Ord. No.
22-89]
A. Separate application for each machine shall be filed on a form to be
furnished by the Borough Clerk, which form shall show the following
information:
1. The name, date of birth, home address and the home telephone
number and the business telephone number of the applicant and
each of its stockholders, officers, directors and each partner,
member or principal.
2. The name and address of the registered agent of the applicant or
person upon whom service of process is authorized to be made.
3. The name, date and place of birth, home address and telephone
number of the manager or other agent of the applicant who shall be
in charge of or conduct the business of the applicant within the
Borough of Waldwick.
4. With respect to each person whose name is listed on the license
application a statement as to whether or not said person has ever
been convicted of a crime or violation of any ordinance involving
gambling.
5. A sketch detailing the precise location and type of each machine or
device to be operated under the license applied for must be
attached to the application for said license.
6. If the applicant is a corporation, a corporate resolution in proper
form authorizing the execution of the license application on behalf
of the corporation shall be attached.
7. The serial number for each machine being licensed.
8. A certification, under oath, made by the applicant, that the
information contained in the application and all attachments
thereto is complete, accurate and truthful to be best of his
knowledge and belief.
B. The Borough Clerk shall refer the application to the Police Department,
Fire Sub-Code Official and Health Officer.
1. Each of the aforementioned shall make, or cause to be made an
investigation of the facts stated in the application and an inspection
of the premises in which the automatic amusement game is to be
located. They shall review said application to insure that all State
laws and Borough ordinances are complied with. They shall attach
to the application their report thereon in writing, which shall also
state their approval or their disapproval with the reason therefor.
§ 30-4 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 30-4
1:58
§ 30-5. Issuance and display of license; license data.
No device or machine as specified in this ordinance shall be placed,
operated, maintained or used until the license issued by the Borough Clerk
of the Borough of Waldwick shall be affixed thereto in a conspicuous place
so that the same shall be easily and quickly identified. Said license shall on
its face, disclose the manufacturer's serial number, the name and post office
address of the licensee and shall disclose the amount of money required to
operate said machine or device and shall briefly state that the machine or
device to which the same is affixed is licensed for operation by the Mayor
and Council of the Borough of Waldwick.
§ 30-6. Transferability.
§ 30-7. Location and limitation on number. [Amended 11-28-89 by
Ord. No. 22-89.]
2. Upon receipt of said application and the aforementioned reports,
the Council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance of a
license to the applicant.
3. No license shall be approved by the Council or issued by the
Borough Clerk if it appears that the premises in which the
automatic amusement game is to be placed does not comply with
the applicable requirements of the laws of New Jersey and with the
building, zoning and fire prevention ordinances of the Borough of
Waldwick.
A. The holder of a license shall be permitted to transfer the license within
the calendar year for which it is issued to any other like machine
operated in the same premises in place of the machine from which the
license is transferred; the licensee, however, to immediately notify the
Mayor and Council of the Borough of Waldwick of such purpose and to
communicate to them the manufacturer's serial number and the type of
machine.
B. Upon proper application having been made, the Mayor and Council
may, in their discretion, transfer a license from one premises to another.
A. No more than three (3) machines or devices of the type or types herein
mentioned shall be permitted to be used or operated in any one (1)
place, location or premises. The use of three (3) machines provided
herein shall be limited to ancillary or accessory use only within a
building or premises used for a commercial use permitted in the VC-1
Village Center District Zone, C-1 Village Commercial District Zone, C-2
Turnpike Commercial District and I Limited Manufacturing-Industrial
Zone.
B. An Amusement Machine Arcade shall be permitted to be located only in
those areas specifically designated "I" Limited Manufacturing-
Industrial Zone. An Amusement Machine Arcade shall not be permitted
§ 30-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-7
1:59
§ 30-8. Use for gambling; violation and penalty.
Any person who shall use or permit to be used any of the machines or
devices licensed hereunder, for the purposes of gambling, shall be deemed
to be guilty of a violation of this ordinance and punishable therefor as
hereinunder provided.
§ 30-9. Rules and regulations.
§ 30-10. Distance restriction.
No machine or device licensed under this ordinance shall be used, placed,
maintained or operated in any premises within two hundred (200) feet of
any school or church.
§ 30-11. Purpose of ordinance. [Amended 10-11-83 by Ord. No.
21-83]
This ordinance is enacted for the purpose of the regulation and control
of automatic amusement or skill games of the type commonly known and
in any other zone even though such zone might permit those uses
permitted in the "I" Limited Manufacturing-Industrial Zone. An
Amusement Machine Arcade shall only be permitted if it meets the
requirements of Chapter 30; Chapter 97; and the conditions
enumerated in Section 97-72.3.
A. Readily visible sign shall be installed indicating that the use of
machines or devices by persons under sixteen (16) years of age shall
not be permitted during normal school hours. The use of machines or
devices during this time by persons under sixteen (16) years of age shall
cause the license to be revoked. The time period shall be 8:30 a.m. to
3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except days on which the Waldwick
Board of Education has closed schools within its jurisdiction and during
the months of July and August. It shall be the responsibility of the
licensee to insure compliance of this section.
B. The licensee shall at all times, maintain good order and shall not permit
any disturbance, congestion or loitering upon the licensed premises.
C. No coin-operated amusement devices shall be operated in a manner
which will enable it to be heard outside of the premises.
D. No games of chance, gaming, gambling, playing for money among
contestants or any other such practices shall be permitted upon the
licensed premises.
E. The licensee shall not permit the use or distribution of any controlled
dangerous substance (as defined by the New Jersey Controlled
Dangerous Substance Act) on the premises.
F. No walls or enclosures shall be permitted between machines.
§ 30-7 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 30-11
1:60
designated as "video", "bagatelle", "baseball", or "pin amusement games"
or similar machines or devices. Amusement machines are known to attract
large numbers of people. The numerical limitation established by this
ordinance minimizes the levels of noise, congestion and traffic thereby
preventing overcrowding of buildings, ensuring safety from fire and
preserving the social and economic well-being of the Borough's commercial
area.
§ 30-12. Violations and penalties.
See Chapter 1:14.1.
§ 30-13. Severability.
If, for any reason, any section or provision of this ordinance shall be
questioned in any court and shall be held to be unconstitutional or invalid,
the same shall not be held to affect any other section or provision of this
ordinance.
§ 30-14. Inconsistent ordinance repealed.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of
this ordinance be and the same are hereby repealed.
§ 30-15. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication according to law.
Chapter 31
(RESERVED)
Chapter 32
ANIMALS
§ 30-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-15
1:61

ARTICLE I
Cats
§ 32-1. Definitions.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species; male, female or altered.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of seven
months, or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
ANIMAL — For the purpose of this chapter, animal shall mean dog or cat.
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Any person or agency designated or
certified by the State of New Jersey to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat shall include every
person having a right or property (or custody) in such cat and every person
who has such cat in his/her keeping, or who harbors or maintains a cat or
knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by
that person.
CATTERY — Shall mean any room or group of rooms, cage, or exhibition
pen, not part of a kennel, wherein cats for sale are kept or displayed.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization, or
institution, commonly recognized by law as a unit.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The agency or department of the Borough
of Waldwick or any designated representative thereof charged with
administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under
the provisions of this chapter.
NEUTERED — Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction as certified
by a licensed veterinarian.
§ 32-2. Provisions.
(a) Vaccination and License Requirements: No person shall own, keep,
harbor, or maintain any cat over seven months of age within the
Borough of Waldwick unless such cat is vaccinated and licensed. The
provisions of this section do not apply to cats held in a cattery, or those
held by a state or federal licensed research facility, or a veterinary
establishment where cats are received or kept for diagnostic, medical,
surgical, or other treatments, or licensed animal shelters, pounds,
kennels, or pet shops.
(b) Vaccination: All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the latest "Compendium of Animal
Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization" published by
the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, except as
provided for in Subsection (d).
(c) Vaccination Certificate: A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to
the owner of each animal vaccinated on a form recommended by the
state.
§ 32-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-2
1:63
§ 32-3. Licensing requirements.
(d) Exemptions: Any cat may be exempted from the requirements of such
vaccination for a specified period of time by the local board of health,
upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that because of
an infirmity or other physical condition, or regimen of therapy, the
inoculation of such cat shall be deemed inadvisable.
(a) Cats Must Have License Number Displayed: Any person who shall own,
keep, or harbor a cat of licensing age shall annually apply for and
procure from the clerk of the municipality, or other official designated
by the governing body thereof to license cats in the municipality in
which he/she resides, a license and official registration tag with license
number, or a registration sleeve for each cat so owned, kept, or
harbored, and shall place upon such cat a collar, or other device with
the license number securely fastened or displayed thereto. Acceptable
methods of displaying license number shall include, but are not limited
to, break-away or elastic collars. License tags or sleeves are not
transferable.
(b) Time for Applying for License: The owner of any newly acquired cat of
licensing age, or of any cat which attains licensing age, shall make
application for license tag or sleeve for such cat within ten days after
such acquisition or age attainment. This requirement will not apply to a
non-resident keeping a cat within the Borough of Waldwick for no
longer than 90 days.
(c) Cats Brought Into Borough of Waldwick: Any person who shall bring, or
cause to be brought into the Borough of Waldwick any cat licensed in
another state for the current year, and bearing registration tag or
sleeve, and shall keep the same or permit the same to be kept with the
Borough of Waldwick for a period of more than 90 days, shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag or sleeve for each
such cat.
Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough of
Waldwick any unlicensed cat, and shall keep same or permit same to be
kept within the Borough of Waldwick for a period of more than ten days,
shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag or sleeve for
each such cat.
(d) Application, Contents, Preservation of Information: The application
shall state the breed, sex, age, color, and markings of the cat for which
license and registration are sought, and whether it is of a long or
shorthaired variety; also the name, street and post office address of the
owner, and the person who shall keep or harbor such cat. The
information on said application and the registration number issued for
the cat shall be preserved for a period of three years by the clerk or
other local official designated to license cats in the municipality.
§ 32-2 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 32-3
1:64
(e) License Forms and Tags: License forms and official tags or sleeves shall
be furnished by the municipality and shall be numbered serially, and
shall bear the year of issuance and the name of the municipality.
(f) Evidence of Inoculation with Rabies Vaccine or Certification of
Exemption: Requirement for License: No Municipal Clerk or other
official designated by the governing body of any municipality to license
cats therein shall grant any such license and official registration tag or
sleeve for any cat, unless the owner thereof provides evidence that the
cat to be licensed and registered has been inoculated with a rabies
vaccine of a type approved by and administered in accordance with the
recommendations of the United States Department of Agriculture and
the United States Department of Human Services, or has been certified
exempt as provided by § 32-3 of this chapter. The rabies inoculation
shall be administered by a duly licensed veterinarian, or by such other
veterinarian permitted by law to do the same.
(g) License Fee Schedule: See § 48:37-3(g).1
(h) Fees, Renewals, Expiration Date of License: License from another
municipality shall be accepted. The person applying for the license and
registration tag and/or sleeve shall pay the fee fixed or authorized. The
fee for the renewal of license and registration tag or sleeve shall be the
same as for the original, and said license, registration tag or sleeve and
renewal thereof shall expire on January 1st in the following year.
Only one license and registration tag or sleeve shall be required in the
licensing year for any cat in the Borough of Waldwick. Any valid New
Jersey license tag or sleeve issued by a New Jersey municipality shall
be accepted by this municipality as evidence of compliance.
(i) Loss of License: If a license tag or sleeve has been misplaced or lost, the
Borough Clerk may issue a duplicate license and/or registration sleeve
for that particular cat at no charge.
(j) Proof of Licensing: Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person
owning, keeping, maintaining or harboring a cat, upon the request of
any health official, police officer, animal control officer, or other
authorized person.
(k) Interfering with Persons Performing Duties Under This Chapter: No
person shall hinder, molest, or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this chapter.
(l) Disposition of Fees Collected: License fees and other moneys collected
or received under the provisions of this chapter, shall be forwarded to
the treasurer of the municipality, and shall be placed in the current fund
account.
1. Editor's Note: Former § 48-37, Cats, licenses, as amended, was repealed 12-18-2018 by
Ord. No. 24-2018.
§ 32-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-3
1:65

ARTICLE II
Dogs
§ 32-4. Definitions.
DOG — Shall mean any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Shall mean any dog which has attained the age
of seven months, or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
VICIOUS DOG — Shall mean any dog, as defined in this section, which
attacks and bites, or attempts to attack and bite, persons or dogs or other
animals, without being incited to do so, or which has shown such savagery,
fierceness or ferocity as to indicate that it is a threat to the safety of
persons.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, shall mean and
include every person having a right of propriety of such dog, and every
person who has such dog or other animal in his keeping or under his
control. A person shall be deemed to have a dog or other animal in his
keeping whenever the ownership or custody of any dog or other animal is in
an unemancipated infant or other member of his household.
AT LARGE — Shall mean off the property of the owner and not on a leash.
POUND — Shall mean an establishment for the confinement of dogs seized
under the provisions of this chapter, state statutes or otherwise.
BOROUGH — Shall mean the Borough of Waldwick, County of Bergen and
State of New Jersey.
§ 32-5. License and registration required.
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age shall,
within 10 days after the acquisition thereof and annually thereafter in the
month of January, apply for and procure from the Borough Clerk a license
and official metal registration tag for each such dog so owned, kept or
harbored and shall place upon each such dog a collar or harness with
the registration tag securely fastened thereto. Such application shall state
the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the dog for which license and
registration are sought and whether it is of long or short-haired variety;
also, the name, street and post office address of the owner and the person
who shall keep or harbor such dog.
§ 32-6. License and registration fees.
(See § 48:42-3.)
§ 32-7. Late fees.
(See § 48:42-3.1.)
§ 32-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-8
1:67
§ 32-8. Disposition of fees collected.
The disposition of license fees and registration fees collected hereunder
shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.11.
§ 32-9. Canvass of dogs in the Borough.
The Board of Health of the Borough shall annually cause a canvass to
be made of all dogs owned, kept or harbored within the Borough and
shall report, on or before May 1 of each year, to the Borough Clerk and
to the State Department of Health, the result thereof, setting forth in
separate columns the names and addresses of persons owning, keeping or
harboring unlicensed dogs and the number of unlicensed dogs owned, kept
or harbored by each of said persons, together with a complete description
of each of said unlicensed dogs.
§ 32-10. Required control of dogs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping harboring or having
the custody and possession of any dog, whether registered or not, to
permit such dog to be at large within the Borough unless securely
confined in a vehicle and under the direct and immediate close
supervision of a person capable of controlling such dog. The provisions
of this section shall not be applicable to the canine unit of the Borough's
Police force or to the canine units of other governmental agencies
called by the Waldwick Police Department as part of mutual aid.
B. No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog shall
cause, suffer or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate on or commit any
nuisance on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath,
play area, park or any place where people congregate or walk or upon
any public property whatsoever or upon any private property without
the permission of the owner of said property. The restriction in this
section shall not apply to that portion of the street lying between the
curblines, which shall be used to curb such dog under the following
conditions:
(1) The person who so curbs such dog shall immediately remove all
feces deposited by such dog by any sanitary method approved by
the local Health Authority.
(2) The feces removed from the aforementioned designated area shall
be disposed of by the person owning, harboring, keeping or in
charge of any dog curbed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, in a sanitary manner approved by the local Health
Authority.
§ 32-8 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 32-11
1:68
§ 32-11. Impounding of dogs at large.
Any dog found at large within the Borough shall be taken into custody and
impounded, or caused to be taken into custody and impounded by the Board
of Health, or any person authorized by it and acting on its behalf.
If any dog so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed thereon or
attached thereto the name and address of any person, or a registration tag
of the owner, or the person keeping or harboring said dog is known, the
Board of Health, or any person authorized by it and acting on its behalf,
shall forthwith serve on the person whose address is given on the collar, or
the owner or persons keeping or harboring said dog, if known, a notice in
writing stating that the dog has been seized and that it will be liable to be
disposed of or destroyed if not claimed within seven days after the service
of the notice.
The notice under this section may be served either by delivering it to the
person on whom it is to be served, or by leaving it at the person's usual
or last known place of abode, or at the address given on the collar, or by
forwarding it by post in a prepaid letter addressed to that person at his
usual or last known place of abode or to the address given on the collar.
When any dog so seized has been detained for seven days after notice,
where notice can be given, as set forth above, or has been detained for
seven days after seizure, when no notice has been given as set forth above,
and if the owner or person keeping or harboring said dog has not claimed
said dog and paid all expenses incurred by reason of its detention, including
maintenance, and if the dog be unlicensed at the time of the seizure and
the owner or person keeping or harboring said dog has not produced a
license and registration tag for said dog, the Board of Health, or any person
authorized by it in that behalf, may cause the dog to be destroyed in a
manner causing as little pain as possible.
§ 32-12. Destruction of certain dogs in lieu of seizure.
Any vicious dog found at large or any dog which shows definite signs of
having been infected with rabies may be destroyed immediately by any
police officer, Health Officer or other person authorized by and acting on
behalf of the Board of Health.
§ 32-13. Administration and enforcement.
A. The Board of Health of the Borough shall be responsible for all dogs
impounded or taken into custody under the provisions of this chapter or
state statutes and shall designate the place where such dogs are to be
impounded or held in custody.
B. Except for the issuance of dog licenses, which, shall be done by the
Borough Clerk, this chapter shall be enforced by the Board of Health of
the Borough. However, nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit any
Police Officer of the Borough from enforcing any provisions hereof.
§ 32-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-13
1:69

ARTICLE III
Pet Waste
§ 32-14. Purpose.
An ordinance to establish requirements for the proper disposal of pet solid
waste in the Borough of Waldwick, so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 32-15. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — Shall mean that the pet solid waste is removed at once,
without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.
§ 32-16. Requirement for disposal.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person
§ 32-17. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while such animal is
being used for that purpose.
§ 32-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-18
1:71
§ 32-18. Enforcement. [Amended 9-11-2018 by Ord. No. 19-2018]
A. The position of municipal humane law enforcement officer (MHLEO) be
and hereby is established.
B. The MHLEO may be employed by an outside contractor and it must be
the appointment of the individual, not the company. The appointment is
null and void if the individual leaves the employment of the service.
C. Each County Prosecutor must issue directives concerning MHLEOs.
While these directives have not yet been issued, the BCPO Animal
Cruelty Task Force is being used as the state-wide model.
D. While no state funds are being provided to accomplish any of this state
mandate, all summonses issued for violation of state animal cruelty
laws will be heard in Municipal Court and the fines less than the State
of New Jersey's portion shall go to the municipality.
E. A basic background investigation will be required for the MHLEO and
there shall be proper identification to each MHLEO.
F. The Borough of Waldwick may designate its Animal Control officers
(either in-house or outside contractors) as humane law enforcement
officers.
G. A police officer will provide assistance should there be an issue which
may require an armed officer.
H. The MHLEO will be under this supervision of the Chief of Police or
Chief's designee.
§ 32-18 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 32-18
1:72
ARTICLE IV
General Provisions
§ 32-19. Responsibility for care of impounded animals.
§ 32-20. Violations and penalty.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to the penalty provisions found in § 1-14.1 of this code.
§ 32-21. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this chapter is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this chapter to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this chapter.
§ 32-22. Effective date.
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and
any publication as may be required by law.
A. The Animal Control Officer of the Borough shall be responsible for all
dogs and other animals impounded and taken into custody under the
terms of this chapter and statutes incorporated herein, as amended and
supplemented. The Animal Control Officer and/or Municipal Health
Officer of the Borough shall designate the place where such dogs and
animals are to be impounded or held in custody subject to the approval
of the Mayor and Council.
B. Subject to the terms of this chapter and statutes incorporated herein,
an owner may obtain the release of their animal impounded due to
emergency calls upon payment of a recovery fee which is set forth in
the contract between the Borough and the Animal Control Officer,
which is on file with the Borough Clerk. Payment of the above charge is
to be made directly to the Animal Control Officer and shall be in
addition to any other costs incurred for care and kenneling of the
animal. No owner of any impounded animal shall be permitted to claim
it unless a license or registration tag can be produced if required under
this chapter. The hours for emergency calls are set forth in the contract
between the Borough and Animal Control Officer on file with the
Borough Clerk.
§ 32-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-22
1:73
Chapter 33
(RESERVED)
Chapter 34
(RESERVED)
Chapter 35
(RESERVED)
Chapter 36
(RESERVED)
Chapter 37
(RESERVED)
Chapter 38
CLEAN UP COST RECOVERY
§ 38-1. Definitions.
DISCHARGE — Any intentional or unintentional action or omission resulting
in the releasing, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying
or dumping of hazardous substances, sewage, or sewage sludge into the
waters, air, land public or private, within the municipal boundaries of the
Borough of Waldwick or outside the Borough when damage may result to
the waters, air, or land inside the Borough.
EXPENDABLE ITEMS — Any items used to extinguish or prevent any fire
or stop, contain or otherwise mitigate a discharge or any items used to
provide for the immediate and/or temporary care of persons affected by
such event which cannot be reused or replenished without cost after that
particular incident. These "expendable items" include but are not limited to,
fire-fighting foam, chemical extinguishing agents and absorbent materials,
sand, recovery drums and any protective equipment and clothing to include
but not be restricted to chemical protective suits, chemical protective
gloves and goggles. Also items necessary to provide for the immediate
and/or short term care of persons affected by the incident to include but
not be restricted to emergency medical supplies and equipment, foodstuffs
and any other items owned or requested by the Borough of Waldwick, the
Waldwick Police Department, the Waldwick Fire Department, and Waldwick
Office of Emergency Management or their employees, officers, agents and/
or officials.
§ 32-22 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 38-1
1:74
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Any material, solid, liquid or gas, listed as
such under the N.F.P.A. Guide of Hazardous Materials, the Department of
Transportation Guide Book, the list of hazardous substances adopted by
the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), pursuant to Section
311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendment of 1972, as
amended by the Clean Water Act of 1977 (33 USC 1251, et seq.), the
list of toxic pollutants designated by Congress or the EPA, pursuant to
Section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, and all elements
and compounds as set forth in N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11b as amended, and in
this chapter, except that sewage and sewage sludge shall be considered
"Hazardous Substances" for the purpose of this article.
PERSON — Any individual, public or private corporation, company,
association, society, firm, partnership or joint stock company.
VEHICLE — Any motorized equipment, registered or unregistered,
including but not limited to, a passenger car, motorcycle, truck, tractortrailer,
construction equipment, farm machinery, watercraft, aircraft and
trains.
VESSEL — Any container, drum, box, cylinder, or tank used to hold, contain,
carry or store any hazardous substances whether or not said container was
manufactured for the containment of hazardous substances.
§ 38-2. Purpose.
A. It is the policy of the Borough of Waldwick that reimbursement for, or
the replacement of, any and all equipment, supplies, or monies utilized,
expended, lost, destroyed or otherwise rendered unusable by the
Borough of Waldwick, without regard to ownership, for the purpose of
mitigating, controlling, or containing any discharge or where the
potential thereof exists or the prevention of the same is necessary or for
the protection of the public health, safety or welfare of the residents of
the Borough of Waldwick.
B. It is also the policy of the Borough of Waldwick that reimbursement for
the expenses incurred by the township for the wages (regular and
overtime) and applicable benefit costs paid to and on behalf of its
employees, agents or servants as a result of an incident involving a
discharge be provided.
C. Any person who shall cause, be responsible for or otherwise create the
discharge, shall reimburse the Borough of Waldwick for all expendable
items, and associated costs as listed in Subections 2A and 2B used by
the Borough or any of its employees, agents, servants, officers or
officials in stopping, containing, controlling or mitigating any
discharge. Such reimbursement shall occur in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter 38.
§ 38-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-3
1:75
§ 38-3. Reimbursement for expendable items.
Any person who shall cause a discharge to occur or create the potential for
the occurrence of a discharge shall make reimbursement to the Borough
for any fees incurred by the Borough and for all expendable items used in
connection with the mitigation, control, containment or prevention of the
discharge.
§ 38-4. Reimbursement for services.
Any person responsible for the occurrence of a discharge or for creating
the potential thereof shall reimburse the Borough of Waldwick for services
rendered by any recovery company, towing company, hazardous materials
response unit or any technical assistance called for by the Borough to
handle such incident. In the event of a vehicle having been responsible for
an incident, such vehicle may be impounded until such time as it has been
deemed safe to proceed by the Incident Commander or Officer in Charge in
consultation with Borough emergency services officials and until such time
as arrangements have been made to reimburse the Borough and the towing
company for expenses incurred pursuant to the terms of this chapter of the
Code of the Borough of Waldwick.
§ 38-5. Time limit for payment of required reimbursement.
The person or entity responsible for any discharge or for creating the
potential thereof shall reimburse the Borough the full cost of expendable
items used to extinguish such fire or stop, contain, control or otherwise
mitigate such discharge and any associated costs as listed in § 38-2A, B and
§ 38-4 within thirty (30) days after receipt of a statement from the Borough
of Waldwick setting forth the amount of reimbursement required.
§ 38-6. Hearing upon reasonableness of assessment.
Upon receipt of an assessment for expendable items and associated costs as
set forth in § 38-5 the person assessed may, within ten (10) days of receipt
of such assessment, make a request for a hearing before the Borough of
Waldwick Council; said hearing to be solely and exclusively upon the issue
of the reasonableness of the amount assessed.
§ 38-7. Liabilities for attorney's fees and collection costs.
The person responsible for the discharge shall be liable for all reasonable
attorney's fees and costs incurred in the collection of costs as listed in §
38-2A, B and § 38-4, in the event the assessment remains unpaid thirty (30)
days after receipt of said assessment.
§ 38-8. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person responsible for any discharge of hazardous materials who
fails to reimburse the Borough of Waldwick within the time set forth in
this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty ($50) dollars
§ 38-3 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 38-8
1:76
Chapter 39
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
§ 39-1. Enforcing agency.
§ 39-2. Fees.
(See Chapter 48:39-2.)
§ 39-3. Fire limits.
nor more than five hundred ($500) dollars per day or to imprisonment
for a period of not more than six (6) months, or both.
A. There is hereby established in the Borough of Waldwick a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the "Department of
Building Inspection", consisting of a Construction Official, Building
Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode
Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official and such other subcode
officials for such additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the
Department of Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter
adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction Code. The Construction
Official shall be the chief administrator of the enforcing agency. All
personnel shall be appointed or assigned to the Department of Building
Inspection by the Mayor and Council pursuant to law.
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as
amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23.
More than one (1) such official position may be held by the same
person, provided that such person is qualified pursuant to P.L. 1975, c.
217, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such position.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one (1) official location, except for emergencies and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
A. The following fire limits are established pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23, as
shown on the Zoning Map of the Borough of Waldwick: All commercial
and industrial zones shall be designated as being within the fire limits.
B. The Construction Official shall prepare and submit to the Mayor and
Council, biannually, a report reevaluating the delineation of the fire
limits. This report shall indicate the recommendations of the
Construction Official, the Building Subcode Official and the Fire
Subcode Official regarding those areas which should be designated as
within fire limits, with the reasons therefor.
§ 38-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-4
1:77
§ 39-4. Repealer
Any ordinance inconsistent herewith shall be and the same is hereby
repealed to the extent of said inconsistency.
§ 39-5. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be decided by the courts
to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so decided
to be unconstitutional.
§ 39-6. Filing; retention as public record.
Upon passage and publication as prescribed by law, this ordinance shall
be filed and recorded with the Bureau of Housing Inspection, New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs, and retained on file as a public record in
the offices of the Borough Clerk and Building Inspector and Department of
Building Inspection.
§ 39-7. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon adoption and publication
as provided by law.
Chapter 40
(RESERVED)
Chapter 41
(RESERVED)
Chapter 42
(RESERVED)
Chapter 43
(RESERVED)
Chapter 44
EMINENT DOMAIN
§ 44-1. Findings of the Mayor and Council.
WHEREAS, on June 23, 2005, the Supreme Court of the United States
decided the case of Kelo v. City of New London in which a majority of the
§ 39-4 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 44-1
1:78
Court determined, among other things, that the "public purpose provision of
the United States Constitution should be broadly interpreted to effectuate
legislative judgments as to what particular needs justify the use of the
power of eminent domain; and
WHEREAS, the result in Kelo was a plurality decision, reflecting the Court's
deep division on the question presented, namely whether private residential
real property may be the subject of eminent domain in order to satisfy a
public purpose such as a planned development; and
WHEREAS, the result of the Kelo decision was that, where there existed
a comprehensive plan of development that is deemed to satisfy the public
purpose provision of the Constitution, even though the "motivation" for the
plan might be economic development, municipalities could use the eminent
domain power to achieve the desired end as long as all parties' legal rights
were established in the process; and
WHEREAS, the Kelo majority opinion specifically emphasized that nothing
in the decision should preclude a state from placing further restrictions on
the takings power; and
WHEREAS, one of the issues faced by the Court was the appropriate line
between public and private use; and
WHEREAS, under the settled law of the State of New Jersey, the limitless
sovereign power of the State may be employed to take real property as
may be required for public safety, necessity, convenience or welfare so long
as just compensation is paid the owner, but it is for the legislative branch
of government to determine what constitutes a public use as to limit that
broad power, with the result that the power is to be used in a reasonable
non-arbitrary manner, and not greater than necessary to effectuate the
public use; and
WHEREAS, the Borough of Waldwick believes that one of the primary
purposes of government is to protect the rights of owner-occupied
residential real properties within the Borough against governmental takings
that do not have as their goal, either (a) the transfer of private property to
public ownership for the creation of, for example, a road, hospital or military
base or (b) the transfer of private property to private owners for the specific
purpose of making the same available for public use (e.g. railroad, public
utility or stadium).
§ 44-2. Eminent domain.
BE IT ORDAINED, by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Waldwick,
County of Bergen, and the State of New Jersey, that the Borough shall
not employ the power of eminent domain so as to deprive owner-occupiers
of residential real properties of such ownership rights in the absence of
a specified purpose (a) to transfer the property to public ownership for
the creation of a public use including, but not limited to a road, hospital,
military base, sewer, water line, sidewalk, right-of-way, flood control, park,
§ 44-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-2
1:79
open space, erosion control mechanism and the like, or (b) to transfer the
property to private owners for the specific purpose of making the same
available for public use.
§ 44-3. When effective.
No ordinance or any item or part thereof shall take effect without the
Mayor's approval under N.J.S.A. 40A:60-5(d), unless the Mayor fails to
return the Ordinance to the Council as prescribed above or unless, the
Borough Council upon consideration of the Ordinance following its return,
shall by vote of two-thirds of all of the members of the Borough Council
resolve to underwrite the veto. This ordinance shall take effect immediately
upon final passage and publication as required by law or from the date of
the assuming of the position defined herein whichever is later.
Chapter 45
(RESERVED)
Chapter 46
(RESERVED)
Chapter 47
EXHIBITIONS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
§ 47-1. Permits required.
No performance, show or entertainment commonly called a cabaret,
concert hall performance, carnival, dancing exhibition or other similar show
or performance or entertainment shall be given or held in any public place
in the Borough of Waldwick, or in any place to which the public shall be
invited or solicited to attend, without permit therefor first had and obtained
from the Borough Council of the Borough of Waldwick.
§ 47-2. Fees.
See Chapter 48:47-2.
§ 47-3. Use of fees.
All moneys derived from such license fee shall be for revenue.
§ 47-4. Violations and penalties.
See Chapter 1:14.1.
§ 44-2 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 47-5
1:80
§ 47-5. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect after publication as provided by law.
Chapter 48
FEES
§ 48-1. Miscellaneous fees.
A. Fee schedule for photocopying and other fees. [Added 8-20-96 by
Ord. No. 14-96; amended 6-11-02 by Ord. No. 11-02; 7-27-04 by
Ord. No. 21-04; 5-26-09 by Ord. No. 10-09; 8-25-09 by Ord. No.
11-09; 4-27-10 by Ord. No. 8-10; 11-9-10 by Ord. No. 19-10]
Documents picked up in person:
Duplication of government
record
$0.05 per letter size page
Duplication of government
record
$0.07 per legal size page
Additional fees:
Mailing of documents Actual postage cost plus $0.25
Faxing of one to three pages $5
Faxing of additional pages over
three
$1/page
Copies of photographs $5/photo
Copies of video tapes $25/tape
Mailing of photographs Actual postage cost plus $0.25
Mailing of video tapes Actual postage cost plus $0.25
Copy of Zoning Code Book &
Map
$25
Copy of Zoning Map $4
Duplicate Tax Bills $3
Duplicate Tax Sale Certificate
[Added 9-25-01 by Ord. No.
11]
$100
Affidavit of Redemption $100
Notary Fees:
Residents No charge
§ 47-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-1
1:81
Non-Residents $2.50 (Administering an oath/
affirmation; Executing a jurat;
Taking proof of a deed (proof of
execution); Taking an
acknowledgment)
B. Reimbursement rates. Reimbursement rates for use of Borough
vehicles and equipment in relation to off-duty employment, insurance
and damage claims: [Added 4-8-03 by Ord. No. 9-03]
a. Sweeper: $85/hour.
b. Pick Up Truck: $35/hour.
c. Loader: $85/hour.
d. Dump Truck: $55/hour.
e. Dump Truck: $55/hour.
C. Escrow for off-duty and outside employment by police officers. The fees
paid by the private persons or entities for off-duty police officers shall
be paid in advance and to the police officer Off-Duty Escrow Fund,
administered jointly by the Chief of Police and the Chief Financial
Officer. [Added 3-23-04 by Ord. No. 8-04; amended 10-25-11 by
Ord. No. 14-11; Ord. No. 22-2016]
1. No off-duty services shall be provided on behalf of any private
person or entity until an advance escrow is deposited with the Chief
of Police. In the event of an emergency circumstance as solely
determined by the Chief of Police advance deposit may be waived
provided that all costs for hours worked are paid within five
business days of the request for services.
2. Off-duty services shall be provided to non-profit and other
governmental entities without advance deposit provided that
payment shall be made within 30 days of being invoiced for
services.
3. The initial deposit into the escrow fund for each private person or
entity shall be estimated on the basis of number of hours needed
times the overtime rate for the most senior patrol officer.
Additionally costs for fringe benefits, administrative fees and costs
for a patrol car will be added to that amount.
4. On completion of the services, the private person or entity, nonprofit
and other governmental entity for which the off-duty patrol
officer services are provided, shall be given with an itemization of
disbursements from the escrow account which will include the
actual overtime rate paid to each officer the fringe benefit costs of
that officer while on duty. There shall also be assessed a charge for
the use of the vehicle in accordance with § 48:1-10-2 and an
§ 48-1 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 48-1
1:82
§ 48-28. Alarms.
48:28-4 (b) An annual registration fee for an Alarm Device in the sum of
$30 shall be paid at the time of initial registration and at the time of each
subsequent annual registration. [Added 09- 25-01 by Ord. No. 11-01;
amended 04-27-10 by Ord. No. 8-10; 09-08-15 by Ord. No. 18-15]
48:28-5 (c) An annual charge of $25 for each dial alarm shall be paid
to the Borough Clerk at the time of registration, for each year or part
thereof during which a dial alarm shall be in operation, provided that for
the first year of registration the annual fee be pro-rated as of the date of
registration, except that with respect to dial alarms in operation prior to the
effective date of this ordinance, such pro-rating shall be as of the effective
date of this ordinance.
48:28-6 (c) For each such false alarm(s) after the second such false alarm in
any calendar year, the following fees shall be paid to the Borough within 15
days of notice that such fee is due: (1) for the first false alarms a fee of $30;
(2) for the second false alarm a fee of $55; (3) for the third false alarm a fee
of $80; (4) for the fourth and each subsequent false alarm a fee at $105.
§ 48-29. Alcoholic beverages, license fees. [Amended 8-8-43 by Ord.
No. 1-43; 5-14-63 by Ord. No. 5-63; 2-26-74 by Ord. No. 2-74;
12-26-78 by Ord. No. 26-78; 2-10-81 by Ord. No. 3-81; 11-23-82 by
Ord. No. 19-82; 12-23-83 by Ord. No. 25-83; 12-26-84 by Ord. No.
25-84; 12-30-86 by Ord. No. 23-86; 12-27-88 by Ord. No. 26-88,
administrative fee of 6% will be levied on the personnel costs
(salary and fringe benefits). If there is any balance remaining in
the escrow account it shall be returned to the posting entity in
accordance with Borough payment policy without interest.
5. The rate for off-duty and outside employment by police officers
shall be a minimum flat rate of $85 per hour or the police officer's
overtime rate, whichever is higher. Non-profits and Borough
approved events are not subject to the minimum flat rate and will
be billed according to the police officer's overtime rate at the time
of the detail worked.
D. Fee schedule for use of the second floor of the ambulance corps
building. There shall be charged a $150 usage fee for each day the
second floor meeting area of the Ambulance Corps building is reserved.
This usage fee shall be non-refundable and shall be in addition to the
$100 per event security and cleaning deposit. This deposit will be
refunded to the applicant upon verification that the room has been left
clean and no damage to the facility has occurred. Neither the usage fee
nor security deposit shall be charged to non-profit organizations based
in the Borough of Waldwick for utilization of the meeting area or for
members of the Waldwick Fire Department or Waldwick Ambulance
Corps. [Added 3-27-07 by Ord. No. 4-07; amended 7-24-07 by Ord.
No. 9-07]
§ 48-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-29
1:83
12-26-90 by Ord. No. 18-90; 9-25-01 by Ord. No. 11-01; 6-22-04 by
Ord. No. 16-04; 4-27-10 by Ord. No. 8-10]
48:29-5 License fees. The annual fees for alcoholic beverage licenses shall
be as follows:
§ 48-30. Amusement devices, licenses.
48:30-3. Licenses: issuance to proprietor, term, fee. [Amended 10-11-83
by Ord. No. 21-83; 4-27-10 by Ord. No. 8-10]
The license for the placing, operation maintenance or use of such
amusement devices or machines mentioned aforesaid shall be issued to
and in the name of the proprietor of the premises where the machine is
to be installed, for the calendar year, commencing January 1, and expiring
December 31 at 12 midnight, and the fee for the issuance of a license shall
be $350 for the first machine and $75 for each additional machine for said
calendar year or any part thereof.
§ 48-37. (Reserved)2
§ 48-39. Construction Code, Uniform.
48:39-2 Fees. [Amended 12-26-78 by Ord. No. 22-78, 11-23-82 by Ord.
No. 19-82; 12-30-86 by Ord. No. 23-86; 12-27-88 by Ord. No. 26-88;
12-26-90 by Ord. 18-90; 4-26-94 by Ord. No. 10-94; 12-22-98 by Ord.
No. 25-98; 2-23-99 by Ord. No. 2-99; 12-12-00 by Ord. No. 20-00;
9-25-01 by Ord. No. 11-01; 6-11-02 by Ord. No. 11-02; 8-13-02 by
Ord. No. 14-02; 3-22-05 by Ord. No. 4-05; 3-27-07 by Ord. No. 4-07;
4-27-10 by Ord. No. 8-10; 4-26-16 by Ord. No. 2016-09]
A. Plenary retail consumption license: $2,500.
B. Plenary retail distribution license: $1,780.
C. Club license: $160.
A. The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees
listed in Subsection A(1) through (3) hereof and shall be paid before the
permit is issued.
(1) The building subcode fee shall be:
(a) For new construction: $0.05 per cubic foot of building or
structure volume for all use groups as defined in the Uniform
Construction Code of the State of New Jersey except for the
use defined below.
For new construction of a building or structure primarily used
for the storage of goods, wares or merchandise, non-separated
2. Editor's Note: Former § 48-37, Cats, licenses, as amended, was repealed 12-18-2018 by
Ord. No. 24-2018.
§ 48-29 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 48-39
1:84
except for an area not to exceed 15% to be dedicated as
accessory thereto the fee shall be:
From 1 cu. ft. to 500,000 cu. ft. - $0.04 per cu. ft.
From 500,001 cu. ft. to 1,000,000 cu. ft. - $0.03 per cu. ft.
Over 1,000,000 cu. ft. - $0.02 per cu. ft.
(b) For renovation, alteration and repairs; $22 per $1,000 of the
estimated cost of the work.
(c) For additions: $0.05 per cubic foot of building or structure
volume for the added portion.
1. Minimum Fee for Additions:
Additions less than 120 square feet of
floor area
$150
121 square feet of floor area and greater $300
Accessory building $100
(d) The minimum fee to be charged on the building subcode
application shall be $65.
(e) Fill/abandoned tanks in place, 1,000 gallons or less: $65.
(f) Fill/abandoned tanks in place, more than a thousand gallons:
$75.
(g) The fee for new or replacement residential roofs and siding
shall be $75.
(h) The fee for new or replacement commercial roofs shall be
$200.
(2) The plumbing subcode fee shall be:
(a) The fees for installation or replacement under the plumbing
subcode shall be as follows:
Fixture Fee
Water Closet $22
Urinal/Bidet $22
Bath Tub $22
Lavatory $22
Shower $22
Floor Drain $22
Sink $22
Dishwasher $22
§ 48-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-39
1:85
Fixture Fee
Drinking Fountain $22
Washing Machine $22
Hose Bibb $22
Water Heater $60
Fuel Oil Piping $60
Gas Piping $60 per each appliance
connection
Steam Boiler $70
Hot Water Boiler $70
Sewer Pump $80
Interceptor/Separator $80
Backflow Preventer $22
Grease trap $120
Sewer Connection $70
Water Service Connection $70
Stacks $22
Minimum Plumbing Fee $65
(3) Electrical subcode fees.
(a) The fees for installation or replacement under the electrical
subcode shall be as follows:
Items Fees
Lighting Fixtures $3 each
Receptacles $3 each
Switches $3 each
Detectors $3 each
Light Poles $3 each
Motors — Fract. HP $3 each
Emergency and Exit Lights $3 each
Communication Points $3 each
Alarm Devices/F.A.C. Panel $3 each
Minimum for the above $65
Pool Permit with UW lights
(Includes Trench and two Bonding
Inspections)
$150
§ 48-39 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 48-39
1:86
Items Fees
Storable Pool/Spa/Hot Tub $90
KW Elec. Range/Receptacles $22
KW Oven/Surface Unit $22
KW Elec. Water Heater $22
KW Elec. Dryer/Receptacle $22
KW Dishwasher $22
HP Garbage Disposal $22
KW Central A/C Unit [New] $50
HP/DW Space Heater/Air Handler
[New]
$50
Existing A/C Replacement Minimum $65
KW Baseboard Heat $22
HP Motors 1/+ HP $35
KW Transformer Generator $22
AMP Service/Subpanel
100 — 149 $100
150 — 200 $120
201 — 300 $150
300 and up $250
Solar $80
AMP Motor Control Center $50
KW Elec. Sign/Outline Light $75
Minimum Electric Subcode Fee $65
(4) The fees for fire subcode permits shall be as follows:
(a) Installation of oil or gas burners: $60.
(b) Installation of wood burners or fireplaces: $60.
(c) Installation of fuel tanks: $150.
(d) Installation of L.P.G. storage tank: Up to 500 Gal. — $100. 501
Gal. and Up — $250.
(e) Installation of Smoke/Heat Detectors/Sprinkler Heads:
from 1 to 20 smoke/heat detectors/sprinkler
heads
$75
from 21 to 100 smoke/heat detectors/sprinkler
heads
$150
§ 48-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-39
1:87
from 101 to 200 smoke/heat detectors/
sprinkler heads
$300
from 201 to 400 smoke/heat detectors/
sprinkler heads
$750
401 and over of smoke/heat/fire heads $1,500
(f) Installation of commercial kitchen exhaust system: $110.
(g) Standpipes: $250.
(h) Suppression Systems: $150.
(i) The minimum fee for fire subcode shall be $65.
(5) The fee for plan review shall be 20% of the amount to be charged
for the construction permit and shall be paid before the plans are
reviewed. The amount paid for this fee shall be credited toward the
amount of the fee to be charged for the construction permit.
(a) There shall be an additional fee of $30 per subcode for review
of any amendment or change to a plan that has already been
released.
(b) There shall be a change of contractor fee of $20 per subcode.
(6) The fee for a permit for the demolition of a building or structure
shall be $75 for accessory buildings under 400 square feet; $300
for one- or two-family dwellings or farm buildings; and six hundred
dollars ($600) for all others.
(7) The fee for a permit for the removal of a building or structure from
one lot to another or to a new location on the same lot shall be $22
per $1,000 of the sum of the estimated costs for moving, for new
foundations and for placement in a completed condition in the new
location, provided that the minimum fee shall be $65.
(8) The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be a flat fee of $30 plus
$1 per square foot of the surface area of the sign. In the case of a
double-faced sign, the area of the surface of only one side shall be
used for purposes of the fee computation.
The fee for a real estate or lease sign unless exempted by
§ 97-61:6(4) is $50.
Permitted temporary signs are exempt from fee.
(9) The building subcode fee for construction or installation of a
swimming pool on a one- or two-family residential lot shall be $100
for an aboveground pool; or $200 for an in ground pool.
(10) Special Inspections - Special overtime inspections: a permit holder
may request special inspections outside of the normal business
workday. The fee for these inspections shall be $100. for the first
§ 48-39 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 48-39
1:88
hour and $25 for each additional hour. When inspection is not
continuous with the business workday, the fees shall be $150 for
the first hour, and $50 for each additional hour.
(11) Certificates of occupancy.
(a) The fee for an inspection for a certificate of continued
occupancy shall be $55 for one- and two-family residential
structures and $75 for all other structures.
1. Reinspection Fee - $15 (sidewalks excluded).
The fee for an inspection for a certificate of continued
occupancy if requested more than 10 days after date of
application shall be $75.
The fee for an inspection for a certificate of continued occupancy
if requested within 10 days of application shall be $150.
The fee for an inspection for a certificate of continued occupancy
if requested within three days of application shall be $200.
(b) A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a
period of three months and extended for an additional three
months upon payment of a $30 fee.
(c) The fee for a certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to a
change of use shall be $100.
(d) The fee for a multiple certificate of occupancy shall be $55; in
addition, each tenant shall be required to apply for a certificate
of continued use.
(e) The fee for a certificate of occupancy for new construction
shall be $90 for one- or two-family and multi family residential
structures and $200 for all other structures.
(12) The fee for a permit for installation of an elevator shall be $200.
B. The Construction official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the Mayor and Council, biannually, a report
recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the
agency and any other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to
the enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
C. Surcharge fee.
(1) In order to provide for the training certification and technical
support programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act
and its regulations, the enforcing agency shall collect, in addition
to the fees specified above, a surcharge fee equal to that
promulgated under Chapter 23, § 5.23-4.19(b) of the New Jersey
Administrative Code. Said surcharge fee shall be remitted to the
Bureau of Housing Inspection, Department of Community Affairs,
§ 48-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-39
1:89
§ 48-42. Dogs.
48:42-3. License and registration fees. [Amended 9-9-75 by Ord. No.
17-75; 2-24-81 by Ord. No. 6-81; 11-23-82 by Ord. No. 19-82; 9-13-83
by Ord. No. 17-83; 12-27-88 by Ord. No. 26-88; 3-27-07 by Ord. No.
4-07; 4-27-10 by Ord. No. 8-10]
The persons applying for the license shall pay a fee of $13.80 for each
license and an additional $1.20 for the registration tag of each dog. An
additional fee of $3 shall be charged on all licenses issued for any dog
of licensing age which has not had its reproductive capacity permanently
altered through sterilization in accordance with P.L. 1983, c. 172. Dogs used
as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "seeing eye" dogs shall
be licensed and registered as other dogs hereinabove provided for, except
that the owner or keeper of such dog shall not be required to pay any fee
therefor. This amended fee shall become effective for the 2011 license year.
48:42-3.1. Late Fees. [Amended 2-13-90 by Ord. 1-90; 4-27-10 by Ord.
No. 8-10]
There shall be a charge of $10 per dog for any person applying for a license
after May 1, 2010. In subsequent years, the late fee shall be assessed per
dog after February 1st. This late fee shall be in addition to any fee levied by
the Municipal Court.
§ 48-47. Exhibitions and entertainments.
48:47-2 Fees.
The fee for such permit shall be $25 for each performance, exhibition or
show.
§ 48-51. Fire Prevention Code.
48:51-8. Additional required inspections and fees. [Amended 5-26-92 by
Ord. 8-92, 10-28-97 by Ord. No. 22-97]
on a quarterly basis for the fiscal quarters ending September 30,
December 31, March 31 and June 30, and not later than one month
next succeeding the end of the quarter for which it is due.
(2) The enforcing agency shall report to the Bureau of Housing
Inspection, annually, at the end of each fiscal year and not later
than July 31, the total amount of the surcharge fee collected in the
fiscal year.
D. Waiver of construction permit fees with regard to barrier free
accessibility. No disabled person, or a parent or sibling of a disabled
person as defined in N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126e shall be required to pay any
municipal fee or charge in order to secure a construction permit for any
construction, reconstruction or improvement undertaken solely to
promote accessibility to his or her own living unit.
§ 48-39 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 48-51
1:90
Additional fees are not required for "Life Hazard Use Structures" which
are regulated by the Uniform Fire Safety Act. In addition to the inspections
and fees required pursuant to the Act and regulations of the Department of
Community Affairs, the following inspections and fees shall be required:
Use Group Fee
Assembly $125
Business: Group B
Gross floor area of the building or part of the building
used for business
a. Up to 4,000 sq. ft. $50
b. 4,001 to 8,000 sq. ft. $75
c. 8,001 to 11,999 sq. ft. $100
d. 012,000 to 17,999 sq. ft. $125
e. 18,000 sq. ft. and up $175
Factory and Industrial $175
Mercantile:
a. Up to 4,000 sq. ft. $50
b. 4,001 to 8,000 sq. ft. $75
c. 8,001 to 11,999 sq. ft. $100
d. Mercantile establishments in excess of 12,000 sq. ft.
are regulated by the Life Hazard Use fees payable to
the State of New Jersey.
Residential (multi-family):
a. 3 to 10 units $75
b. 11 to 20 units: $100 $100
c. 21 to 30 units $125
d. 31 or more units $175
Storage Buildings $150
Buildings owned by the Board of Education and operated solely for Board
of Education services, municipal libraries and buildings owned by the
Borough of Waldwick are exempt from the fees imposed by this section.
Occupants of non-residential units shall be responsible for the payment of
the above mentioned fees. Owners of the buildings will be responsible for
the fees required for inspections for utility areas, storage areas, common
areas and other areas occupied by the Owner. Unoccupied or unrented
space fees shall be paid by the Owner of the building.
48:51-9 The following fees shall be charged for each inspection made:
A. Blasting, maximum $50 pounds of dynamite, 100 blasting caps: $100.
§ 48-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-51
1:91
B. Gasoline pump installation, each installation of an electric pump: $50.
C. Tents: $35.
§ 48-53. Games of chance. [Added 7-12-16 by Ord. No. 14-2016]
Upon filing an application for a raffle and/or bingo license, the applicant
shall submit the fee to the Borough of Waldwick due to the Legalized Games
of Chance Control Commission and $5 to the Borough of Waldwick per
application, pursuant N.J.A.C. 13:47.
§ 48-56. Junk shops and junkyards.
48:56-7. The license fee hereunder is hereby fixed at $100 per annum,
payable yearly in advance.
§ 48-56A. Land use procedures. [Added 3-23-93 by Ord. No. 3-93]
48:54-17. Registration of Tenancy. [Added 3-23-93 by Ord. No. 3-93]
The fee for filing a Certificate of Registration of Tenancy shall be thirty
($30.) dollars.
48:56A-27. Land Use Procedures. [Amended 4-23-96 by Ord. No. 5-96]
A. In addition to the application fees called for in Chapter 48 of the Code
of the Borough of Waldwick, an applicant shall be responsible to
reimburse the municipality or a municipal agency for all expenses and
fees incurred by the municipality or municipal agency for the services
of professional personnel required to process an application for
development.
B. No plats or site plans shall be signed or approved, nor shall any zoning
permits, building permits, certificates of occupancy, resolutions of
approval, or other types of permits be issued with respect to any
application until an applicant has deposited with the Chief Financial
Officer an amount which the applicant and the municipality or
municipal agency agree is sufficient to satisfy the estimated expenses
and fees incurred by the municipality or the municipal agency to pay
professional personnel for professional services. No bill for professional
services shall be paid from said deposit unless approved by the
municipality or municipal agency. If the amount deposited by an
applicant exceeds the actual cost of professional services, as approved
by the municipality or municipal agency, the applicant shall be entitled
to a return of the excess, together with such interest as allowed
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1. If the actual cost of professional
services exceeds the amount deposited, the applicant shall immediately
pay such additional amount as is required to pay all actual costs of
professional services.
C. The term "professional personnel" or "professional services" as used
herein shall include the services of a duly licensed engineer, surveyor,
§ 48-51 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 48-56A
1:92
planner, attorney, realtor, appraiser, architects, landscape architects,
noise engineers and traffic engineers or other expert who would
provide professional services to insure an application meets
performance standards set forth in the ordinance and other experts
whose testimony is in an area in which the applicant has presented
expert testimony.
D. Any application for development as defined by this ordinance, or any
other ordinance of the Borough of Waldwick or any law of the State of
New Jersey shall be deemed "incomplete" if adequate escrows are not
placed on deposit with the municipality in accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance. The escrows as required by this ordinance
shall be replenished by the applicant upon reasonable notice of the
municipality for any additional escrows and the applicants obligation to
maintain adequate escrows shall continue throughout the course of an
application for a development through the point of occupancy of that
development or portion thereof contained within that application.
E. No professional personnel submitting charges to the municipality or
Municipal Agency for any of the services referred to in Subsection A of
this section shall charge for any of the services contemplated by that
subsection at any higher rate or in any different manner than would
normally be charged the municipality or Municipal Agency for similar
work as ascertained by the professional's contract of employment with
the municipality or by resolution or by provisions of the Municipal
Escrow Ordinance. Payment of any bill rendered by a professional to
the municipality with respect to any service for which the professional
is entitled reimbursement under this ordinance shall in no way be
contingent upon receipt of reimbursement from an applicant. The
professional is responsible to alert the municipality of potential deficits
occurring within a particular escrow account so that the municipality
may have adequate time to collect the potential shortage in the
account.
F. Deposits received pursuant to § 48-1 of this ordinance shall be
deposited in a fund or depository approved for such deposits by the
State, in an account bearing interest at the minimum rate currently
paid by the institution or depository on time or savings deposit. All
deposits received pursuant to this ordinance shall be held and
administered in accordance with the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. and in particular, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2, including all
rights of appeal and the appeal procedure that is provided under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4 within that statute. The municipality shall notify
the applicant in writing of the name and address of the institution or
depository in which the deposit is made and the amount of the deposit.
The municipality shall not be required to refund an amount of interest
paid on a deposit which does not exceed $100 for the year. If the
amount of interest exceeds $100 that entire amount shall belong to the
applicant and shall be refunded to him by the municipality annually or
at the time the deposit is repaid or applied to the purpose for which it
§ 48-56A GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-56A
1:93
§ 48-61A. Motor vehicles, abandoned and unclaimed storage fee
regulations.
48:61A.1 Maximum Fees.
was deposited, as the case may be; except that the municipality may
retain for administrative expenses a sum equivalent to no more than
33-1/3% of the entire amount, which shall be in lieu of all other
administrative and custodial expenses.
G. Escrow deposits required for applications:
a. Minor Site Plan - For development applications where the square
footage of the building(s) is not greater than 3,000 square feet.
Engineering escrow $750
Legal escrow $400
Planner escrow $500
b. Major Site Plan — For development applications where the square
footage of the building(s) is in excess of 3,000 square feet.
Engineering escrow $3,500
Legal escrow $1,750
Planner escrow $1,750
c. Minor Subdivision - For development of less than five lots.
Engineering escrow $1,000
Legal escrow $500
Planner escrow $500
d. Major Subdivision - For development of more than five lots.
Engineering escrow $4,000
Legal escrow $1,250
Planner escrow $2,000
e. Use Variance. [Amended 9-25-01 by Ord. No. 11-01]
Engineering escrow $750
Legal escrow $400
f. Hardship variances. [Added 9-25-01 by Ord. No. 11-01]
Legal Escrow $325
§ 48-56A WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 48-61A
1:94
All fees to be paid to an operator engaged by the Borough of Waldwick for
the storage of abandoned and unclaimed motor vehicles shall not exceed
the following:
§ 48-62A. Outdoor displays and sales.
48:62A-3 Application fee for outdoor displays or sales - $30. [Added
2-22-94 by Ord. No. 2-94; Amended 4-27-10 by Ord. No. 8-10]
48:62A-9 The receptacle owner shall pay an annual fee of $25 per
receptacle for the receptacle at each property location. [Added 11-14-06
by Ord. No. 22-06]
§ 48-63. Park and Ride.
48:63-3.A. [Amended 12-23-83 by Ord. No. 25-83; 12-30-86 by Ord.
No. 23-86; 6-8-93 by Ord. No. 13-93; 9-25-01 by Ord. No. 11-01;
6-22-04 by Ord. No. 16-04; 3-27-07 by Ord. No. 4-07, 5-12-15 by Ord.
No. 12-15; Ord. No. 18-2016]
(A) a maximum of $3 per day for the first 30 days of storage per vehicles;
and
(B) a maximum of $2 per day for the 31st day of storage and any day
thereafter; and
(C) a maximum of $400 per vehicle stored regardless of the duration of the
storage.
A. Fees. Waldwick Park and Ride permits, valid for three (Student Permit),
six or 12 consecutive calendar months, shall be available at the office of
the Borough Clerk upon application thereof and payment of a
nonrefundable fee as follows:
(1) Student permit for three calendar months: $80.
(a) The three month student permit shall only be issued once
during a twelve-month period.
(2) Permit for six calendar months: $150.
(a) The six month permit may be issued on or after the 11th day of
the calendar month proceeding the first month of
effectiveness.
(b) Within two months prior to the expiration date, the holder of a
six month permit may obtain a permit valid for an additional six
months upon payment of the appropriate fee and surrender of
such currently valid permit; provided, however that permits
are subject to availability limitations in accordance with §
63-3B below.
(3) Annual permit for 12 calendar months: $250.
§ 48-61A GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-63
1:95
§ 48-64. Parks.
48:64-4.1 Tennis tags and fees. [Added 12-26-78 by Ord. No. 24-78;
amended 11-23-82 by Ord. No. 19-82; 12-27-88 by Ord. No. 26-88;
3-27-07 by Ord. No. 4-07; 4-27-10 by Ord. No. 8-10]
Each person entering upon or using one of the tennis courts within any
Borough park shall be required to display a tag or permit. Each resident of
the Borough shall be entitled to purchase a nontransferable tennis tag or
permit valid for one calendar year, the fee for which shall be $20.
48:64-4.2 Summer Recreation Program. [Added 4-14-09 by Ord. No.
6-09]
Each child registered for the Waldwick Summer Recreation Program will
be charged a $20 fee. This fee is payable at the time of registration and is
nonrefundable.
Each individual pre-registered for the Waldwick "Yoga in the Park" Program
will be charged a $35 fee. Senior Citizens shall be charged a $25 fee. This
fee is payable at the time of registration and is nonrefundable. [Added
7-25-17 by Ord. No. 12-2017]
(a) The charge for an annual permit may be issued on a pro-rated
basis as of the date of registration.
(b) Annual permits are issued on a split year calendar from July 1st
— June 30th.
(c) Within two months prior to the expiration date, the holder of a
twelve-month permit may obtain a permit valid for an
additional 12 months upon payment of the appropriate fee;
provided, however that permits are subject to availability
limitations in accordance with § 63-3B below.
(4) Administrative fee for lost or stolen permits: $25.
B. Limited availability. The number of permits issued may be limited based
upon the number of parking spaces available at the Waldwick Park and
Ride Lot.
C. Transferability. A permit shall be nontransferable and shall only be
permitted to be utilized with a vehicle that is registered with the
Borough. [Amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 25-2018]
D. Registration. An applicant may register a maximum of three vehicles for
which the permit may be utilized for, so long as all such vehicles are
registered to the same address. Proof of vehicle registration must be
provided at the time of application and no such permit shall be issued
without such proof of registration. The applicant is responsible for
notifying the Borough of any change in registration within 30 days of
such change. Failure to do so shall be cause for forfeiture of said
permit. [Added 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 25-2018]
§ 48-63 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 48-64
1:96
Each individual considered a walk-in for the Waldwick "Yoga in the Park"
Program will be charged a $5 fee. [Added 7-25-17 by Ord. No. 12-2017]
Summer Tennis Camp Fees. [Added 4-23-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-11]
Fee Per Student
Per Week Per Season (6 weeks)
Grades K-2 $115 $625
Grades 3-12 $145 $785
§ 48-66. (Reserved) [Reserved 3-18-16 by Ord. No. 4-2016]
§ 48-69. Publications, distribution of.
48:69.2 Licenses required for distributing advertising matter; fee.
No person shall distribute or place, or cause to be distributed or placed,
into or upon the lawns or grounds of any house, or upon the doorstep, porch
or plaza thereof, or in the doorway, any circular, card or pamphlet designed
primarily for advertising sales of merchandise, goods or wares, unless said
person shall first obtain a license therefor from the Borough Clerk and pay
therefor to the Borough Clerk the sum of $1 for each 100 of said circulars,
cards or pamphlets distributed.
§ 48-70. Public transportation.
48:70-9. Fee. [Amended 12-3-86 by Ord. No. 23-86; 4-27-10 by Ord.
No. 8-10]
The fee for issuing of municipal consent for the operation of a taxicab, in
the Borough of Waldwick, shall be $125 annually.
48:70-17. Fee. [Amended 12-30-86 by Ord. No. 23-86; 6-11-02 by Ord.
No. 11-02; Ord. No. 17-2016]
The fee for issuing of municipal consent for the operation of an autocab
(limousine) in the Borough of Waldwick shall be $50 annually.
§ 48-75. Sewer use.
48:75-17. Classes of permits. [Amended 9-25-01 by Ord. No. 11-01;
6-22-04 by Ord. No. 16-04; 3- 27-07 by Ord. No. 4-07; 4-27-10 by Ord.
No. 8-10, 08-26-14 by Ord. 18-14]
§ 48-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-75
1:97
A. The permit and inspection fee for a building-sewer lateral serving one
dwelling unit or business in an amount of $2,000 shall be paid to the
Borough Clerk at the time the application is filed. Each additional
dwelling unit or business to be serviced from this sewer lateral shall
be assessed a fee of $2,000 per each dwelling unit or business. The
permit application shall be supplemented by such necessary plans
and specifications as shall be required by the Borough Engineer. All
applications approved by the Waldwick Planning Board and Waldwick
Board of Adjustment prior to the passage date of this ordinance shall
be charged under the previous rate structure in effect.
48:75-27. Fees for Annual Inspections of Sewer Interceptors. [Added
11-24-92 by Ord. No. 15-92]
The annual inspection fee for sewer interceptors shall be $50.
48:75-30. Maintenance of public sewer and building sewer. [Amended
8-9-77 by Ord. No. 16-77]
A. Maintenance of the public sewer and the building sewer lateral shall be
performed by the Borough. Maintenance of all other facilities connected
to the public sewer, including the building sewer and drain, shall be the
responsibility of the property owner.
B. In the event that the Borough is called upon and provides emergency
service, such as removing a blockage and it shall be determined that
the cause of such condition was not within the public sewer or building
sewer lateral, the property owner or person requesting such services
shall reimburse the Borough for the costs of labor and equipment at
the rate of $150 for the first hour or any part thereof and $75 per
hour thereafter for work on a sewer more than four inches in diameter.
The Borough shall have the right to have reasonable assurance of
such reimbursement before undertaking any work which may be the
responsibility of others, and nothing herein shall be construed as
imposing any obligation whatsoever on the Borough to undertake or
perform services on facilities which are not the responsibility of the
Borough to maintain.. [Amended 12-30-86 by Ord. No. 23-86]
§ 48-77. Site plan review.
48:77-13. Fees and deposits. [Amended 4-23-96 by Ord. No. 5-96;
3-22-05 by Ord. No. 4-05]
A. Application fee. An application submitted to the Planning Board for site
plan review and approval in accordance herewith shall be accompanied
by an application fee to cover costs incurred by the Planning Board for
engineering review and report and other costs in connection with said
application. The application fee shall be calculated at the rate of $200
for each acre of land in the proposed development, with a minimum
application fee of $200.
B. Change of Use permit - $50. [Added 9-14-93 by Ord. No. 20-93]
§ 48-75 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 48-80
1:98
§ 48-80. Soil removal fees. [Amended 7-22-97 by Ord. No. 16-97;
9-25-01 by Ord. No. 11-01; 3-22-05 by Ord. No. 4-05]
§ 48-82. Street and sidewalk uses.
48:82-4. Deposit or bond required. [Amended 12-27-88 by Ord. No.
26-88; 4-27-10 by Ord. No. 8-10]
Prior to the issuance of a permit under Chapter 82, the applicant shall:
A. Soil Application fees:
(1) Ministerial soil application fee: $20.
(2) Major soil application fee: $100.
(3) Soil application fee will not be refundable whether the permit is
issued or denied or withdrawn.
B. Soil-Moving fee:
(1) The soil-moving fee will be charged at $0.10 per cubic yard of fill or
excavation, whichever is greater.
(2) Exemption. All utility companies, federal, state and local
authorities, including the Board of Education and charitable
organizations, and further, any movement of soil amounting in the
aggregate up to ten cubic yards of soil in a twelve-month
consecutive period shall be exempt from the requirement of the soil
application fee and soil movement fee and the posting of escrow.
(3) Escrow. The applicant will be required to post at the time of
ministerial permit application an escrow of $150 to cover the costs
associated with the review of the application by the Borough
Engineer. For a major permit application this engineering escrow
shall be $500 and the legal escrow shall be $100, posted at the time
of the application. If the project requires additional funds to cover
the review the applicant will be required to post sufficient balances
to cover these additional costs.
A. Deposit with the Borough Clerk the sum of $400 in cash, or may file
with said Clerk a corporate surety bond in the amount of $400 in form
satisfactory to the Borough, guaranteeing that any and all such damage
resulting to the streets, curbs or sidewalks by reason of the use for
which the permit was granted shall be repaired in a manner satisfactory
to the Borough. Such cash or bond shall be held by said clerk during the
term of the permit and until any and all such damages resulting to the
streets, curbs or sidewalks by reason of the use for which the permit
was granted have been repaired in a manner satisfactory to the
Borough.
B. Where the applicant intends to make application for more than one but
less than ten permits in any one calendar year, the applicant may file
§ 48-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-82
1:99
§ 48-84. Street excavations.
48:84-2. Application fees. [Amended 11-23-82 by Ord. No. 19-82;
3-27-07 by Ord. No. 4-07; 4-27-10 by Ord. No. 8-10]
Applications for road opening permits shall be submitted to the Borough
Clerk and shall be accompanied by payment of the application fee. The
amount of the application fee shall be calculated at the rate of $40 for each
square yard of road surface to be excavated or disturbed, but in no case
shall the application fee be less than the minimum application fee of $2,100.
48:84-4. Certificate of completion. [Amended 3-27-07 by Ord. No. 4-07]
The Superintendent of Public Works shall so certify when a permit holder
has completed restoration of the permanent pavement in accordance with
the specifications of the Borough of Waldwick. Such certificate shall also
contain a statement of the action, if any required to be taken by the Borough
by reason of the failure of the permit holder to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter together with all costs and expenses incurred
by the Borough in connection therewith. No such certification shall be
made until at least one hundred eighty days after all of the work has been
completed. Upon receipt of such certification, the permit holder shall be
entitled to a refund of $1,500 of the application fee paid; provided, however,
that any costs or expenses incurred by the Borough as set forth in said
certificate shall be deducted from any refund which might otherwise be due.
§ 48-86. Subdivision of Land.
48:86-10. Schedule of fees and deposits. [Amended 3-24-55 by Ord. No.
3-55; 10-24-72 by Ord. No. 20-72; 2-10-81 by Ord. No. 4-81; 12-27-88
by Ord. No. 26-88; 4-23-96 by Ord. No. 5-96]
The following fees and/or deposits shall be paid by the subdivide to the
Borough Clerk.
with the Borough Clerk a corporate surety bond in the amount of
$1,000 in form satisfactory to the Borough, guaranteeing that any and
all such damages resulting to the streets, curbs or sidewalks by reason
of the use for which the permits were granted shall be repaired in a
manner satisfactory to the Borough. Such bond shall continue in full
force and effect during the term of the permits and until any and all
such damages resulting to the streets, curbs or sidewalks by reason of
the use for which the permits were granted have been repaired in a
manner satisfactory to the Borough.
48:82-8 Permit fee. [Amended 12-27-88 by Ord. No. 26-88; 4-27-10 by Ord.
No. 8-10]
The fee for issuance of each permit shall be $75 payable by the applicant upon
the issuance of the permit.
§ 48-82 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 48-86
1:100
§ 48-87. Swimming pool, municipal.
48:87-7. Fees for permits and tags to use pool. [Amended 5-9-67 by
Ord. No. 6-67; 4-14-70 by Ord. No. 1-70; 5-25-76 by Ord. No. 8-76;
12-26-78 by Ord. No. 25-78; 2-24-81 by Ord. No. 5-81; 4-27-82 by
Ord. No. 6-82; 12-27-88 by Ord. No. 26-88; 4-12-94 by Ord. No. 6-94;
4-11-95 by Ord. No. 3-95; 5-28-96 by Ord. No. 11-96; 5-25-99 by
Ord. No. 8-99; 8-10-99 by Ord. No. 11-99, 5-23-00 by Ord. No. 10-00;
9-25-01 by Ord. No 11-01; 3-22-05 by Ord. No. 4-05; 3-27-07 by Ord.
4-07; 2-24-09 by Ord. No. 4-09; 3-23-10 by Ord. No. 7-10; 4-10-12 by
Ord. No. 7-12, 8-2-14 by Ord. No. 16-14, 3-22-16 by Ord. No. 6-16]
Each person entering or using the pool or pool enclosures shall be required
to display a tag or permit, the fees for which are hereby affixed as follows:
A. Minor subdivisions. A fee of $200 per lot, payable at the time of filing
application and sketch plat for approval of a minor subdivision. In the
event such proposed subdivision is thereafter classified as a major
subdivision, said fee may be applied to other fees payable as hereinafter
provided.
B. Sketch plat, major subdivision. A fee of $25 per lot with a minimum fee
of $100. Fee payable upon filing application and submission of sketch
plat.
C. Preliminary plat, major subdivision. A fee of $300 plus $50 per lot,
payable at the time of submission of the preliminary plat, to be applied
to the cost of engineering review and other expenses incurred by the
Planning Board.
D. Final plat, major subdivision. A fee of $300 payable upon filing
application for approval of a final plat.
E. Street construction; engineering costs. If tentative or final approval of
any plat is conditioned upon improvements to an existing public street
or construction of a new street, the subdivide shall be required to pay to
the Borough Engineer fees as set forth in Standard Specifications and
Regulations Concerning Construction Work in Public Streets, as
adopted and amended by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Waldwick and copies of which are on file in the office of the Borough
Clerk. Payment of such fees shall be a prerequisite to approval or
acceptance of the work. [Amended 5-25-82 by Ord. No. 11-82; ]
A. Residents of the Borough of Waldwick and Midland Park 18 years of age
or older, but less than 62 years old shall be entitled to purchase a nontransferable
seasonal tag for the sum of $55 if renewed one week prior
to the pool opening. All payments received on or after the Monday prior
to Memorial Day shall pay a fee of $65.
B. Residents of the Borough of Waldwick and Midland Park ages four but
under the age of 18 shall be entitled to purchase a non-transferable
seasonal tag for the sum of $50 if renewed one week prior to the pool
§ 48-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-87
1:101
§ 48-88. Swimming pools, private.
48:88-3. Applications for construction permits; permit fee; approval of plans
and specifications.
Application for the construction and installation of a private swimming pool
shall be made to the Building Inspector by the owner of the property or by
the contractor who will construct said pool.
opening. All payments received on or after the Monday prior to
Memorial Day shall be $60.
C. Residents of the Borough of Waldwick and Midland Park over the age of
sixty two (62) shall be entitled to purchase a non-transferable seasonal
tag for the sum of $45 if renewed one week prior to the pool opening.
All payments received on or after the Monday prior to Memorial Day
shall pay a fee of $55.
D. Guests. Guests over the age of 18 years may obtain a guest permit,
which shall be issued for the sum of $10 per day per guest, provided
that such guest is in the company of a holder of a seasonal tag.
E. Guests. Guests under the age of 18 years may obtain a guest permit,
which shall be issued for the sum of $8 per day per guest, provided that
such guest is in the company of a holder of a seasonal tag.
F. New or Replacement Badge Fee. All patrons of the pool are required to
maintain their previous year's badge. That badge, upon payment of the
required fee, will be validated for the current year's use. New or
replacement badges will be issued upon the payment of $5 per badge
with a maximum family charge of $10. These fees will be in addition to
any annual charges.
G. Swimming Lessons. Each two-week session fee shall be $40 for each
student with a family maximum of $100 for that session. [Amended
5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-13]
H. Members of Waldwick Volunteer Fire Department and WALLACE, who
qualified and received a clothing allowance in the previous year and
their immediate families defined as spouse and unmarried children who
reside in the home, are hereby exempt from annual pool permit fees.
[Added 5-23-00 by Ord. No. 10-00; amended 08-12-14 by Ord. No.
16-14]
I. The fee for all other non-resident pool seasonal tags shall be as follows:
[Added 9-25-01 by Ord. No. 11-01; amended 3-27-07 by Ord. No.
4-07; 4-22-08 by Ord. No. 8-08; 2-24-09 by Ord. No. 4-09; 4-10-12
by Ord. No. 7-12]
Children age four but under the age of 18 - $125.
Adults 18 or older - $150.
Children under the age of four shall be free.
§ 48-87 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 48-88
1:102
The application shall be accompanied by duplicate sets of plans,
specifications and plot plans of the property. The plot plans shall show the
accurate location of the proposed pool on the property, together with any
proposed accessory structures. The plot plan shall also show the location,
height and type of all existing fencing or walls on the boundary lines of the
property, together with the type and height of such fencing or enclosure as
may be required by Chapter 88-11 of this ordinance. A fee of $30 shall be
paid to the Borough of Waldwick for such private swimming pool permit.
Such permit fees shall be exclusive of the permit fee required for erection
of any accessory structure to be used in connection with such pools. No
permit for a private swimming pool shall be issued by the Building Inspector
until the plans, specifications and plot plan have been approved by the
Health Officer and Borough Engineer of the Borough of Waldwick, and such
approval has been properly certified on the plans. Such approval must be
directly obtained from the Health Officer by the applicant.
§ 48-91. Vehicles and traffic.
48:91-12.2 Parking meter fees. [Amended 12-27-05 by Ord. No. 14-05]
§ 48-92. Video and movie filming. [Added 11-26-02 by Ord. No.
18-02; 4-27-10 by Ord. No. 8-10]
48-92 Fees.
In addition to reimbursing the Borough for the Borough's expenses as set
forth in Chapter 92, Video and Movie Filming, § 92-3M, the applicant shall
pay the following fees:
A. Parking meter spaces shall be delineated in parking meter zones as
herein established, and parking meters shall be installed adjacent to
such parking meter spaces. Each parking meter shall be set to indicate,
upon deposit of a twenty-five cent ($0.25) coin of the United States of
America, lawful parking for a period of consecutive hours from the time
of such deposit as follows:
(1) $0.50: two hours. [Amended 5-24-16 by Ord. No. 11-2016]
(2) $1: four hours. [Amended 5-24-16 by Ord. No. 11-2016]
(3) $1.50: six hours. [Amended 5-24-16 by Ord. No. 11-2016]
(4) $2.50: 12 hours. [Amended 5-24-16 by Ord. No. 11-2016]
1. Basic filming permit: $100. Where an applicant requests a waiver of the
provision of § 92-C requiring expedited processing of the permit
application, the basic filming permit fee shall be $150.
2. Daily filming fee payable in addition to the basic filming permit: $500
per day. No daily filming fee shall be required for non-profit applicants
filming for educational purposes.
§ 48-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-92
1:103
§ 48-94. Water supply.
48:94-5 Meters. [Amended 4-27-10 by Ord. No. 8-10]
H. Upon request of a customer, the Department will make a test of the
accuracy of the meter. If it is found to register more than 103% of
the water passed or less than 97% of full capacity, there shall be no
charge for removing, repairing and resetting the meter. If, however,
a request for a test is made more often than once a year and the
meter is found to be accurate within the above-stated limit, a charge
of $40 shall be made for the removal, testing and resetting. The Water
Department shall have the right to make periodical tests of any or all
meters at no cost to the customer.
48:94-7. Fees for service connection. [Amended 9-13-77 by Ord. No.
17-77; 12-23-80 by Ord. No. 15-80; 12-30-86 by Ord. No. 23-86;
1-24-89 by Ord. No. 1-89; 12-26-95 by Ord. No. 17-95; 2-24-98 by
Ord. No. 5-98; 9-25-01 by Ord. No. 11-01; 2-25-03 by Ord. No. 5-03;
6-22-04 by Ord. No. 16-04; 3-27-07 by Ord. No. 4-07; 4-27-10 by Ord.
No. 8-10; 5-28-13 by Ord. No. 8-13, 8-26-14 by Ord. 18-14]
Fees for service connection shall be as follows:
Application for tapping permit, connection to be made at applicant's
expense serving one dwelling unit or business in an amount of $2,000 shall
be paid at the time the application is filed. Each additional dwelling unit or
business to be serviced from this water supply connection shall be assessed
a fee of $2,000 per each dwelling unit or business.
Application fee for service to property outside the Borough limits $3,000.
All applications approved by the Waldwick Planning Board and Waldwick
Board of Adjustment prior to the passage date of this ordinance shall be
charged under the previous rate structure in effect.
Water meter installation 5/8 inch - $280.
Water meter installation 1 inch - $390.
Water meter installation 1 1/2 inch - $580.
Water meter installation 2 inch - $695.
No show for appointment with Water Department - $50.
Charge for: Amount
Turn-on charge - $50.
Service call in accordance with Chapter 94-4L - $150.
For the first hour or any part thereof and $80.
Per hour thereafter for work on water issues
Charge for returned check - $20.
3. Daily filming fee payable for Major Motion Picture: $1,500 per day.
§ 48-92 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 48-94
1:104
48:94-8. Metered rates. [Amended 2-24-76 by Ord. No. 2-76; 9-13-77
by Ord. No. 17-77; 12-23-80 by Ord. No. 15-80; 9-22-81 by Ord. No.
14-81; 12-3-85 by Ord. No. 20-85; 12-30-86 by Ord. No. 23-86;
1-24-89 by Ord. No. 1-89; 2-24-98 by Ord. No. 5-98; 9-25-01 by Ord.
No. 11-01; 9-23-03 by Ord. No. 15-03; 3-27-07 by Ord. No. 4-07;
10-13-09 by Ord. No. 16-09; 9-25-12 by Ord. No. 16-12; 08-27-13 by
Ord. No. 12-13]
A. Quarterly charges for water supplied through a metered service line
connection shall be at the following rates effective as of October 1,
2009:
(1) Minimum charges for up to 1,500 gallons shall be $29.
(2) Radio read Meter opt-out charge shall be $25 effective as of
August 27, 2013.
B. Additional charges for water supplied above; the minimum shall be at
the following rates:
(1) From 1,500 gallons up to 30,000 gallons; $5.35 per 1,000
gallons.
(2) From 30,000 gallons up to 65,000 gallons; $5.98 per 1,000
gallons.
(3) More than 65,000 gallons; $6.96 per 1,000 gallons.
48:94-10 Fees: construction. [Amended 12-23-80 by Ord. No. 15-80;
12-30-86 by Ord. No. 23-86; 1-24-89 by Ord. No. 1-89; 2-24-98 by
Ord. 5-98]
Construction fee shall be as follows:
Charge For Amount
Application fee and water tap 1 inch or less,
including installation to curb box up to 50 feet from
main
$2,500
Meter rental per month $25
48:94-11. Water rates: construction [Amended 9-13-77 by Ord. No.
17-77; 12-23-80 by Ord. No. 15-80; 2-24-98 by Ord. No. 5-98;
4-27-10 by Ord. No. 8-10]
Quarterly charges for unmetered water supplied to construction projects
shall be as follows:
Charge For Amount
Industrial construction $225
Large private construction $240
Individual home construction $130
§ 48-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-94
1:105
48:94-13. Fees and rates: fire service
Fees and rates for fire service shall be as follows:
A. In addition to charges in accordance with Chapter 94-8 for water
supplied, the fee for filling swimming pool from a fire hydrant: $150.
B. Annual charge for sprinkler system or other fire prevention device on
private property: $130.
C. Fire service connections.
(1) Annual charge to the Borough of Waldwick for each fire service
connection, per hydrant: $76; or
(2) Annual minimum charge to the Borough of Waldwick for all fire
service connections commencing January 1, 1977: $25,000.
§ 48-96. Yard/garage sales. [Added 11-23-93 by Ord. No. 26-93]
48:96-3. The permit fee shall be $5.
§ 48-97. Zoning.
48:97-58 Outdoor café permit fee. [Added 8-22-00 by Ord. No. 12-00;
4-27-10 by Ord. No. 8-10]
The fee for an outdoor café permit shall be $75 per season and there shall
be no proration of the fee for any shorter period of time for which a license
is obtained.
48:97-59 The fee for an inspection under § 97-59A(1) of the Zoning Code
shall be $25. [Added 7-22-97 by Ord. No. 15-97]
48:97-81. Review and hearings.
Every application for a site plan review or a hearing before the Board of
Adjustment shall be accompanied by a check payable to the Borough of
Waldwick for the following amounts:
A. Conditional use (§ 97-94, Special Use Permits): $500. [Amended
12-26-84 by Ord. No. 25-84; 12-27-88 by Ord. No. 26-88]
B. Variances (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70): [Amended 12-26-84 by Ord. No.
25-84; 12-27-88 by Ord. No. 26-88; 3-22-05 by Ord. No. 4-05]
(1) Hear and decide appeals: $50.
(2) Interpretations of the map or ordinance: $45.
(3) Hardship variance:
(a) One- and two-family residences: $60.
(b) All others: $225.
(4) Use variance:
§ 48-94 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 48-97
1:106
(a) One- and two-family residences: $350.
(b) All others: $600.
C. Building permit in bed of map street (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76a.1 and
40:55D-34). The fee for an application to build in the bed of a map
street, drainage right-of-way, park or playground shall be $50.
[Amended 12-26-84 by Ord. No. 25-84]
D. Building permit for structure not related to a street (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-76a.2). The fee for an application to build a building or
structure not related to a street, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-35
and 55D-36, shall be $50. [Amended 12-26-84 by Ord. No. 25-84]
E. Combined review and hearing. Whenever an application for
development shall include more than one request for action, the total
accumulated fees for each separate action shall be charged.
F. Application decision.
1. Notice in official newspaper. A brief notice of the decision reached
on any application shall be published in the official newspaper of
the Borough of Waldwick. A fee of $25 separate from the
application fee shall be collected at the time of the filing of the
application (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10i).
2. Copy of application. A copy of each application decision can be
obtained at the Borough Clerk's office for a fee of $1 for each copy
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10h).
G. In addition to the fees set forth above, the applicant shall be responsible
to post, as a deposit, fees for professional and expert services required
in the manner set forth in Chapter 56A-27 of the Land Use Procedures
Ordinance of the Borough of Waldwick. [Added 7-23-85 by Ord. No.
12-85]
48:97-83. Appeals to the governing body (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17).
The fee to review the record on an appeal shall be as follows:
A. one- and two-family residences: $50.
B. All others: $150.
48:97-87. Zoning permits.
The fee to review for zoning compliance, the construction of a garden
type utility shed and similar structure that is one hundred square feet,
or less in area is $40. [Added 8-9-00 by Ord. No. 13-00; amended
3-22-05 by Ord. No. 4-05]
The fee to review for zoning compliance a fence six feet or less in
height that is not a barrier surrounding a public or private swimming
pool is $40. [Added 8-9-00 by Ord. No. 13-00]
§ 48-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-97
1:107
Chapter 49
FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
§ 49-1. Discharging firearms prohibited; exceptions.
No person, firm, corporation or association shall, within the limits of the
Borough of Waldwick, fire or discharge or permit to be fired or discharged
any gun, pistol, revolver, rifle, cannon or firearm of any description, whether
loaded with blank or full charge. This section shall not apply to any military
exercises nor to members of a Police Department in the course of duty or
while participating in practice or exercises in connection with police duties,
nor shall this section apply to persons who shall fire or discharge a firearm
at a firing range while such range is under the supervision of a member of
the Police Department of the Borough of Waldwick. This section shall also
not apply to persons who lawfully possess or carry a firearm while using
such firearm for purposes of protection of life or property.
48:97-92.1 Certificate of compliance. [Added 2-10-87 by Ord. No.
1-87; amended 9-25-01 by Ord. No. 11-01; 4-27-10 by Ord. No.
8-10]
D. Fees. The following fees shall be charged for the issuance of a
certificate of compliance:
1. Apartments in multifamily dwellings: $50 each unit;
2. one- and two-family dwellings: $50 each unit.
3. Non-Residential dwellings: $75 for each tenancy
4. Re-inspection fee excluding sidewalks: $15.
E. Smoke detectors in one- and two-family dwellings and remote
water meters. No certificate of occupancy or certificate of
continuing occupancy shall be issued for any dwelling, including
one- or two-family dwellings, unless smoke detectors are installed
in such dwelling in accordance with Chapter 51 of the Code of the
Borough of Waldwick or a remote water meter has been installed
in accordance with Chapter 94, entitled "Water Supply," of the
Borough of Waldwick Code or a deposit of $35, effective January 1,
2002, is made to the Borough for installation of the remote water
meter. The homeowner or occupant shall also sign a form provided
by the Borough, acknowledging that they will permit the Borough
official access to the dwelling for installation of the remote water
meter.
48:97-94.7 Installation of Radio Read Meters. [Added 3-22-05 by
Ord. No. 4-05]
Installation of a radio read meter as a replacement on an existing
five-eighths inch meter - $35. This fee shall be waived for individual
property owners who are eligible for the New Jersey Pharmaceutical
Assistance to the Aged and Disabled Program.
§ 48-97 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 49-2
1:108
§ 49-2. Discharging spring-loaded devices.
No person, firm, corporation or association shall, within the limits of the
Borough of Waldwick, fire or discharge or permit to be fired or discharged
any gun, pistol, revolver, rifle, cannon or implement or apparatus of any
kind which uses as a propelling force a spring or air and which is capable of
ejecting a missile with sufficient force to injure the person.
§ 49-3. Discharging explosive devices; permission required.
No person, firm, corporation or association shall, within the limits of the
Borough of Waldwick, fire or discharge or permit to be fired or discharged
any rocket, implement, apparatus or contrivance loaded with explosive or
combustible material unless permission to do so shall first be had and
obtained from the Mayor and Council. This section shall not apply to be
explosion of dynamite or other similar material used for blasting purposes
in connection with construction work, or to the proper use of signal flares
and railroad track torpedoes.
§ 49-4. Violations and penalties.
See Chapter 1:14.1.
§ 49-5. Repealer.
An ordinance entitled "An Ordinance to Regulate the Use of Firearms,
Fireworks and Explosives," passed and approved March 10, 1936, and all
other ordinances inconsistent herewith, are hereby repealed.
§ 49-6. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect when passed and published as required by
law.
Chapter 50
(RESERVED)
Chapter 51
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
§ 51-1. Local enforcement.
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383),
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the Borough
of Waldwick.
§ 49-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-2
1:109
§ 51-2. Agency designation. [Amended 6-11-02 by Ord. No. 12-02]
The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of Fire Prevention in the
Waldwick Fire Department. Members of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall
be appointed annually by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Waldwick
§ 51-3. Duties of enforcing agency.
The local enforcement agency, the Bureau of Fire Prevention, shall enforce
the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the codes and regulations adopted under it
in all buildings, structures and premises within the established boundaries
of the Borough of Waldwick, other than those structures which are owner
occupied one-and two-family dwellings. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall
faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 51-4. Life-hazard uses.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention established by Ch. 51-2 of this ordinance
shall carry out the periodic inspections of life-hazard uses required by the
Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 51-5. Organization of agency.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention established by Ch. 51-2 of this ordinance
shall be part of the Waldwick Fire Department and shall be under the direct
supervision and control of the Waldwick Fire Official.
§ 51-5A. Personnel. [Added 7-9-96 by Ord. No. 13-96; Amended
6-11-02 by Ord. No. 12-02, Amended 12-28-04 by Ord. No. 29-04]
The Waldwick Fire Prevention Bureau shall consists of a Fire Official, and
other personnel as determined by resolution of the Mayor and Council.
A seniority list shall be maintained by the Fire Official of available certified
inspectors for open positions on the Bureau.
§ 51-5B. Qualifications for membership.
Each applicant for membership shall have the following qualifications at the
time of his application:
1. Must possess a current and valid Fire Inspector's Certificate issued by
the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
2. Must possess a valid New Jersey Driver's License
3. Priority shall be given to members of the Waldwick Fire Department.
§ 51-2 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 51-5C
1:110
§ 51-5C. Probationary period.
Each applicant must successfully complete one (1) year of service of
assigned duties and inspections.
§ 51-5D. Duties.
Senior Inspectors:
Conduct inspections of all Life Hazard Use occupancies.
All occupancies containing cooking suppression systems.
Secretary Inspector:
Perform inspections as needed.
Maintain all financial records of all income and expenses.
Inspectors:
Conduct inspections of all non-Life Hazard Uses.
All members will participate in Fire Prevention programs and other duties
as assigned.
§ 51-6. Membership.
§ 51-7. Board of Appeals.
Pursuant to Section 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, any person
aggrieved by any order of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall have the right
to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of the County of Bergen.
A. Appointment of Fire Official. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be
under the direct supervision of a Fire Official who shall be appointed by
the Mayor and Council. The appointment shall be pursuant to Title II,
Civil Service, of the New Jersey Revised Statutes.
B. Term of office. The Fire Official shall be appointed for a term in
accordance with Title II, Civil Service, of the New Jersey Revised
Statutes.
C. Inspectors and employees. Such Inspectors and other employees as
may be necessary for the local enforcing agency to properly carry out
its responsibilities shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council
pursuant to Title II, Civil Service, of the New Jersey Revised Statutes.
D. Removal from office. Inspectors and other employees of the enforcing
agency shall be subject to removal by the Mayor and Council for
inefficiency or misconduct. Each Inspector or employee to be so
removed shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard by the appointing
authority or a designated hearing officer.
§ 51-5C GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-8
1:111
§ 51-8. Additional required annual inspection fees.
(See Ch. 48:51-8.)
§ 51-9. Other inspection fees.
(See Ch. 48:51-9.)
§ 51-10. Responsibility for inspection and fee collection.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be responsible for carrying out all
inspections and collecting all permit and inspection fees established by the
Uniform Fire Code.
§ 51-11. Smoke and carbon monoxide detectors required for sale,
rental or lease of certain dwelling units. [Added 2-10-87 by Ord. No.
1-87; amended 2-25-03 by Ord. No. 6-03]
§ 51-12. Maintenance responsibility.
A. Smoke and carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed in each
dwelling unit as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3 and N.J.A.C. 5:70-4.19 upon
the sale, rental, transfer or lease of any dwelling unit in the Borough of
Waldwick.
B. Each dwelling unit sold, rented, leased or transferred shall have a
minimum of one (1) smoke detector on each level and one (1) carbon
monoxide detector in the vicinity of the sleeping areas. A floor area
separated by three (3) or more risers from another floor area shall be
considered a separate level. Where a basement exists, a smoke detector
shall be installed on the basement ceiling.
C. Smoke detectors shall not be required in an unoccupied attic. In order
to achieve compliance with this act, smoke detectors used are those
approved by the Underwriter's Laboratories or Factory Mutual
Research Corp.
D. Alarm signals from the smoke and carbon monoxide detectors shall be
clearly audible in all rooms on the level on which the smoke detector is
installed when all intervening doors are closed.
E. Smoke and carbon monoxide detectors shall be powered by either
battery or electricity. The installation of the smoke detectors shall be
governed by the applicable sections of National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) Standard No. 72E or 74. The installation of the
carbon monoxide detectors shall be governed by the applicable sections
of the National Fire Protection (NFPA) Standard No. 720.
A. Sellers, transferors or lessors of all dwelling units subject to this
Chapter shall be responsible for the correct installation of the smoke
detectors.
§ 51-8 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 51-12
1:112
§ 51-13. Key vaults. [Added 4-11-95 by Ord. No. 7-95]
§ 51-14. Purpose. [Added 4-27-10 as Ord. No. 12-10]
The purpose of this Ordinance is to mandate the exterior identification
of all structures within the Borough of Waldwick that utilize lightweight
wood, wood truss, steel truss, composite truss, laminated wood, wood "I"
beams, or any other pre-manufactured lumber as a method to construct,
renovate, or alter any section of an individual structure or dwelling unit. The
pre incident identification of these buildings will provide fire suppression
crews with critical strategic and tactical information to be utilized during
firefighting operations and significantly enhance the safety of fire
suppression personnel operating at emergency incidents. This Ordinance
shall apply to all structures consisting of truss or pre-manufactured building
components not currently regulated for identification within the 'Current"
New Jersey Edition of the Uniform Construction Code and International Fire
Code.
§ 51-14.1. Definitions.
ENGINEERED LUMBER — Prefabricated I-joists, truss joists, truss rafters,
and laminated beams and studs or any other materials that may fit within
this category.
REFLECTIVE SYMBOL — An emblem made of reflective material, in the
shape and form as described by the Uniform Construction Code (U.C.C.),
the Uniform Fire Code (U.F.C.) and the International Fire Code New Jersey
Addition (I.F.C.) with the mentioned modifications in order to maintain
B. The owner of a rental unit shall, at the time of installation of the smoke
detector and thereafter at the commencement of each tenancy, provide
to the tenant at least one copy of written instructions on the operation,
maintenance, and testing of the smoke detector.
A. The Fire Official, together with the Fire Chief, shall require a key vault
to be installed in an accessible location where immediate access is
necessary to verify the existence of a fire or other emergency in those
buildings equipped with or required to be equipped with, fire detection
and/or fire suppression systems or equipment, and not normally
occupied twenty-four (24) hours. The purpose of the key vault is to
allow the Fire Department to gain immediate access to the building in
emergency situations without the need for forcible entry. The type of
key vault is to be approved by the fire department, and the installation
of this equipment will be at the building owner's expense and shall be
installed by no later than December 31, 1995.
B. Key vaults may be surface-mounted or flush-mounted in an easily
accessible location and the fire department shall maintain possession of
the only keys. In the event locks are changed in any of the above
mentioned areas, the Fire Department shall be notified immediately by
the owner/occupant so key substitution may be done.
§ 51-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-14.1
1:113
continuity throughout the state identifying a structure as containing
engineered lumber.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
All definitions in the "Current" U.C.C., The U.F.C. And the I.F.C. shall be the
same for this ordinance.
§ 51-14.2. Location and application.
The Borough Construction Official or Designee shall determine if a
structure contains engineered lumber. All structures containing engineered
lumber must have a reflective symbol Affixed to the following locations:
Primary Location will be the electrical meter, in the event the electrical
meter is inside the structure the Secondary Location will be the area of the
gas meter plainly visible, in the event the gas meter is inside the building
the Third and Final Location will be the garage door. The reflective symbol
shall be applied by the Construction Official / Fire Official or Designee
and shall be a condition of the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy
in new construction and the Certificate of Acceptance in other than new
construction.
§ 51-14.3. Symbol design and availability.
The REFLECTIVE SYMBOL shall an emblem made of reflective material,
in the shape and form as described by the U.C.C. dimensions shall be 5"
x 2.5" this shape and design shall be used in order to maintain continuity
throughout the state identifying a structure as containing engineered
lumber. This REFLECTIVE SYMBOL will be supplied by the Borough at no
expense to the owner.
§ 51-14.4. Severability.
This chapter shall apply to all structures, whether residential, commercial
or otherwise, including structures existing at the time of the effective date
of this ordinance, existing structures shall be posted according to these
guidelines with the owner's consent.
§ 51-14.5. Enforcement responsibility.
This section shall be enforced by the Construction Official and the Fire
Official of the Borough of Waldwick.
§ 51-14.6. Maintenance.
It is the responsibility of the homeowner to assure the integrity of the
reflective symbol. In the event it is removed, damaged or fades over time
it shall be the owner's responsibility to contact the Building Department to
have a new reflective symbol installed.
§ 51-14.1 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 51-14.7
1:114
§ 51-14.7. Violation.
Any person violating this section of the Fire Prevention Code by refusing to
use the reflective symbol or by Removing or tampering with the reflective
symbol shall be subject to a fine in an amount of $250.00 per violation. Each
day that a violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct
offense.
§ 51-15. Violations and penalties. [Added 9-25-01 by Ord. No.
11-01]
See Chapter 1:14.1.
Chapter 51A
FIRE ZONES
§ 51A-1. Authorization to establish.
The Fire Chief and the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the Fire Department
of the Borough of Waldwick are hereby authorized to establish fire zones
within the Borough of Waldwick, subject to the approval of the Planning
Board, and shall establish rules and regulations with respect to the location,
area and all other requirements pertaining to the same.
§ 51A-2. Obstruction and parking prohibited.
All fire zones in existence or hereafter designated and marked shall be kept
free from all obstructions. Parking of vehicles in fire zones or access thereto
is prohibited.
§ 51A-3. Zones to be marked.
All fire zones shall be designated, marked and maintained by the owners
of the premises in accordance with the rules and regulations established
therefor by the Fire Chief and the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the Fire
Department of the Borough of Waldwick.
§ 51A-4. Violations and penalties; removal of vehicle.
Chapter 52
A. See Chapter 1:14.1.
B. In addition to other remedies, any unoccupied vehicle parked or
standing in violation of this ordinance shall be deemed a nuisance and
detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
Borough of Waldwick, and any peace officer may provide for the
removal of such vehicle, and the owner shall pay the reasonable cost of
the removal and storage which may result from such removal before
regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 51-14.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51A-4
1:115
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
§ 52-1. Findings of fact.
§ 52-2. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 52-3. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Borough of Waldwick are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
§ 51A-4 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 52-3
1:116
§ 52-4. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are
between one and three feet. Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average
depths are between one and three feet.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Borough construction official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH Zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% annual or greater
chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable
and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
It is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or
AH.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS) including the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM). For Zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30 the elevation represents
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and,
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 52-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-4
1:117
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure that equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure at the time of the
improvement or repair when counted cumulatively for 10 years.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building (i) built, in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the elevated
floor, elevated above the base flood elevation plus freeboard by means of
piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of
the water, and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base
flood. In an area of special flood hazard "elevated building" also includes a
building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
EROSION — The process of gradual wearing away of land masses.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or
§ 52-4 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 52-4
1:118
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without accumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
0.2 foot.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed or existing walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
D.
§ 52-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-4
1:119
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is [i] built on a single chassis;
[ii] 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal
projections; [iii] designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and [iv] designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel,
or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — [For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348)3] includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pilings, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
3. Editor's Note: See 16 U.S.C.A. § 3501 et seq.
§ 52-4 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 52-4
1:120
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred. "Substantial damage" also means flood-related damages
sustained by a structure on two or more separate occasions during a tenyear
period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood
event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the market valve of the
structure before the damages occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure during a ten-year period the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
before the start of construction of the improvement. Substantial
improvement also means "cumulative substantial improvement." This term
includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of
the actual repair work performed or repetitive loss. The term does not,
however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
§ 52-5. General provisions.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 52-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-5.1
1:121
§ 52-5.1. Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Borough of Waldwick, Bergen County, New Jersey.
§ 52-5.2. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
§ 52-5.3. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, relocated to, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
pursuant to Borough Code § 1-14.1, for each violation, and in addition shall
pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the Borough of Waldwick from taking such other lawful action
as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
§ 52-5.4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 52-5.5. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Borough of Waldwick,
Community No. 340078, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Bergen
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated August 28, 2019.
(2) Flood Insurance Rate Map for Bergen County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as shown on Index and panels 34003C0069J and
34003C0088J, whose effective date is August 28, 2019.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file with the
Building Department of the Borough of Waldwick, 63 Franklin
Turnpike, Waldwick, New Jersey.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
§ 52-5.1 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 52-5.5
1:122
§ 52-5.6. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
§ 52-6. Administration.
§ 52-6.1. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of
special flood hazard established in § 52-5.2. Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Waldwick Building
Department and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate
drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations
of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically,
the following information is required:
§ 52-6.2. Designation of local administrator.
The Borough of Waldwick construction official is hereby appointed to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development
permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Waldwick, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
A. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed;
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 52-8.2.2; and
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
§ 52-5.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-6.3
1:123
§ 52-6.3. Duties and responsibilities of the administrator.
Duties of the Borough of Waldwick construction official shall include, but
not be limited to:
§ 52-6.3.1. Permit review.
§ 52-6.3.2. Use of other base flood and floodway data.
When base flood elevation and floodway data has not been provided in
accordance with § 52-5.2, Basis for establishing the areas of special flood
hazard, the Borough of Waldwick construction official shall obtain, review,
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available
from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer § 52-8.2.1,
Specific standards, residential construction, and 52-8.2.2, Specific
standards, nonresidential construction.
§ 52-6.3.3. Information to be obtained and maintained.
§ 52-6.3.4. Alteration of watercourses.
A. Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
B. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required.
C. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions of § 52-8.3A are met.
A. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of
the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially
improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a
basement.
B. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(1) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(2) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in § 52-6.1-C.
C. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of
this chapter.
A. Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control and the Land Use
Regulation Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Insurance Administration.
§ 52-6.3 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 52-6.3.4
1:124
§ 52-6.3.5. Substantial damage review.
§ 52-6.3.6. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries.
Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in
§ 52-7.
§ 52-7. Variance procedure.
§ 52-7.1. Appeal Board.
B. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished.
A. After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to
structures due to flood and nonflood causes.
B. Record and maintain the flood and nonflood damage of substantial
damage structures and provide a letter of substantial damage
determination to the owner and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control.
C. Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of § 52-8.2.1,
Specific standards, residential construction, 52-8.2.2, Specific
standards, nonresidential construction and 52-8.2.3, Specific
standards, manufactured homes.
A. The Planning Board as established by the Borough of Waldwick shall
hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Borough of Waldwick construction official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of either the Planning Board or the
Board of Adjustment, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the
Superior Court, Law Division, Bergen County, as provided in Court Rule
4:69-6.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
§ 52-6.3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-7.1
1:125
§ 52-7.2. Conditions for variances.
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(11) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of § 52-7.1D and the purposes of this
chapter, the Planning Board may attach such conditions to the granting
of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this
chapter.
F. The Waldwick construction official shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing items in in
§ 52-7.1D(1) through (11) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
§ 52-7.1 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 52-7.2
1:126
§ 52-8. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
§ 52-8.1. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required:
§ 52-8.1.1. Anchoring.
§ 52-8.1.2. Construction materials and methods.
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation
as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
C. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
D. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public as identified in § 52-7.1D, or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
F. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation.
A. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
B. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top
or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
§ 52-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-8.1.2
1:127
§ 52-8.1.3. Utilities.
§ 52-8.1.4. Subdivision proposals.
§ 52-8.1.5. (Reserved)
§ 52-8.1.6. Enclosure openings.
All new construction and substantial improvements having fully enclosed
areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are
subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
A. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
B. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
A. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
B. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
C. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding; and
D. For all new construction and substantial improvements the electrical,
heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and
other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
A. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
B. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and
water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
C. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage;
and
D. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed new development which contain at least 50 lots or
five acres (whichever is less).
§ 52-8.1.2 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 52-8.1.6
1:128
by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria: a minimum of two openings in at least two
exterior walls of each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
covering or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
§ 52-8.2. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in §§ 52-5.2, Basis for establishing the areas of
special flood hazard or 52-6.3.2, Use of other base flood data, the following
standards are required:
§ 52-8.2.1. Residential construction.
§ 52-8.2.2. Nonresidential construction.
In an area of special flood hazard, all new construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure located in an A or AE Zone shall have the lowest floor, including
basement together with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities as
well as all electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other service
equipment, either:
A. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE Zone shall have the lowest floor,
including basement together with the attendant utilities (including all
electrical, heating, ventilating, air- conditioning and other service
equipment) and sanitary facilities, elevated at or above the more
restrictive base flood elevation plus two feet or as required by ASCE/
SEI 24-14, Table 2-1.
B. Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's DFIRM that all
new construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement together with
the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated above the depth
number specified in feet plus two feet above the highest adjacent grade,
and require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
A. Elevated at or above the more restrictive base flood elevation plus two
feet or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1; and
B. Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's DFIRM to
elevate above the depth number specified in feet plus two feet above
the highest adjacent grade, and require adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures; or
§ 52-8.1.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-8.2.2
1:129
§ 52-8.2.3. Manufactured homes.
§ 52-8.3. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 52-5.2 are
areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris,
potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
C. Be floodproofed so that below the more restrictive, base flood elevation
plus two feet or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 6-1, the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water; and
D. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
E. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting the applicable provisions of this
subsection. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set
forth in § 52-6.3.3B(2).
A. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with § 52-8.1.1B.
B. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within
an area of special flood hazard shall:
(1) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) Be constructed to minimize flood damage;
(3) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage;
(4) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the
lowest floor is at or above the more restrictive base flood elevation
plus two feet or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1; and
(5) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are
no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If § 52-8.3A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with § 52-8, Provisions for flood hazard
reduction.
§ 52-8.2.2 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 52-8.3
1:130
Chapter 53
FOOD AND DRINK ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 53-1. Business hours restricted.
Every person, owner or operator of any establishment which shall serve
food or beverages, or both, and/or alcoholic beverages shall be closed to
the public, and business with the public therein shall be and is hereby
prohibited between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., except as set forth
herein.
§ 53-2. Construction of provisions.
Notwithstanding Chapter 53-1 herein, this ordinance is not intended to
modify or repeal those provisions of Chapter 29-12 of Chapter 29 of the
Borough Code entitled "Alcoholic Beverages."
§ 53-3. Violations and penalties.
See Chapter 1:14.1.
§ 53-4. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provisions of this ordinance shall not
invalidate other sections or provisions hereof.
§ 53-5. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith, except as
provided herein, be and the same are hereby repealed.
§ 53-6. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication as provided by law.
Chapter 53A
GAMES OF CHANCE
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
accumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 2/10 foot at any
point.
§ 52-8.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53A-1
1:131
§ 53A-1. Games of chance permitted on Sunday.
Upon the effective date of this ordinance and thereafter, it shall be lawful,
within the confines of the Borough of Waldwick, Bergen County, New Jersey,
to conduct on the first day of the week, commonly known and designated as
"Sunday," those games of chance authorized and permitted under N.J.S.A.
5:8-1 et seq. and the rules and regulations of the Legalized Games of
Chance Control Commission of the State of New Jersey.
§ 53A-2. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon final passage and publication as
required by law.
Chapter 54
HOUSING STANDARDS
§ 54-1. Adoption of Property Maintenance Code.
That a certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the
office of the Borough Clerk of the Borough of Waldwick, being marked
and designated as "The International Property Maintenance Code 2006,
and as subsequently amended be and is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the Borough of Waldwick, in the State of New Jersey;
for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in Section 2 of this ordinance.
§ 54-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
That the International Property Maintenance Code is amended and revised
in the following respects:
Section 101.1 Insert: Borough of Waldwick
Section 103.5 Insert: Chapter 48 of the Code of the Borough of Waldwick
Section 302.4 The first sentence is amended to read as follows: All premises
and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth
in accordance with Chapter 95 of the Code of the Borough of Waldwick.
Section 304.14 Insert: April 15 to October 15
Section 602.3 Insert: Insert October 1 to May 1
Section 602.4 Insert: October 1 to May 1
§ 53A-1 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 54-3
1:132
§ 54-3. Enforcement officials.
Code Enforcement officials empowered to be the enforcing agents of the
Borough of this ordinance shall be the Health Officer/Sanitarian, Fire
Inspector, Code Enforcement Official, and all subcode officials of the
Construction Department of the Borough of Waldwick.
§ 54-4. Registration of tenancy.
That the Borough Clerk shall certify to the adoption of this ordinance, and
cause the same to be published as required by law; and this ordinance shall
take effect and be in force from and after its approval as required by law.
1. Landlord Defined. The term "landlord", as used in this ordinance, shall
mean the person or persons who own or purport to own, or exercise
control of any building in which there is rented or offered for rent
housing space for living or dwelling purposes under either a written or
oral lease, provided that this definition shall not include owneroccupied
two dwelling unit premises.
2. Certificate of registration; filing; contents.
A. Every landlord shall, within 30 days following the effective date of
this Ordinance, or at the time of the creation of the first tenancy in
any newly constructed or reconstructed building, file with the
Borough Clerk of the Borough of Waldwick in the case of a onedwelling
unit rental or a two-dwelling unit non-owner occupied
premises, or with the Bureau of Housing Inspection in the
Department of Community Affairs in the case of a multiple dwelling
as defined in section 3 or the "Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law"
(N.J.S.A. 55:13a-3), a certificate of registration on forms prescribed
by the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs,
which shall contain the following information:
1. The name and address of the record owner or owners of the
premises and the record owner or owners of the rental
business if not the same persons. In the case of a partnership
the names of all general partners shall be provided;
2. If the record owner is a corporation, the name and address of
the registered agent and corporate officers of said corporation;
3. If the address of any record owner is not located in the County
in which the premises are located, the name and address of a
person who resides in the county in which the premises are
located and is authorized to accept notices from a tenant and
to issue receipts therefor and to accept service of process on
behalf of the record owner;
4. The name and address of the managing agent of the premises,
if any;
§ 54-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-4
1:133
§ 54-5. Date of effect.
That the Borough Clerk shall certify to the adoption of this ordinance, and
cause the same to be published as required by law; and this ordinance shall
take effect and be in force from and after its approval as required by law.
§ 54-6. Registration and maintenance of vacant/abandoned
properties.
5. The name and address, including the dwelling unit, apartment
or room number of the superintendent, janitor, custodian or
other individual employed by the record owner or managing
agent to provide regular maintenance service, if any;
6. The name, address and telephone number of an individual
representative of the record owner or managing agent who
may be reached or contacted at any time in the event of an
emergency affecting the premises or any unit or dwelling space
therein, including such emergencies as the failure of any
essential service or system, and who has the authority to make
emergency decisions concerning the building and any repair
thereto or expenditure in connection therewith;
7. The name and address of every holder or a recorded mortgage
on the premises;
8. If fuel oil is used to heat the building and the landlord furnishes
the heat in the building, the name and address of the fuel oil
dealer servicing the building and the grade of fuel oil used.
9. The names of all tenants occupying each dwelling unit.
10. Subleasing and/or receiving of rent by any tenant of a dwelling
unit from another person living in the unit not named on the
registration is prohibited.
B. The landlord shall file with the Borough Clerk of the Borough of
Waldwick a copy of the Certificate of Registration form and any
other documents that Landlord files with the Bureau of Housing
Inspection.
C. The Certificate of Registration must be filed annually, on or before
April 1 of each year or whenever a tenancy changes. Multiple
registrations required in a calendar unit due to change of tenancy,
there shall be no fee for the amended registrations. In the event
that the building is sold and there is a registered unit(s), the new
owners shall be required to register the unit(s) as set forth herein
above. The fee for registration shall be set forth in Chapter 48 of
the Municipal Code of the Borough of Waldwick. The provisions of
the ordinance shall be enforced by the Public Officer designated in
Chapter 54 of the Municipal Code of the Borough of Waldwick.
§ 54-4 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 54-6.1
1:134
§ 54-6.1. Definitions.
OWNER — Any title holder, any agent of the title holder having authority
to act with respect to a vacant property, any foreclosing entity subject to
the provisions of C. 46:10B-51 (P.L. 2008 c. 127, Sec. 17 as amended by P.L.
2009, c. 296), or any other entity determined by the Borough of Waldwick
to have authority to act with respect to the property.
VACANT PROPERTY — Any building used or to be used as a residence which
is not legally occupied or at which substantially all lawful construction
operations or residential occupancy has ceased, and which is in such
condition that it cannot legally be reoccupied without repair or
rehabilitation, including but not limited to any property meeting the
definition of abandoned property in N.J.S.A. 55:19-80, provided, however,
that any property where all building systems are in working order, where
the building and grounds are maintained in good order, or where the
building is in habitable condition, and where the building is being actively
marketed by its owner for sale or rental, shall not be deemed a vacant
property for purposes of this ordinance.
§ 54-6.2. Registration requirements.
Effective May 1, 2014, the Owner of any vacant property as defined herein
shall, within thirty (30) calendar days after the building becomes vacant
property or within thirty (30) calendar days after assuming ownership
of the vacant property, whichever is later; or within ten (10) calendar
days of receipt of notice by the municipality, file a registration statement
for such vacant property with the Property Maintenance Officer on forms
provided by the Borough for such purposes. Failure to receive notice from
the municipality shall not constitute grounds for failing to register the
property.
a. Each party having a separate block and lot number as designated in
official records of the municipality shall be registered separately.
b. The registration statement shall include the name, street address,
telephone number, and email address (if applicable) of a person twentyone
(21) years or older, designated by the Owner or Owners as the
authorized agent for receiving notices of code violations and for
receiving process in any court proceeding or administrative
enforcement proceeding on behalf of such Owner or Owners in
connection with the enforcement of any applicable code: and the name,
street address, telephone number, and email address (if applicable) of
the firm and the actual name(s) of the firms individual principal(s)
responsible for maintaining the property shall be available by telephone
or in person on a twenty-for (24) hour per day, seven-day (7) per week
basis. The two entities may be the same or different persons. Both
entities shown on the statement must maintain offices in the State of
New Jersey or reside within the State of New Jersey.
c. The registration shall remain valid for one year from the date of
registration except for the initial registration time which shall be pro-
§ 54-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-6.2
1:135
§ 54-6.3. Access to vacant properties.
The Owner of any vacant property registered under this Article shall
provide access to the Borough to conduct exterior and interior inspections
of the building to determine compliance with municipal codes, upon
reasonable notice to the property owner or the designated agent. Such
inspections shall be carried out on weekdays during the hours of 9:00 a.m.
through 4:00 p.m. or such other time as may be mutually agreed upon
between the Owner and the Borough.
§ 54-6.4. Responsible owner or agent.
rated through December 31. The Owner shall be required to renew the
registration annually as long as the building remains a vacant property
and shall pay registration or renewal fee in the amount prescribed in
Section 54-6.5 of this ordinance, for each vacant property registered.
d. The annual renewal shall be completed by January 1st each year. The
initial registration fee shall be pro-rated for registration statements
received less than ten (10) months prior to that date, but not the escrow
fee.
e. The Owner shall notify the Property Maintenance Officer within thirty
(30) calendar days of any change in the registration information by
filing an amended registration statement on a form provided by the
Property Maintenance Officer for such purpose.
f. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the Borough against the
Owner or Owners of the building.
a. An Owner who meets the requirements of the Article with respect to the
location of his or her residence or workplace in the State of New Jersey
may designate him or herself as agent or as the individual responsible
for maintaining the property.
b. By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this section,
the Owner consents to receive any and all notices of code violations
concerning the registered vacant property and all process in any court
proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding brought to
enforce code provisions concerning the registered building by service
of the notice or process on the authorized agent. Any Owner who has
designated an authorized agent under the provisions of this section
shall be deemed to consent to the continuation of the agent's
designation for the purposes of this section until the Owner notifies the
Borough of Waldwick by regular and certified mail, any and all notices
of code violations and all process in an administrative proceeding
brought to enforce code provisions concerning the building.
§ 54-6.2 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 54-6.5
1:136
§ 54-6.5. Fee schedule.
The initial registration fee for each building shall be one hundred dollars
($100). The fee for each subsequent year renewal shall be one hundred
dollars ($100). In addition to such registration fee, the Owner shall post an
escrow for each and every property according to the annual fee schedule
below. Said escrow shall be used for any costs expended by the Borough
in maintaining, abating, correcting any nuisance, property maintenance
violation, or securing the premises from unauthorized entry and any other
item that the Borough deems appropriate for the public's health, safety and
welfare.
Vacant Property Escrow Schedule
Initial Registration $500.00 (year of registration)
First Renewal $1,500.00 (2nd calendar year)
Second Renewal $3,000.00 (3rd calendar year)
Subsequent Renewal $5,000.00 (4th or more calendar years)
The initial escrow shall be deposited at the time of registration, and all
subsequent years shall be posted by January 31 of the following year. If
at any point the escrow shall become deficient, the Owner shall replenish
the escrow account according to year since initial registration. Any unused
escrow amount, shall be refunded to the Owner at the time the premises
becomes occupied and not subject to the requirements of this Ordinance.
§ 54-6.6. Requirements of owners of vacant property.
The Owner of any building that has become vacant property, and any person
maintaining or operating or collecting rent for any such building that has
become vacant shall, within thirty (30) days thereof:
§ 54-6.7. Rights of the Borough.
1. Enclose and secure the building against unauthorized entry as provided
in the applicable provisions of the Borough Code, or as set forth in the
rules and regulations supplementing those codes until the building is
again legally occupied or demolished or until repair or rehabilitation of
the building is complete; and
2. Ensure that the exterior grounds of the structure, including yards,
fences, swimming pools, sidewalks, walkways, right-of-ways, alleys,
retaining walls, attached or unattached accessory structures and
driveways, are well-maintained and free from trash, debris, loose litter,
and grass and weed growth; and
a. If the Owner is in violation of any terms and conditions of this
Ordinance, the Borough shall send notice to the Owner, via certified and
regular mail, as identified on the registration, that such violation must
be remedied within thirty (30) days. If such violation is not remedied
§ 54-6.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-6.7
1:137
§ 54-6.8. Violations.
Chapter 55
HUNTING & TRAPPING
§ 55-1. Prohibition.
No person shall, within the boundaries of the Borough of Waldwick, hunt or
trap wildlife at any time.
within thirty (30) days of such notice, the Borough shall cause a
summons to be issued.
b. In addition to such summons, the Borough shall have the right to
expend public funds in order to abate the nuisance, correct or remedy
the violation, or secure the premises against unauthorized entry, and
such costs shall be paid from the escrow established pursuant to
Section 54-6.5.
c. If the amount of escrow posted shall be insufficient to reimburse the
municipality for such costs, then notice shall be given to the Owner, and
any unpaid costs after thirty (30) days shall become a lien upon the
property.
d. For the purposes of obnoxious weeds or growth, the cutting of the
grass, or removal of snow and ice, the notice provided to the Owner
pursuant to Section a above, shall include such notice that unless the
Owner shall object, a regular schedule shall be established between the
Contractor and the Borough to trim said obnoxious weeds or growth, to
cut the grass, or remove the snow and ice on the property. Said regular
schedule of work shall be no more than twice a month.
a. Any person who violates any provision of this Article or of the rules and
regulations issued hereunder shall be fined not less than $100 and not
more than $2,000 for each offense. Every day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Fines assessed under
this chapter shall be recoverable from the owner and shall be a lien on
the property; and
b. For purposes of this section, failure to file a registration statement
within thirty (30) calendar days after a building becomes vacant
property or within thirty (30) calendar days after assuming ownership
of a vacant property, whichever is later, or within ten (10) calendar days
of receipt of notice by the municipality, and failure to provide correct
information on the registration statement, or failure to comply with the
provisions of such provisions contained herein shall be deemed to be
violations of this ordinance.
§ 54-6.7 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 55-2
1:138
§ 55-2. Violations and penalties.
See Chapter 1:14.1.
§ 55-3. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 15-53, entitled "An Ordinance Relating to the Prohibition of
Hunting Within the Boundaries of the Borough of Waldwick", and all other
ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance, are hereby
repealed.
§ 55-4. When effective.
This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon passage and
publication as required by law.
Chapter 56
JUNK SHOPS AND JUNKYARDS
§ 56-1. Licenses required.
It shall be hereafter unlawful for any person, firm, association, partnership
or corporation to operate or maintain a junk shop or junkyard, or to deal
in junk at any place within the limits of the Borough of Waldwick, in any
manner contrary to the provisions of this ordinance and without first having
obtained a license for such purpose, as hereinafter provided.
§ 56-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following definitions are hereby
established.
JUNK — Any waste material or discarded material or old iron or other metal
or substance, glass, paper, machine parts, accessories, discarded machinery
or discarded machines, in whole or in part, and any material commonly and
generally known as "junk", in the ordinary meaning of the word, acquired
and/or collected.
JUNKYARD — Any lot of land within the Borough of Waldwick on which
"junk" is placed, collected, stored or kept.
JUNK SHOP — Any building within the Borough of Waldwick in which "junk"
is stored.
JUNK DEALER — Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation
who buys or otherwise acquires "junk" for commercial purposes within the
limits of the Borough of Waldwick, and/or who collects and stores "junk"
therein.
§ 55-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-3
1:139
§ 56-3. Applications for licenses.
Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain
a license as herein required shall:
§ 56-4. Inspection of premises; written reports by Building
Inspector and Fire Chief.
Upon receiving the copies of said application, the Building Inspector and
the Chief of the Borough Fire Department shall make an inspection of the
premises sought to be licensed, and within ten (10) days after receipt of said
application, shall make written report of the circumstances thereof to the
Borough Clerk. Said report shall state, among other things, the conclusion
of such official as to whether the storing of junk at or in the proposed
premises would constitute a hazardous condition.
§ 56-5. Holding of application for hearing by Council.
If the Building Inspector, the Chief of the Borough Fire Department, or
both, shall determine that the operation of a junkyard or junk shop at
the premises proposed would constitute a hazard, or the Borough Clerk
shall find the application irregular, the Borough Clerk shall not issue a
license but shall report his refusal to do so to the Mayor and Council and
notify the applicant, who upon said notification may apply for a hearing on
such application before the Mayor and Council. If there is no objection to
the issuance of the license, the Borough Clerk shall issue it as hereafter
provided.
§ 56-6. Approval or disapproval by Council.
At such hearing the Mayor and Council shall have evidence of the facts, and
within thirty (30) days after such hearing shall determine whether to sustain
the Clerk's refusal to issue a license or whether to reverse it. If reversed,
the Clerk shall issue said license, subject to the other provisions hereof.
§ 56-7. License fee.
(See Chapter 48:56-7.)
A. Make application in writing to the Borough Clerk, setting forth the
name, address and the premises at which it is proposed to establish a
junk shop or junkyard, including a full description of such premises and
whether the applicant owns the premises or leases them, together with
the deed or lease thereon, together with a description of the building
and the classes of materials which it is proposed to store therein.
B. Such application shall be accompanied by cash in a sum equaling the
whole annual license fee, which shall be returned by the Borough Clerk
in the event the license is refused.
C. The applicant shall file a copy of said application with the Building
Inspector and the Chief of the Borough Fire Department.
§ 56-3 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 56-8
1:140
§ 56-8. Denial of license to certain persons; bond required.
No license shall be issued to any person not a citizen of the United States
nor to any person convicted of the crime of larceny or receiving stolen
goods, or other crime involving moral turpitude, nor to any person owing
a tax or fee to the Borough of Waldwick, nor for any lot or building owing
tax to the Borough of Waldwick, and no license shall be issued until the
applicant has posted a bond with the Borough Clerk, with good surety and
in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000), conditioned upon the faithful
compliance with all the regulations herein and the lawful conduct of said
business, and conditioned further upon a guarantee to make daily report to
the Police Department of the Borough of Waldwick as to purchases made,
from whom, and with such further information as the chief officer of the
Police Department shall require.
§ 56-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation violating any of
the provisions hereof shall, upon conviction before any authority, be
punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50), by imprisonment in
the county jail for not more than thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 56-10. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
hereof are hereby repealed.
§ 56-11. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect when passed and published as required by
law.
Chapter 56A
(RESERVED)
Chapter 57
(RESERVED)
Chapter 58
LIBRARY
§ 58-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the enforcement of the
following rules and regulations adopted by the Borough Council of the
Borough of Waldwick by establishing penalties and procedures for the
§ 56-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-1
1:141
adjudication of any alleged violations of the rules and regulations in the
Municipal Court of said Borough.
§ 58-2. Return of materials upon notification; time limit.
No person shall detain or fail to return any book, periodical, pamphlet,
artistic reproduction, phonograph recording, audio-visual material or any
other article borrowed from the Waldwick Library or a member Library of
the Bergen County Cooperative System (hereinafter referred to as member
Library) that is borrowed under a Waldwick Library card after thirty (30)
days have elapsed from the date of posting by certified mail, return receipt
requested, of a notice demanding return thereof, addressed to said person
at the last address furnished.
§ 58-3. Damage to or destruction of materials.
No person shall cut, tear, deface, disfigure, damage or destroy any book,
periodical, pamphlet, artistic reproduction, phonograph recording, audiovisual
material or other article or any part thereof which is borrowed from,
owned by or is in the custody of such member Library.
§ 58-4. Compliance with Library procedures required.
No person shall remove any book, periodical, pamphlet, artistic
reproduction, phonograph recording, audio-visual material or any other
item or article from a member Library building without complying with the
rules and regulations and procedures of the Library for borrowing such
items or articles.
§ 58-5. Furnishing of false information.
No person with intent to defraud shall register or furnish a false name or
address or use any card other than the one issued to said person for the
purpose of borrowing any book or other article from said Library.
§ 58-6. Conditions for filing of complaint in Court.
The Library Director is authorized to file a complaint in the Municipal Court
under the following conditions:
A. A certified letter, return receipt requested, shall be sent by the Library
administration as a final notice after twelve (12) weeks have elapsed
since the original due date, informing the borrower that unless the
material borrowed is returned and/or any fines paid within thirty (30)
days a summons will be issued under the provisions of this chapter.
B. In the case of a minor, the letter of complaint shall be directed to the
parents or guardians of the minor involved.
§ 58-1 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 58-7
1:142
§ 58-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or refuses to comply with the regulations and
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine
not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500) or be imprisoned in
the county jail for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both, in the
discretion of the Judge before whom such conviction is obtained.
§ 58-8. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication in accordance
with State law.
Chapter 59
LITTERING
§ 59-1. Title.
This ordinance may be referred to or cited as the "Antilitter Ordinance of
the Borough of Waldwick".
§ 59-2. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LITTER — Includes garbage, refuse, rubbish, trash, waste or abandoned
materials of any kind. The term "litter" shall not be deemed to include any
such matter which has been properly placed in a suitable receptacle used
for the purpose of containing the same temporarily pending disposal by
means of regularly scheduled services provided by a scavenger contractor.
§ 59-3. Littering prohibited. [Amended 5-24-88 by Ord. No. 9-88]
A. No person shall place, throw or discard litter or debris on any land,
public or private, within the Borough of Waldwick.
B. The discarding or dumping of any household or commercial solid waste
in any place not specifically designated for the purpose of solid waste
storage or disposal is prohibited.
C. The parking of vehicles on residential lawns is prohibited.
D. The accumulation of debris on or around construction sites, or its
storage in such a manner that it is likely to be removed by natural
forces onto adjacent property is prohibited.
E. Any person sweeping into or depositing in any gutter, street, catch
basin or other public place, any accumulation of litter from any public
or private sidewalk or driveway is hereby prohibited.
§ 58-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-3
1:143
§ 59-4. Use of receptacles. [Amended 5/24/88 by Ord. No. 9-88]
F. Every person who owns or occupies property shall keep the sidewalk in
front of his or her premises free of litter and all sweepings shall be
collected and properly containerized for disposal when regularly
scheduled by the Borough.
A. Any person placing litter in an outdoor receptacle whether on public
land or private property, shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it
from being released or scattered by the elements.
B. Litter receptacles and their servicing shall be required at the following
public places which exist in the municipality:
1. Sidewalks used by pedestrians in active retail commercially zoned
areas such that at a minimum there shall be no single linear
quarter mile without a receptacle.
2. Buildings held out for use by the public including schools,
government buildings, railroad and bus stations.
3. Parks.
4. Drive-in restaurants.
5. All street vendor locations.
6. Self-service refreshment areas.
7. Construction sites.
8. Gasoline service station islands.
9. Shopping centers.
10. Parking lots.
11. Campgrounds and trailer parks.
12. Marinas, boat moorings and fueling stations, boat launching areas,
public and private piers operated for public use.
13. Beaches and bathing areas.
14. At special events to which the public is invited, including sporting
events, parades, carnivals, circuses and festivals.
C. The proprietors of these places or the sponsors of these events shall be
responsible for providing and servicing the receptacles such that
adequate containerization is available.
D. Open or overflowing commercial, industrial or residential waste
disposal bins is prohibited.
§ 59-3 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 59-4
1:144
§ 59-5. Duty to remove litter. [Amended 5-24-88 by Ord. No. 9-88]
§ 59-6. Violations and penalties.
See Chapter 1:14.1.
§ 59-7. Interpretation of provisions.
This ordinance is in addition to and not in derogation of any other
ordinances pertaining to any matter regulated herein.
§ 59-8. Severability.
If any clause, provision or part of this ordinance or the application thereof to
any person or circumstances shall, for any reason, be adjudged by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder of this ordinance.
§ 59-9. Enforcement. [Added 12-28-04 by Ord. No. 25-04]
This ordinance shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or other
Municipal Officials of the Borough of Waldwick.
Chapter 60
(RESERVED)
Chapter 61
MAP, OFFICIAL
§ 61-1. Adoption by reference.
The Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough of Waldwick hereby adopt
as the Official Map of the Borough of Waldwick, in accordance with the
Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey, Title 40:55-1.32, that portion of
the Assessment Atlas of 1945, as corrected by Fraleigh and Schwanewede,
Borough Engineers, as of October 1, 1954, that is set forth in detail in an
annexed schedule attached hereto and marked "Schedule A."4
E. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Waldwick.
[Added 11-24-09 by Ord. No. 23-09]
A. The owner or occupant of any private land or building and the person in
control of any business operation shall be responsible to maintain the
exterior of such premises and public sidewalks immediately adjacent
thereof free of litter at all times.
§ 59-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-2
1:145
§ 61-2. Streets not included on adopted schedule expressly
exempted from Official Map.
All streets not included in the attached schedule, marked "Schedule A,"5 as
shown on the aforementioned Tax Atlas, are expressly exempted from the
Official Map hereby adopted.
§ 61-3. Reservations for future park-school sites and playgrounds.
§ 61-4. Purpose of Official Map.
The purpose of adopting the Official Map is for the express purpose of
conserving and promoting public health, safety, morals and the general
welfare of the residents of the Borough of Waldwick.
A. The following enumerated parcels of property, listed in accordance with
block and lot numbers as shown on the Assessment Atlas of 1945, as
revised by Fraleigh and Schwanewede, Borough Engineers, as of
October 1, 1954, are hereby expressly reserved for present and future
park-school sites and playgrounds:
1. Lots 7 and 8 of Block 136.
2. Lots 36B, 37, 38 and 39A of Block 128.
3. Parts of Lots 4A, 4D, 6A and 6B of Block 136.
B. The parts to be set aside, being all of the properties above mentioned,
which lie north of a line drawn parallel to Wyckoff Avenue and one
hundred twenty-five (125) feet north of the north line of Wyckoff
Avenue.
1. All of Block 58.
2. All of Block 31.
3. All of Block 57.
4. All of Block 56.
5. Lots 1 to 8 inclusive of Block 55.
6. Lots 1 to 36 inclusive of Block 32.
7. Lots 33 to 65 inclusive of Block 33.
8. Lots 34 to 59 inclusive of Block 34.
4. Editor's Note: A copy of Schedule A is available for examination in the Borough offices.
5. Editor's Note: A copy of Schedule A is available for examination in the Borough offices.
§ 61-2 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 61-5
1:146
§ 61-5. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect when passed and published as required by
law.
Chapter 61A
MOTOR VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND UNCLAIMED
STORAGE FEE REGULATIONS
WHEREAS, municipalities are faced with exorbitant storage fees for storage
of abandoned and unclaimed motor vehicles; and
WHEREAS, storage fees have been permitted to accumulate far in excess of
the value of any of these vehicles; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to set reasonable limitations on these storage
fees for the important public purpose of sustaining local fiscal soundness;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Waldwick as follows:
§ 61A-1. Maximum fees.
See Chapter 48:61A.1.
§ 61A-2. Fine.
See Chapter 1:14:1.
§ 61A-3. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
as required by law.
Chapter 61B
(RESERVED)
Chapter 62
NOISE CONTROL
§ 62-1. General prohibition.
A. The making, creating or permitting of any unreasonably loud,
disturbing or unnecessary noise in the Borough of Waldwick is hereby
prohibited.
B. The making, creating or permitting of any noise of such character,
intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life, health or welfare of
any individual or which either steadily or intermittently annoys,
§ 61-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-1
1:147
§ 62-2. Specific prohibitions. [Amended 8-22-00 by Ord. No. 15-00]
disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, peace or safety of
any individual is hereby prohibited.
A. Unless exempted under the provisions of this chapter, no person shall
cause to be made, directly or indirectly, any loud noise which disturbs,
injures or endangers the health, comfort, safety or welfare of others
within the Borough of Waldwick.
B. The following specific acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but said enumerations
are intended to be typical only and shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
1. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus, truck or other vehicle on any street, road or public
place (except as warning pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
39:3-69); the sounding of any whistle or other device operated by
engine exhaust; the use of any such signaling device when traffic is
for any reason held up.
2. The use of radio or television receiving sets, musical instruments,
phonographs or any other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet
and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or, at any time, with
volume louder than is necessary for convenient hearing of the
person or persons who are in the room or vehicle in which such
machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners
thereto. The operation of any such device between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such manner as to be plainly audible at a
distance of fifty (50) feet from the building, structure or vehicle in
which it is located or, in the case of such instruments operated in
the open at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the instrument, shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
3. The use of any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or
device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast
upon the public streets for the purposes of commercial advertising.
4. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or
long-continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of persons
residing in the vicinity.
5. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any internalcombustion
engine, except through an adequate muffler or other
device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises
therefrom. (See N.J.S.A. 39:3-70 for State law regarding muffler
requirements on motor vehicles.) This includes, by way of example
and not by way of limitation, internal-combustion engines powering
motor vehicles.
§ 62-1 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 62-2
1:148
§ 62-3. Exceptions.
The prohibitions contained in this chapter shall not apply to:
6. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with
loading and unloading any vehicle or the opening or destruction of
bales, boxes, crates and containers.
7. The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or
repair of any building other than between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of
public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the
Building Inspector, which permit may be granted for a period of
three (3) days or less while the emergency continues.
8. The use of any blower, fan or pump engine or motor in connection
therewith, including, by way of example and not by way of
limitation, air-conditioning systems, compression devices and pool
filter systems, if such use creates loud, penetrating or continuous
noises that disturb the comfort or repose of persons residing in the
vicinity.
9. The creation of any excessive noise adjacent to any school,
institution of learning, house of worship or judicial court while the
same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably
interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs
or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided that
conspicuous signs are displayed on the adjacent streets indicating
that the same is a school, hospital, church or court street.
10. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors in and
among the public streets.
11. The use of any drum, bell, horn, loudspeaker or other instrument or
device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance,
show or sale or display of merchandise by any creation of noise or
sound.
12. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on vehicles or
aircraft.
13. Lawn mowers, chain saws, and other equipment powered by
internal-combustion engines, between the hours 9:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. Monday through Friday, and between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 8:30 a.m. weekends and holidays.
14. The prolonged and continual operation of a burglar alarm in a
manner that disturbs the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring
inhabitants.
A. Persons who are engaged in the performance of any public or
governmental function, such as the sounding of a church or school bell
§ 62-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-3
1:149
§ 62-4. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be severable, and if any of the provisions
hereof shall be held to be unconstitutional, the decision of the court
respecting such provision or provisions shall not affect the validity of any
other provisions which can be given effect without such invalid provision or
provisions.
§ 62-5. Violations and penalties.
See Chapter 1:14.1.
§ 62-6. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
Chapter 62A
OUTDOOR DISPLAYS AND SALES
or a police, fire, ambulance, air raid or like disaster warning, alert or
alarm, whether such alarm is for an actual emergency purpose or for
practice or drilling purposes.
B. Military or civic parades, celebrations or other public gatherings for
which a permit has been issued by the Mayor and Council.
C. Persons who are engaged in any activity specifically permitted or
required by any ordinance, resolution, statute or governmental
regulations.
D. Persons employed by public utility companies engaged in emergency
repair services; provided, however, that such noise shall not exceed
levels reasonably necessary to accomplish such work.
§ 62-3 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 62-6
1:150
ARTICLE I
Outdoor Displays and Sales
§ 62A-1. Permit required.
On application to the Borough Council, the Borough Council may by
resolution, permit the outdoor display and/or sale of merchandise on
sidewalks and adjoining areas subject to the conditions contained herein.
Following the adoption of the enabling resolution, permits shall be issued
by the Borough Clerk.
§ 62A-2. Application procedure.
The applicant shall provide a sketch drawing showing the area to be used
for outdoor display or sale. This area shall not be an off-street parking place
nor shall it be obstructive to easy ingress and egress from the building
or create a fire hazard. Outdoor displays or sales shall abut the principal
building and shall leave a minimum of four feet of unimpeded sidewalk
as measured from the curb for pedestrian traffic. Merchandise shall be
securely and adequately placed so that it will not endanger passersby, or be
stored indoors as to create a safety or fire hazard.
The applicant shall also certify to the following as part of the application
package:
§ 62A-3. Application fee.
The application will require a fee as per Chapter 48 of the Code.
§ 62A-4. Permit term.
The permit shall be good for one year and shall run from April 1st through
March 31st. If, during the course of the permit, the area used for outdoor
display is expanded, a new application and permit shall be required for the
balance of the term.
A. No food or food stuffs be displayed or offered for sale unless approved
and permitted by the Board of Health.
B. The outdoor display and sale be restricted to areas zoned for business
and be in accord with all zoning regulations pertaining thereto.
C. All participating displayers or sellers shall own or lease permanent
premises where the outdoor display or sale will be conducted.
D. The permit would not adversely affect the public welfare.
E. No additional signage for the outdoor display merchandised.
§ 62A-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62A-5
1:151
§ 62A-5. Merchant days.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to Borough Council sanctioned
Merchant's Days.
§ 62A-6. Enforcement and penalties.
Enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be under the jurisdiction
of the Zoning Code Official and the Police Department. Penalties for
noncompliance are contained in Chapter 1-14-1.
§ 62A-5 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 62A-6
1:152
ARTICLE II
Clothing Receptacles
§ 62A-7. Purpose.
An ordinance to regulate the location and quantity of clothing receptacles
in and around the Borough of Waldwick, so as to protect the public safety
and welfare and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 62A-8. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated in the text of this Chapter:
COMMERCIAL COMPLEX — Any configuration of four or more retail
establishments.
RECEPTACLE — A container that is used for the collection of used clothing.
§ 62A-9. Permit and fees. [Amended 5-27-08 by Ord. No. 9-08]
§ 62A-10. Receptacle size; number and identification. [Amended
5-27-08 by Ord. 9-08]
a. No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity, whether for
profit or not-for-profit, shall place or cause to be placed a receptacle
within the Borough of Waldwick without first obtaining a permit,
enclosing a sketch of the location with the permit application, and
paying the annual fee as required in Chapter 48-62A-9. In no event shall
a Receptacle be placed on residential property or in a residential
district. Receptacles may not be placed within 100 yards of any place
that stores large amounts of, or sell, fuel or other flammable liquids or
gases as pursuant to N.J.S.A. (40.48-2.60 et seq.).
b. The application for a permit to place a receptacle within the Borough of
Waldwick shall be made in writing to the Zoning Officer and signed by
the applicant. The application shall set forth:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
(2) The location sketch of where the receptacle is to be placed;
(3) The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the
property where the receptacle is to be placed, with a written
authorization from the owner for the placement of the receptacle.
a. No more than three receptacles shall be located within any Commercial
Complex.
b. Each receptacle shall not exceed five feet in depth, eight in width, and
six feet in height.
§ 62A-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62A-10
1:153
§ 62A-11. Receptacle location.
§ 62A-12. Maintenance.
The receptacles shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary condition, painted
and in good working order. Each receptacle shall be emptied regularly at
least once each month.
§ 62A-13. Enforcement and penalties. [Amended 5-27-08 by Ord.
9-08]
This ordinance shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer of the Borough of
Waldwick. Penalties for non-compliance are contained in Chapter 1-14-1.
c. Each receptacle shall have an identifying logo, name, or wording for the
use or nature of the same.
d. The receptacle shall be located in a clearly visible and well-lighted area
to permit inspection and enforcement.
e. The permit number and its date of expiration along with the name,
address and telephone number of the registered person that owns the
bin shall be clearly and conspicuously displayed on the exterior of the
clothing receptacle.
f. A statement, consistent with the information provided on your permit/
renewal application, indicating the manner in which the clothing
donation collected via the bin would be used, sold or dispersed, and the
method by which the proceeds of collected donations would be
allocated or spent shall be clearly and conspicuously displayed on the
exterior of the clothing receptacle.
a. The receptacle shall be located in such a manner that it will not be
necessary to park in a driveway or on an access drive for parking stalls
while depositing used clothing.
b. The receptacle shall not be placed in any parking spaces, roadways,
sidewalks and/or walkways or in any buffer areas and shall be no closer
than three feet to any property line
c. The areas adjacent to the receptacle shall be kept clear of all boxes and
debris.
d. The receptacle shall be permitted in side and rear yards, but not within
front yard.
e. The receptacle shall not be located in a parking stall designated to meet
the parking requirements of the on-site uses.
a. The owner of the clothing receptacle and the property owner shall be
liable for violating any of the foregoing conditions.
§ 62A-10 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 62A-13
1:154
b. No summons for a violation of this section shall be issued unless the
owner of the clothing receptacle and the property owner have been
given 48 hours to correct the violation, and has failed to correct the
violation within that 48-hour time period. The 48 hour time period shall
be exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. For the purpose of
this section, every 48-hour period, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and
holidays is a separate offense for which an additional summons shall be
issued.
c. The issuance of three (3) notices of violation and three (3) convictions
within a 12-month period shall result in a revocation of the special
permit for a period of 12 months commencing on the date of the
issuance of the summons for the third offense. Notice of the revocation
of the permit shall be sent to the owner of the receptacle and the
property owner, notifying them that the receptacle must be removed
within five (5) days of the notice of revocation. In the event the
receptacle is not removed within five (5) days of the date of notice of
revocation, a summons shall be issued to the property owner for
violation of this section and the municipality shall remove the clothing
receptacle from the site. The municipality shall store said clothing
receptacle for thirty days and if unclaimed by the owner, the Borough
shall have the right to remove any articles from the receptacle and
scrap the container. All proceeds from the sale of articles and scrap
value of the container shall reside with the Borough.
d. This ordinance shall supplement N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq. and the
Borough of Waldwick specifically reserves the right to enforce any and
all provisions in their statutes not explicitly covered as written and
subsequently amended.
§ 62A-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62A-13
1:155
Chapter 63
PARK AND RIDE LOTS
§ 63-1. Location.
The improved parking facility operated and maintained by the Borough of
Waldwick on lands leased by the Borough from the State of New Jersey
and situate north of West Prospect Street between the westerly side of
Hewson Avenue and the Conrail Railroad tracks is hereinafter designated
or referred to as the "Waldwick Park and Ride Lot."
§ 63-2. Parking by permit only during certain hours.
During the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. (prevailing time) daily,
except Saturdays, Sundays and national holidays, parking in the Waldwick
Park and Ride Lot shall be restricted to passenger vehicles with an
unexpired Waldwick park and ride permit displayed from the dashboard,
sun visor or otherwise in such a way that the expiration date thereof shall be
plainly visible through the windshield from the center front of said vehicle.
§ 63-3. Permit requirements.
See Chapter 48:63-3.
§ 63-4. Restrictions.
§ 63-5. Adoption of additional regulations.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Waldwick may by ordinance adopt
and amend rules not inconsistent herewith for the purpose of protecting and
promoting the public welfare by encouraging the most efficient use of the
Waldwick Park and Ride Lot as a commuter parking facility in accordance
with the provisions and intent of the agreement dated September 6, 1977,
by and between the Borough of Waldwick and State of New Jersey. Upon
A. Head-in parking. All vehicles in the Waldwick Park and Ride Lot shall be
parked within a delineated parking space head in, that is, with the front
of the vehicle toward curbs or stops and the rear toward driving lanes.
B. Registered vehicles only. Vehicles which do not have currently valid
registration tags affixed thereto shall not be parked in the Waldwick
Park and Ride Lot at any time.
C. Removal of unauthorized vehicles. In addition to penalties for violations
as herein provided, any vehicle left parked or unattended in the
Waldwick Park and Ride Lot contrary to the provisions of this ordinance
may be removed, and it shall be the obligation of the owner of such
vehicle to pay reasonable costs for the removal and for any storage
which may result from such removal before he shall be entitled to
recover possession of such vehicle.
§ 62A-13 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 63-5
1:156
adoption, such regulations shall be posted conspicuously at the point or
points of vehicular access to the lot.
§ 63-6. Severability.
If any clause, provision or part of this ordinance or the application thereof to
any person or circumstance shall, for any reason, be adjudged by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder of this ordinance.
§ 63-7. Violations and penalties.
See Chapter 1:14.1.
§ 63-8. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
as required by law with the exception that 63-2 shall not become effective
until October 1, 1978.
Chapter 64
PARKS
§ 64-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the following meaning:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Waldwick.
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other
area in the Borough owned or used by the Borough and devoted to active or
passive recreation.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
VEHICLE — Any wheeled conveyance, whether motor powered, animal
drawn or self-propelled. The term "vehicle" shall include any trailer in
tow of any size, kind or description. Exceptions are hereby made for baby
carriages and vehicles in the service of any Borough parks.
§ 64-2. Prohibited activities.
No person in any public park shall:
A. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or
remove any building, bridges, tables, benches, railings, paving or
paving materials, water lines or other public utilities or parts or
appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether temporary
or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or
§ 63-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-2
1:157
other structures, equipment, facilities or park property or
appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.
B. Dig or remove any sand, earth, rock, stone, tree, shrub, plant, flowers,
grass, timber or log, whether standing or cut, or any other material; or
make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or
agency; or attach or cause to be attached any rope, wire or other device
to any tree, plant or building.
C. Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether
permanent or temporary in character; or run or string any public
service utility into, upon or across such lands, except upon special
written permit issued hereunder.
D. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters
of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or
adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain
flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid,
which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
E. Have brought in or dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass,
ashes, papers, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse or
other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or
contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but
shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided.
Where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall
be carried away from the park, by the person responsible for its
presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere.
F. Fail to observe and obey all traffic laws, including signs indicating
speed, direction, caution, stopping, parking or no parking, and all other
signs posted for proper control and to safeguard life and property.
G. Park and leave a motor vehicle overnight in any area of the park.
H. Park a motor vehicle on park property unless the operator or owner
thereof shall use or is making use of the recreation facilities of such
park during the time that the said motor vehicle is parked in said park.
I. Ride a minibike or motorized bike in or on any park or recreational
facility.
J. Swim, wade, or enter into, except lawfully licensed to fish, any waters
or waterways within the Borough, except at the municipal pool. [Ord.
No. 16-2017]
K. Except for the existing pistol range, bring or have in his possession or
set off or otherwise cause to explode, discharge or burn any firecracker,
torpedo, rocket or other fireworks or explosives of flammable material,
or discharge them or throw them into any such area from land or
highways adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any substance,
compound, mixture or article that, in conjunction with any other
§ 64-2 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 64-2
1:158
§ 64-3. Additional rules authorized.
substance or compound would be dangerous from any of the foregoing
standpoints.
L. Bring in or operate any boat, raft or other watercraft, whether motor
powered or not, upon any waters in the park, except at such times, in
such places and under such conditions as may be approved by the
Mayor and Council.
M. Enter upon ice, except such ice designated.
N. Due to the size of the soccer field at Veterans Park, play is restricted to
persons under the age of twelve (12). [Added 8-10-99 by Ord. No.
11-99]
O. There shall be no commercial activity occurring within a public park
without the prior authorization of the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Waldwick memorialized at a public meeting of the
Governing Body. Said authorization shall require but not be limited to
the requirement of a license to be issued by the Borough Clerk and
proof of valid general liability insurance naming the Borough as an
addition insured. The amount of insurance shall be dependent upon the
activities to be conducted. [Added 8-28-12 by Ord. No. 13-12]
P. There shall be a complete prohibition on smoking within the property
boundaries of any park in the Borough of Waldwick. [Added 12-27-12
by Ord. No. 17-12]
Q. When reserving the park for a special event, charging a fee to the
general public to attend the event is prohibited. [Added by Ord. No.
21-2016]
R. The use of any cooking device, unless professionally catered for a
special event (which requires prior approval from the Health
Department for Public Events), except the use of designated municipal
barbecue charcoal grills. [Ord. No. 16-2017]
A. The Mayor and Council is hereby authorized to adopt any additional
rules and regulations with respect to the park facilities of the Borough,
including but not limited to the establishment of opening and closing
hours, which shall be posted at the entrance to the park so that same
will be easily noticeable by the public, and with respect to the conduct
of the public in any such parks, provided that such rules and regulations
are not inconsistent or in conflict with the provisions herein set forth.
B. With respect to school grounds which the Borough uses as a park, as
defined herein, the Mayor and Council may rely upon those rules and
regulations adopted or to be adopted by the Board of Education as the
latter may deem appropriate.
§ 64-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-4
1:159
§ 64-4. Permits for special events. [Amended 8-22-00 by Ord. No.
15-00]
A. Whenever a person desires to use a park or a certain area of the park
for period of one (1) day or any part thereof, that person shall make
application to the Borough Clerk for a permit for the special event,
which includes but is not limited to a performance, show or
entertainment. The Borough Clerk shall have the authority to grant said
permit provided that the following conditions are met:
1. The name and address of the applicant.
2. The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or
association sponsoring the activity, if any.
3. The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
4. The portion of the park area for which such a permit is desired.
5. A description of and purpose for the special event.
6. An estimate of the anticipated attendance.
7. (Reserved) [Removed by Ord. No. 21-2016]
8. Any other information which the Mayor and Council shall find
reasonably necessary for a fair determination as to whether a
permit should be issued hereunder.
9. There shall be a two hundred dollar ($200) per event security and
cleaning deposit. This deposit will be refunded to the applicant
upon verification that the park area has been left clean and no
damage to the facility has occurred. The security deposit shall be
posted by a resident of the Borough who is supervising the special
event. The security deposit shall not be charged to non-profit
organizations based in the Borough of Waldwick or for members of
the Waldwick Fire Department or Waldwick Ambulance Corps.
[Ord. No. 16-2017]
B. Standards for issuance of a use permit by the Borough Clerk or the
Mayor & Council shall include the following findings:
1. That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the
park by others.
2. That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere
with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety
and recreation.
3. That the proposed activity or uses that are reasonably anticipated
will not include violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
§ 64-4 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 64-4
1:160
§ 64-4.1. Tennis tags and fees.
See Chapter 48:64-4.1.
§ 64-4.2. Summer Recreation Program. [Added April 14-09 by Ord.
No. 6-09]
See Chapter 48:64-4.2.
4. That the proposed activity will not entail additional expense to the
Borough or impose a burden upon its Police Department.
5. That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at
the date and hour requested in the application.
6. That the proposed activity or use will be supervised by or be under
the immediate direction and control of responsible residents of the
Borough.
C. Within twenty-one (21) days after the receipt of an application, the
Mayor and Council shall apprise an applicant, in writing, as to whether
or not the permit has been granted and, if so granted, any reasonable
conditions that may be imposed by the Mayor and Council. If the Mayor
and Council refuses to issue a permit, it shall state the reasons for such
denial.
D. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations, any
conditions set forth in the permit and all applicable ordinances as
though the same were inserted in said permit.
E. The person or persons to whom the permit is issued shall be liable for
all loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason
of negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit shall have
been issued. Such approval shall be further conditioned upon an
agreement by the applicant to indemnify the Borough in the event that
any damage or destruction is caused by the permittee or any members
of such organization or as a result of such applicant's use, unless
specifically waived, in writing, by the Mayor and Council.
F. The Mayor and Council shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon
a finding of violation of any conditions set forth in the permit, any rule
or regulation or any provision herein contained or any other applicable
ordinance, or upon good cause shown.
G. Notwithstanding the above, with respect to school grounds which the
Borough uses as a park, as defined herein, the Mayor and Council may
rely upon those rules and regulations adopted by the Board of
Education as the latter may deem appropriate concerning permits for
special events.
§ 64-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-5
1:161
§ 64-5. Violations and penalties.
See Chapter 1:14.1.
§ 64-6. Interpretation of provisions; repealer.
This ordinance is in addition to and not in derogation of any other ordinance
involving or affecting any of the subject matters contained in the within
ordinance, except that all ordinances or parts of ordinances, including
Chapter 47 of the Waldwick Code entitled "Exhibitions and
Entertainments", inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance are
hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistencies.
§ 64-7. Severability.
The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence or provision of this ordinance
shall not affect the validity of any part of this ordinance which can be given
effect without such invalid part or parts.
§ 64-8. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as provided
by law.
Chapter 65
PEACE AND ORDER
§ 65-1. Disturbance of the peace.
§ 65-2. Violations and penalties.
See Chapter 1:14.1 of the Waldwick Municipal Code.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person within the confines of the Borough of
Waldwick to violate the public order and decorum or to create a
disturbance of the public tranquility by any act or conduct inciting to
violence or tending to provoke or excite others to break the peace, or by
an act which, by causing consternation and alarm, disturbs the peace
and quiet of the community.
2. For a violation of this chapter, it shall not be necessary for the actual
commotion or disturbance to occur; rather, it is sufficient if the conduct
is likely to annoy members of the public, arouse the anger of members
of the public or disturb the peace.
3. Acts which shall be considered as disturbing the peace include but are
not limited to disorderly or boisterous conduct, use of abusive or
indecent language in public, engaging in lewd or indecent behavior, and
creating any loud disturbing noise which injures or endangers the
comfort, repose, peace or safety of any individual.
§ 64-5 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 65-3
1:162
§ 65-3. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as provided
by law.
Chapter 66
COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION
§ 65-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-3
1:163

ARTICLE I
Commercial Solicitation
§ 66-1. (Reserved)
§ 66-2. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, words and phrases shall
be interpreted as follows:
AGENT/EMPLOYEE — Any individual receiving compensation, in any form
whatsoever, from an entity for engaging in solicitation within the Borough.
APPLICANT — Any person, organization, firm, partnership, corporation,
company, association, church, religious denomination, society, class, league
or other entity or group seeking to obtain a license for commercial
solicitation.
CANVASSER — Any person who travels, either by foot or automobile or any
other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, from
business to business or from street to street to seek or develop support for,
to conduct market research about, to determine feelings or opinions about,
to conduct a survey about, or explain a position about and on behalf of any
commercial product, cause or organization.
GOODS AND/OR SERVICES — Includes but is not limited to food (including
but not limited to ice cream, refreshments and farm products), magazines
and periodicals, advertisements, commercial handbills, personal property,
coupons, products, merchandise, wares, orders or contracts for a service,
home or business improvement or alterations, as well as offering or seeking
to purchase real property when such real property is not listed for sale.
ITINERANT VENDOR OR SOLICITOR — Any person who travels, either by
foot or automobile or any other type of conveyance, from place to place,
from house to house or from street to street taking or attempting to take
orders for the sale of goods of any nature whatsoever for future delivery or
for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such
person has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the object to be sold, and
whether he/she is collecting advance payments on such sales; but shall not
include wholesalers calling on retail merchants.
LICENSE — A license for commercial solicitation issued by the Borough of
Waldwick pursuant to the provisions of this article.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION — (1) Any organization tax exempt under
§ 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; (2) any organization created
under or otherwise subject to the provisions of Title 15A of the New Jersey
Statutes; (3) any organization, whether or not qualified under § 501(c)(3)
of the Internal Revenue Code or subject to the provisions of Title 15A of
the New Jersey Statutes, whose primary purpose is to benefit the school
age children of the Borough of Waldwick, including but not limited to
schools, school clubs and organizations, Cub Scouts, Boy Scouts, Brownies,
Girl Scouts and similar youth groups; (4) any organization whose primary
§ 66-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-2
1:165
purpose is to advocate for religious or political causes, whether or not
qualified under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code or subject to Title
15A of the New Jersey Statues; (5) any department within the Borough of
Waldwick's municipal governmental structure, including, but not limited to,
the Police Department and any volunteer fire or first aid company that is
located in, has a substantial membership from or serves the Borough of
Waldwick; or (6) any federal or state governmental agency.
PEDDLER OR HAWKER — Any person who travels, either by foot or
automobile or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house
to house or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods
for the purpose of selling and delivering them to prospective customers.
PERSON — Not only an individual, but also any organization, firm,
partnership, corporation, company, association, church, religious
denomination, society, class, league or other entity or group.
SOLICITATION or SOLICIT — To go in or upon the streets, roads, and
semi-private and private property in the Borough of Waldwick without
having been invited to do so by the owner or occupant of the property
for the purpose of advertising, promoting or selling any products, goods
or services, seeking to purchase real estate that isn't advertised for sale
or conducting market research or a market or opinion survey regarding
commercial goods or services. Solicitors shall include but shall not be
limited to itinerant vendors, peddlers, hawkers and canvassers of
commercial products or services. Solicitation shall include the placement
upon private property of handbills or other written material advertising
goods or services for sale. Solicitation shall also include the sale of goods or
services which the solicitor promises to donate or deliver to a charitable or
other nonprofit institution on behalf of the purchaser.
SOLICITOR — Any individual agent or employee soliciting on behalf of any
organization, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, church,
religious denomination, society, class, league or other entity or group.
§ 66-3. Exemptions.
A. This chapter shall not affect any of the following persons or activities:
(1) Any person engaged in the delivery, in the regular course of
business, of goods, wares, merchandise, or other articles of
personal property to the premises of persons who had previously
ordered same or were entitled to receive same by reason of prior
agreement.
(2) Any nonprofit organization, as defined in § 66-2 of this chapter,
engaged in the solicitation of funds for charitable purposes solely
from its members.
(3) Any person engaged in the solicitation of funds for a nonprofit
organization, when solicitation occurs on premises owned or
controlled by the person soliciting funds or with the permission of
the person who owns or controls the premises.
§ 66-2 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 66-3
1:166
§ 66-4. License required.
Except as otherwise provided in § 66-3 above, it shall be unlawful for any
person to solicit, sell or dispose of or to offer to sell or dispose of any
goods, or to solicit orders for the performance of any service or to engage
in commercial canvassing within the corporate limits of the Borough of
Waldwick without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the
provisions of this section. Such license shall not be transferable from the
person to whom issued to any other person. A separate license shall be
obtained by each solicitor, itinerant vendor, hawker, peddler or canvasser
for every agent or employee working for him/her.
§ 66-5. Application for license.
(4) Federal census-taking and surveys taken pursuant to federal, state
or local laws.
(5) Any public utility, or its employees, which is subject to the
regulation of the State Board of Public Utility Commissioners;
provided, however, such employees shall display the identification
badge or card issued by the employer.
(6) Children enrolled in public and private elementary and secondary
schools in the Borough of Waldwick, including children peddling or
soliciting for schools, school clubs and organizations, Cub Scouts,
Boy Scouts, Brownies, Girl Scouts, and similar youth groups.
(7) Any person engaged in the delivery or solicitation of subscriptions
for a print media organization; provided, however, that said person
shall adhere to the general regulations set forth in § 66-11
hereinbelow and in addition such persons shall display an
identification badge (subject to the approval by the Clerk) provided
by the print media and an information sheet shall be filed with the
Police Department and Borough Clerk containing:
(a) The proposed location of solicitation;
(b) The make, model and license plate number of any vehicle being
used during such solicitation;
(c) The name of the supervisor of the persons soliciting; and
(d) The names of all those soliciting within the Borough of
Waldwick on behalf of said print media.
(8) Any individual campaigning for elected public office or support/
opposition to a public question which is to be voted upon in the
Borough of Waldwick during a primary, general, school board or
special election, in a local, state or national election.
§ 66-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-5
1:167
§ 66-6. investigation and approval of application.
A. Every applicant for a license under this section shall be 18 years of age
or older and shall follow the procedures set forth in Chapter 17,
Licenses and Permits.
B. Each applicant for a license shall secure through a private agency a
criminal history background check, conducted not more than 30 days
prior to the filing of the application. Such criminal history background
check must be submitted (as part of the application) directly from the
private agency to the Borough Clerk or Chief of Police. The criminal
history background check shall be in sufficient detail and scope to
reveal any criminal history recorded with the State Bureau of
Identification or with the Federal Bureau of Investigation and to allow
the Chief of Police to reach an informed decision as required by § 66-6
below.
C. Every application shall be verified under oath, and shall contain the
following:
(1) Full name and address of the applicant organization, firm,
partnership, corporation, company, association, church, religious
denomination, society, class, league or other entity or group;
(2) The proposed location of solicitation;
(3) The make, model and license plate number of any vehicle being
used during such solicitation;
(4) The name of the supervisor of the agents or employees soliciting;
(5) The names of all agents or employees soliciting within the Borough
of Waldwick on behalf of applicant;
(6) Place of residence for each of the solicitor's agents/employees;
(7) Each agent's/employee's sex, age, height, color of eyes and hair;
(8) Whether the solicitor's agent/employee is a citizen of the United
States;
(9) Whether the solicitor's agent/employee has ever been convicted of
a crime;
(10) Whether a driver's license issued by any state to the solicitor's
agent/employee had ever been suspended or revoked, and if so, for
what reason; and
(11) Each application for a solicitor's agent/employee shall be
accompanied by one recent photograph of the applicant. The
photograph shall be two inches by two inches.
A. The investigation required shall be limited to that sufficient for the
Chief of Police or their designee to make a determination that:
§ 66-5 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 66-6
1:168
§ 66-7. License application fee; duration of license.
A license application fee of $100 per person, per license, must be submitted
at the time of application. The fee is nonrefundable whether the license is
approved or denied.
§ 66-8. Time restrictions.
Solicitation shall take place within the Borough only during daylight hours
but no earlier than 9:00 a.m. and no later than one hour after sunset or 9:00
p.m. (whichever is earlier) on Mondays through Saturdays. Solicitation shall
be prohibited on Sundays.
§ 66-9. Carrying and displaying of license.
Each individual and/or member of any organization permitted to conduct
solicitations shall carry the approved license at all times and will present
same upon request. The license shall be prepared by the Borough Clerk
and shall be uniform in style and design. The following information shall be
printed on the license:
(1) The issuance of a license is in accordance with the provisions of
§ 66-3 above and N.J.S.A. 45:17A-18 et seq.; and
(2) The applicant or its agents/employees have not been convicted of
any criminal offense or a violation of a municipal ordinance relating
adversely to the registrant's fitness to perform activities regulated
by this section, including those involving violence or the threat of
violence.
B. For the purpose of this section, a plea of guilty, nolo contendere or any
other similar disposition of alleged criminal activity shall be deemed a
violation.
A. Duration of license. Other than licenses issued to mobile food vendors,
all solicitation licenses shall expire at the end of 30 days following the
date of issuance.
B. Mobile food vendors. All solicitation licenses issued to mobile food
vendors shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the calendar year
in which the license was issued, or upon expiration, revocation, or
suspension of the vendor's retail food establishment license.
A. Exception: Mobile food vendors with a valid solicitation license and a
valid retail food establishment license issued by the Board of Health
may operate at any location on public or private property which mobile
retail food vending equipment occupies or where the mobile retail food
vendor conducts business in any manner for a total cumulative time
period of no more than one hour in any twenty-four-hour period,
commencing at 12:00 midnight. Any interruption or removal of
equipment and/or of the vendor during any twenty-four-hour period
shall not constitute the commencement of a new one-hour period.
§ 66-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-9
1:169
§ 66-9.1. Display of badge.
§ 66-10. Code of conduct.
Every organization, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association,
church, religious denomination, society, class, league or other entity or
group issued a license under this section and their agents and employees
thereof shall conduct himself/herself according to the following code of
conduct:
A. Name of the organization, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, church, religious denomination, society, class, league or
other entity or group;
B. Name of the agent/employee;
C. Name and address of the organization on whose behalf the solicitation
is made. The municipal and state address of the organization shall be
the most conspicuous writing on the license and shall be at least twice
as large as any other printed matter contained on the license;
D. Expiration date of the license;
E. A statement that the Borough of Waldwick has licensed the solicitation
but neither approves nor disapproves of the organization and/or its
activities; and
F. The applicant shall provide the Clerk with a current two-inch by twoinch
color photograph of each licensee for inclusion on the license.
A. Every solicitor shall also receive a badge prepared by the Borough
Clerk utilizing the information received from the solicitation application
and license, as established in §§ 66-5 and 66-9 above. The badge shall
be not smaller than two inches by 3 1/2 inches with letters and figures
at least 1/4 inch high on contrasting background and displayed so that
the information thereon is easily discernible from a distance of seven
feet. The badge shall be displayed on the front outer layer of the
solicitor's clothing.
B. The following information shall be printed on the badge:
(1) Name of the solicitor.
(2) Picture of the solicitor.
(3) The name of the company, entity or group shall be printed on the
badge.
C. All badges upon expiration of the thirty-day period for which they are
valid shall be returned to the Borough Clerk's Office.
§ 66-9 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 66-10
1:170
§ 66-11. Prohibited practices.
It shall be unlawful for a person to:
A. He/she shall not enter or remain upon any resident's property that is on
the "do not solicit" list (See § 66-15 of this chapter) or upon which it is
posted that solicitors are not permitted or notice of similar content.
B. He/she shall carry the license/badge at all times and will present same
upon request as described in § 66-9.
C. He/she shall display his/her badge in a visible manner as described in
§ 66-9.1.
D. He/she shall not enter or attempt to enter any dwelling unit without
express invitation from the occupant therein.
E. He/she shall immediately leave the resident's property or business
property upon request by the resident or business owner or employee
to do so.
F. He/she shall not leave, on or about the resident's property, any circular,
samples or other matter or material unless same is handed to an
occupant of the property.
G. He/she shall not indicate that the Borough endorses or sponsors any of
the views expressed or the organization for which support of
contribution is sought.
H. He/she shall not make false claims, misrepresentations or materially
incorrect statements concerning the solicitation, organizations
represented or the use to be made of the amount solicited.
I. He/she shall not engage in any course of alarming conduct or conduct
himself/herself so as to reasonably alarm or annoy the occupant of the
dwelling.
J. He/she shall not engage in any conduct which is prohibited by any
statute, regulation or ordinance in effect in the Borough of Waldwick.
K. He/she shall present written receipts in accordance with § 66-12.
L. He/she shall have a complete copy of this section in his/her possession
at all times.
M. He/she shall be wearing a reflective vest and carrying a functioning
flashlight at dusk or later.
N. He/she shall have in his/her possession at all times a copy of the "do not
solicit" list (See § 66-15 of this chapter) that is no more than 30 days
old. A current copy of the updated "do not solicit" list shall be accessible
on the Borough's official website.
§ 66-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-11
1:171
§ 66-12. Written receipts required.
Any person receiving money or any other thing for a value of $1 or more
from any contributor under a solicitation made pursuant to this section shall
give to the contributor a written receipt signed by the solicitor showing the
date and the amount received, provided that this subsection shall not apply
to any contribution collected by means of a closed box or receptacle used
in solicitation where the use thereof has been approved by the Borough
in accordance with this section where it is impractical to determine the
amount of each contribution. Copies of such receipts shall be kept and
available for inspection upon the request of a police officer.
§ 66-13. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Borough of Waldwick or the
Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this section.
A. To solicit any person at his or her residence before 9:00 a.m. or one
hour after sunset or 9:00 p.m., whichever is earlier.
B. To solicit on Sundays or on holidays recognized by the Borough of
Waldwick.
C. Have exclusive right to any location on public property.
D. Enter or attempt to enter the land of any resident where such resident
has posted or placed a clearly visible sign indicating that such resident
does not wish to be disturbed by peddlers or solicitors.
E. Attempt to solicit any individual or residence listed on the "do not
solicit" list, as described in § 66-15 below.
F. Refuse to leave a private dwelling or property after having been
requested to do so by the owner or occupant thereof.
G. Distribute obscene merchandise or printed material, or printed
material that advocates unlawful conduct.
H. Litter the streets, public places or other property within the
municipality by any merchandise or printed material.
I. Station, place, set up or maintain a cart, wagon, motor vehicle or other
vehicle, or allow it to remain on any sidewalk in a way that would:
(1) Restrict, obstruct, interfere with or impede any pedestrian's rightof-
way;
(2) Restrict, obstruct, interfere with or impede the ingress or egress
from the abutting property;
(3) Increase traffic congestion, cause or increase traffic delay or
hazard;
(4) Cause or create or constitute a danger to life, health or property.
§ 66-11 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 66-14
1:172
§ 66-14. Violations and penalties.
Any act committed while within the scope of the license issued by the Clerk
pursuant to § 66-4 above resulting in the issuance of a municipal citation
or criminal complaint shall constitute a violation of this section. Such a
violation will carry the following penalties:
A. First violation: $500 fine.
B. Second violation: $1,500 fine.
C. Third or subsequent violation: $2,500 fine and possible suspension of
license and/or denial of future license.
§ 66-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-14
1:173

ARTICLE II
"Do Not Solicit" List
§ 66-15. (RESERVED)
§ 66-15.1. Definitions.
All definitions as set out in §§ 66-2 and 66-3 of this section shall apply to this
section.
§ 66-16. Registration of property.
Any person or entity who owns or rents property within the Borough may
register such property to be included on the "do not solicit" list by
registering through the Borough Clerk's office.
§ 66-17. Maintenance of list.
Maintenance of the "do not solicit" list shall be as follows:
§ 66-18. Duties of Borough Clerk's office.
The Borough Clerk's office shall:
A. The "do not solicit" list shall be maintained by the Borough Clerk. The
list shall be available through the official Borough website.
B. The "do not solicit" list shall consist solely of property addresses and
shall include no further identifying information concerning the
ownership of each property.
C. The Tax Assessor shall notify the Borough Clerk of any change in
ownership of property within the Borough. The Borough Clerk shall
remove from the "do not solicit" list any property which has changed
ownership.
D. Other than by sale of property, a property, once listed, may only be
removed from the list by submitting a written, sworn and notarized
request, sent to the Borough Clerk.
A. Post a current copy of the "do not solicit" list on the official Borough
website.
B. Provide a dated copy of the "do not solicit" list to every applicant to
whom a license is issued pursuant to Chapter 66.
C. Provide a copy of the "do not solicit" list to any organization, firm,
partnership, corporation, company, association, church, religious
denomination, society, class, league or other entity or group notifying
the Borough Clerk's office pursuant to § 66-5 of their intention to
engage in commercial soliciting or canvassing. The failure of the
Borough Clerk to provide the "do not solicit" list to such person or the
§ 66-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-18
1:175
§ 66-19. Solicitation prohibited.
It is prohibited for any person to conduct any commercial solicitation at any
property listed on the "do not solicit" list.
§ 66-20. Exclusion to prohibition.
The prohibition in this section shall not apply to the visiting of a property
where the owner or occupant of such property has directly or implicitly
indicated to the solicitor or canvasser, through prior interaction, that his/
her visit would be welcomed. The burden of persuasion shall be on the
person claiming this exemption.
failure of such person to have received a copy of the "do not solicit" list
from the Borough Clerk shall not provide a defense to the requirement
of having in his/her possession a copy of the updated "do not solicit" list
as required by § 66-10N.
§ 66-18 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 66-20
1:176
Chapter 67
PESTICIDES AND FERTILIZERS
§ 66-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-20
1:177

ARTICLE I
Pesticides
§ 67-1. Definitions.
ACTIVE INGREDIENT(S) — Any ingredient(s) which will prevent, destroy,
repel, control or mitigate pests or which will act as a plant and/or fungi
regulator, defoliant or desiccant.
AGRICULTURAL COMMODITY — Any plant or part thereof or animal or
animal product produced by a person, including but not limited to farmers,
ranchers, vineyardists, plant propagators, Christmas tree growers,
aquaculturists, floriculturists, orchadists, foresters or other comparable
persons, primarily for sale.
BRAND or BRAND NAME or TRADE NAME — The characteristic
designation by words, symbols, name, number or trademark of a specific
particular pesticide or formulation thereof under which the pesticide is
distributed, sold, offered for sale, handled, stored, used or transported in
the State of New Jersey.
CUSTOMER — Any person who hires a commercial pesticide applicator
business to perform an ornamental, turf or structural pest control
application utilizing hydraulic spraying equipment, airblast sprayers or
aerial application equipment on property owned or controlled by him. For
the purposes of this definition, the term "customer" shall include any person
who makes such application on property owned or controlled by him.
GROUND LEVEL SPRAYING — Spraying done from a height less than two
feet above the ground and in a downward direction.
NON-TARGET SITE — Any location that is not a target site.
ORNAMENTAL — Trees, shrubs and other plantings in and around
habitations generally, but not necessarily located in urban and suburban
areas, including residences, parks, streets, retail outlets, industrial and
institutional buildings.
PERSON — Includes corporations, companies, associations, societies, firms,
partnerships and joint-stock companies, as well as individuals, and shall
also include all political subdivisions of this state or any agencies or
instrumentalities thereof.
PEST — Any insect, rodent, nematode, fungus, weed or any other form
of terrestrial or aquatic plant or animal life or virus, bacteria or other
microorganism (except viruses, bacteria or other microorganisms on or
in living human beings or animals) which is injurious to health or the
environment.
PESTICIDE — Includes any substance or mixture of substances labeled,
designed or intended for use in preventing, destroying, repelling or
mitigating any pest or any substance or mixture of substances labeled,
designed or intended for use as a defoliant, desiccant or plant regulator,
provided that the term "pesticide" shall not include any substance or
mixture of substances which the EPA does not consider to be a pesticide.
§ 67-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-1
1:179
PESTICIDE APPLICATOR — Any person who uses, applies, supervises or
holds himself out for hire to apply pesticides in the State of New Jersey.
STRUCTURE — Buildings, foundations, sheds and other man-made
structures that may be treated with pesticides for the prevention, control
and/or destruction of pests.
SUBTERRANEAN APPLICATION — The placement of any pesticide:
TARGET SITE — A specific location, including but not limited to any crop,
commodity, object, delineated field or area or structure or part thereof, that
is intended to be treated by a pesticide so that any pests therein or thereon
are controlled. This term does not include any similar site which was not a
part of the original agreement between the contracting parties even if such
site is included on the label or labeling of the pesticide.
USE — Any act of handling or release of a pesticide or exposure of man,
animal, plant or property or the environment to a pesticide through the acts
which include but are not limited to:
§ 67-2. Hours of application.
§ 67-3. Pesticide use and/or application.
A. Under or adjacent to structures by trenching; or
Under slabs or under or within six inches of foundation walls by
rodding; or
B.
C. Within the interior voids of foundation walls.
Applying a pesticide, including mixing and loading and any required
supervisory action in or near the area of application.
A.
B. Handling, transporting or storing a pesticide or pesticide container.
Disposal actions for a pesticide and/or containers or equipment
associated with the pesticides.
C.
A. Application of pesticides shall not be permitted between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 9:00 p.m. and 8:30 a.m. on
Saturdays. Pesticide application is prohibited on Sundays.
A. No person shall mix, apply or use a pesticide unless a readable copy of
the registered label for the pesticide which is being mixed or applied is
available at the application or mixing site.
B. No person shall make an application of pesticide to a target site in such
a manner or under such conditions that drift or other movement of the
pesticide unreasonably infringes on a non-target site.
C. No person shall directly apply any pesticide to a non-target site or apply
pesticides in a manner that causes damage to non-target sites.
§ 67-1 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 67-3
1:180
§ 67-4. Safety equipment.
§ 67-5. Notification of ornamental applications.
D. No person shall add water to any pesticide handling, storage or
application equipment via a hose, pump or other equipment unless such
hose, pump or other equipment is fitted with an effective valve or device
to prevent backflow of pesticides or liquids containing pesticides in
water supply systems, streams, lakes, other sources of water or other
areas, except that such backflow devices or valves are not required
when the hose, pump or other equipment is not allowed to contact or
fall below the level of the liquid in the handling, storage or application
equipment to which water is being added and no other possible means
of establishing a back siphon or backflow exists.
A. All persons having employees who use, apply, transport or otherwise
handle any pesticide shall make available to such employees any
necessary and appropriate safety equipment in good working order and
shall provide training to such employees in the proper operation of such
safety equipment.
A. No person shall cause or allow an outdoor ornamental pest control
application utilizing hydraulic spraying equipment, airblast sprayers or
aerial application equipment on property owned or controlled by them
unless the following procedures have been implemented:
(1) The customer shall provide written notice at least 48 hours to the
proposed application, to all residents and tenants of property
adjacent to or contiguous with the customer's property, including
property across a street, such notice to contain the following
information:
[a] A general statement of the purpose of the notification.
[b] The proposed application date(s) and contingency date(s).
[c] The location of the application (address and Block & Lot
Number).
[d] The name, address, phone number and registration number of
the pesticide applicator associated with the application.
[e] The brand name and active ingredient(s) of the pesticide(s) to
be used.
[f] The New Jersey Poison Information and Education System
telephone number for emergencies and the New Jersey
Department of Health for routine health questions.
[g] A statement advising residents to remove toys, food, cooking
equipment and clothing from the area and to protect all pets
and persons.
§ 67-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-5
1:181
(2) The customer shall keep a record or file of the notice provided for
up to six months from the pesticide application date.
(3) The customer shall post signs around the treated property at the
start of the application and for at least 48 hours following the
application or longer if required according to re-entry precautions
given on the pesticide label. The signs shall be provided by the
commercial pesticide applicator and conform to the following
requirements:
[a] The signs shall bear the words "Warning: Pesticide Treated
Area" or their equivalent printed in 1/2 inch letters or greater.
[b] The signs shall also contain a minimum two-inch diameter
circular illustration, in standard international signage,
depicting an adult and a child walking a dog on a leash. The
illustration shall depict by means of a diagonal line across the
circle that this action is prohibited.
[c] The signs shall be placed in such a manner that they are clearly
legible from all streets fronting the treated property and along
any borders of the treated property not bounded by fences,
shrubbery, structures or other obstacles of passage.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Any pesticide application which is made for the purpose of
producing an agricultural commodity or to any person required to
supply advance notification pursuant to the provisions of N.J.A.C.
7:30-10.9, as amended and/or supplemented.
(2) Any pesticide application made using pesticide products available
from retail stores selling home and garden products and which are
dispensed from containers no greater than two pounds or one quart
in capacity. (Note: Application of products purchased at a retail
store and then diluted to a quantity greater than two pounds or one
quart, such as by mixing with water in a larger container or
connecting to a garden hose, are subject to the notification
requirements of this section)
(3) Any pesticide application made inside a structure.
(4) Any pesticide application involving application of granular
pesticides or pesticide/fertilizer combinations to lawns or gardens
or to ground level spraying of lawns or gardens, providing:
[a] Such applications are done in accordance with manufacturer'
instructions.
[b] The pesticide application is done in a manner that prevents
spreading of the pesticide to the air or areas other than the
target lawn or garden.
§ 67-5 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 67-5
1:182
[c] That signs are posted around the property as described in
Section 13(5) of this chapter.
(5) Any pesticide application involving subterranean applications or
injection into trees, shrubs or structures.
§ 67-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-5
1:183

ARTICLE II
Fertilizers
§ 67-6. Purpose.
An ordinance to regulate the outdoor application of fertilizer so as to reduce
the overall amount of excess nutrients entering waterways, thereby helping
to protect and improve surface water quality. This ordinance does not apply
to fertilizer application on commercial farms.
§ 67-7. Basis and background.
Elevated levels of nutrients, particularly phosphorus, in surface
waterbodies can result in excessive and accelerated growth of algae and
aquatic plants (eutrophication). Excessive plant growth can result in diurnal
variations and extremes in dissolved oxygen and pH, which, in turn, can be
detrimental to aquatic life. As algae and plant materials die off, the decay
process creates a further demand on dissolved oxygen levels. The presence
of excessive plant matter can also restrict use of the affected water for
recreation and water supply.
While healthy vegetated areas are protective of water quality by stabilizing
soil and filtering precipitation, when fertilizers are applied to the land
surface improperly or in excess of the needs of target vegetation, nutrients
can be transported by means stormwater to nearby waterways, contributing
to the problematic growth of excessive aquatic vegetation. Most soils in
New Jersey contain sufficient amounts of phosphorus to support adequate
root growth for established turf. Over time, it is necessary to replenish
available phosphorus, but generally not at the levels commonly applied.
Other target vegetation, such as vegetable gardens and agricultural/
horticultural plantings, will have a greater need for phosphorus application,
as will the repair or establishment of new lawns or cover vegetation. A
soils test and fertilizer application recommendation geared to the soil and
planting type is the best means to determine the amount of nutrients to
apply. Timing and placement of fertilizer application is also critical to avoid
transport of nutrients to waterways through stormwater runoff. Fertilizer
applied immediately prior to a runoff-producing rainfall, outside the
growing season or to impervious surfaces is most likely to be carried
away by means of runoff without accomplishing the desired objective of
supporting target vegetation growth. Therefore, the management of the
type, amount and techniques for fertilizer application is necessary as one
tool to protect water resources.
This ordinance does not apply to application of fertilizer on commercial
farms, but improper application of fertilizer on farms would be problematic
as well. Stewardship on the part of commercial farmers is needed to address
this potential source of excess nutrient load to waterbodies. Commercial
farmers are expected to implement best management practices in
accordance with conservation management plans or resource conservation
§ 67-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-7
1:185
plans developed for the farm by the Natural Resource Conservation Service
and approved by the Soil Conservation District Board.
§ 67-8. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this Ordinance clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
BUFFER — The land area, 25 feet in width, adjacent to any waterbody.
COMMERCIAL FARM — A farm management unit producing agricultural or
horticultural products worth $2,500 or more annually.
FERTILIZER — Means a fertilizer material, mixed fertilizer or any other
substance containing one or more recognized plant nutrients, which is used
for its plant nutrient content, which is designed for use or claimed to have
value in promoting plant growth, and which is sold, offered for sale, or
intended for sale.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. This term shall
be used to include any highway, street, sidewalk, parking lot, driveway, or
other material that prevents infiltration of water into the soil.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PHOSPHORUS FERTILIZER — Any fertilizer that contains phosphorus,
expressed as P2O5, with a guaranteed analysis of greater than zero; except
that it shall not be considered to include animal (including human) or
vegetable manures, agricultural liming materials, or wood ashes that have
not been amended to increase their nutrient content.
SOILS TEST — A technical analysis of soil conducted by an accredited
soil testing laboratory following the protocol for such a test established by
Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension.
WATERBODY — A surface water feature, such as a lake, river, stream,
creek, pond, lagoon, bay or estuary.
§ 67-9. Prohibited conduct.
No person may do any of the following:
a) Apply fertilizer when a runoff producing rainfall is occurring or
predicted and/or when soils are saturated and a potential for fertilizer
movement off-site exists.
§ 67-7 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 67-9
1:186
§ 67-10. Phosphorus fertilizer application.
No person may do the following:
§ 67-11. Enforcement, violations and penalties.
§ 67-12. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this Ordinance is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this Ordinance to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this Ordinance.
b) Apply fertilizer to an impervious surface. Fertilizer inadvertently
applied to an impervious surface must be swept or blown back into the
target surface or returned to either its original or another appropriate
container for reuse.
c) Apply fertilizer within the buffer of any waterbody.
d) Apply fertilizer more than 15 days prior to the start of or at any time
after the end of the recognized growing season of Zones 5b and 6a
(northwestern New Jersey) - March 15 to October 31.
a) Apply phosphorus fertilizer in outdoor areas except as demonstrated to
be needed for the specific soils and target vegetation in accordance
with a soils test and the associated annual fertilizer recommendation
issued by Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension.
b) Exceptions
1. Application of phosphorus fertilizer needed for:
a. Establishing vegetation for the first time, such as after land
disturbance, provided the application is in accordance with the
requirements established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and implementing rules,
b. Re-established or repairing a turf area.
2. Application of phosphorus fertilizer that delivers liquid or granular
fertilizer under the soils surface, directly to the feeder roots.
3. Application of phosphorus fertilizer to residential container
plantings, flowerbeds, or vegetable gardens.
a. The Waldwick Police Department and the Property Maintenance Official
shall be the enforcing agents of these provisions.
b. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punished in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 1:14.1.
§ 67-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-13
1:187
§ 67-13. When effective.
a. This ordinance shall take effect after publication as provided by law.
§ 67-13 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 67-13
1:188
Chapter 68
(RESERVED)
Chapter 69
PUBLICATIONS, DISTRIBUTION OF
§ 69-1. Littering public places.
No person shall strew about or cause to be strewn about any street or public
place, any newspaper, paper, periodical, book, magazine, circular, card or
pamphlet.
§ 69-2. Licenses required for distributing advertising matter; fee.
See Chapter 48:69-2.
§ 69-3. Attaching advertising matter to trees or structures.
No person shall attach or cause to be attached to any tree, telegraph
pole, sign, billboard, post or fence, any circular, card or pamphlet designed
primarily for advertising sales of merchandise, goods or wares.
§ 69-4. Violations and penalties.
See Chapter 1:14.1.
§ 69-5. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect when passed and published as required by
law.
Chapter 70
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
§ 67-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-5
1:189

ARTICLE I
Taxicabs
§ 70-1. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
TAXICAB — Includes any automobile or motor car, commonly called "taxi"
engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire which is held out,
announced or advertised to operate or run, or which is operated or run
over any of the streets of the Borough of Waldwick, and particularly accepts
and discharges such persons as may offer themselves for transportation
from points or places to points or places within or without the Borough of
Waldwick.
§ 70-2. Required consent.
Any taxicab company whose principal place of business is in the Borough of
Waldwick shall be required to obtain the consent of the Mayor and Council
in order to operate any taxicab along any street in the Borough of Waldwick.
§ 70-3. Insurance required.
A. No such consent shall become effective until the owner of the taxicab
shall have filed with the Clerk of the Borough of Waldwick an insurance
policy of a company duly licensed to transact business under the
insurance laws of the State of New Jersey, conditioned for the payment
of a sum not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000) to satisfy all
claims for damages, by reason of bodily injury to or the death of any one
(1) person, resulting from an accident, and a sum of not less than
twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) to satisfy all claims for damages, by
reason of the bodily injuries to or the death of all persons, on account of
any such accident, by reason of the ownership, operation, maintenance
or use of such taxicab upon any public street; and conditioned for the
payment of a sum not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000) to satisfy
any claim for damages to property of any one (1) person resulting from
an accident, and a sum not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000) to
satisfy all claims for damages to property of all persons on account of
any such accident, by reason of the ownership, operation, maintenance
or use of such taxicab upon any public street.
B. The consent shall become effective and operation hereunder shall be
permitted only so long as the insurance policy shall remain in force to
the full and collectible amounts as aforesaid.
C. The insurance policy shall provide for the payment of any final
judgment use of the taxicab, or any fault in respect thereto, and shall be
for the benefit of every person suffering loss, damage or injury as
aforesaid.
§ 70-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-4
1:191
§ 70-4. Blanket insurance or bond.
If such owner operates more than one (1) taxicab, he may file with the Clerk
at the Borough Hall of Waldwick, in lieu of the policy required by section
70-3 of this Article, a bond or insurance policy of a company duly licensed to
transact business under the insurance laws of New Jersey, in the sum of fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000), which shall be a blanket insurance covering
all cabs operated by such owner, which shall provide for the payment of
any final judgment recovered by any person or account of the ownership,
maintenance and use of any such taxicab or any fault in respect thereto, and
shall be for the benefit of every person suffering loss, damage or injury as
aforesaid.
§ 70-5. Power of attorney.
The owner of the taxicab shall execute and deliver to the Clerk of the
Borough of Waldwick concurrently with the filing of an insurance policy or
insurance bond a power of attorney, whereby the owner shall appoint the
Chief Fiscal Officer of the Borough of Waldwick, his true and lawful attorney
for the purposes of acknowledging service of any process out of a court
of competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured by virtue of the
indemnity granted under the insurance policy or bond filed.
§ 70-6. Certificate of compliance.
The Clerk of the Borough of Waldwick, upon receipt of the required
insurance policy or bond and payment of the fee required by this Article,
shall issue a certificate in duplicate showing that the owner of the taxicab
has complied with the terms and provisions of this Article. The certificate
shall recite the name of the insurance company, the number and date
of expiration of the policy or bond, a description of the taxicab insured
hereunder and the registration number of the same. The duplicate
certificate shall be filed with the Department of Motor Vehicles before any
such car is licensed as a taxicab. The original certificate shall be posted in
a conspicuous place within the taxicab.
§ 70-7. Operation in multiple municipalities.
Where a taxicab operates in more than one (1) municipality, the insurance
policy or bond required by section 70-3 and 70-4 of this Article shall be
filed with the Borough Clerk of the municipality in which the owner has his
principal place of business.
§ 70-8. Revocation of consent.
A consent granted under this Article may be revoked by the Mayor and
Council after notice and hearing, whenever it shall appear that the person
to whom the consent was granted has failed to furnish or keep in force the
insurance policy or bond and power of attorney required by this Article, or
to comply with any terms or conditions imposed by the Mayor and Council,
or any law of the State of New Jersey.
§ 70-4 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 70-9
1:192
§ 70-9. Fee.
See Chapter 48:70-9.
§ 70-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-9
1:193

ARTICLE II
Autocabs
§ 70-10. Definitions. [Amended 6-11-02 by Ord. No. 12-02]
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
AUTOCAB — Means a limousine.
LIMOUSINE — Means and includes any automobile or motor car, used
in the business of carrying passengers for hire, provides prearranged
passenger transportation at a premium fare on a dedicated, nonscheduled,
charter basis that is not conducted on a regular route and with a seating
capacity in no event of more than 14 passengers, not including the driver,
provided, that such a vehicle shall not have a seating capacity in excess of
four passengers, not including the driver, beyond the maximum passenger
seating capacity of the vehicle, not including the driver, at the time of
manufacture. Nothing in this Article contained shall be construed to include
taxicabs, hotel buses, or buses employed solely in transporting school
children or teachers or autobuses, which are subject to the jurisdiction
of the Department of Transportation, or interstate autobuses required by
federal or State law or regulations of the Department of Transportation to
carry insurance against loss from liability imposed by law on account of
bodily injury or death.
LIMOUSINE OR LIVERY SERVICE — Means and includes the business of
carrying passengers for hire by limousines.
PERSON — Means and includes any individual, copartnership, association,
corporation or joint stock company their lessees, trustees or receivers
appointed by any court whatsoever.
STREET — Means and includes any street, avenue, park, parkway, highway
or other public place.
§ 70-11. Required consent.
Any autocab company whose principal place of business is in the Borough
of Waldwick shall be required to obtain the consent of the Mayor and
Council in order to operate any autocab along any street in the Borough of
Waldwick.
§ 70-12. Insurance required. [Amended 6-11-02 by Ord. No. 12-02]
A. No limousine shall be operated wholly or partly along any street in the
Borough of Waldwick until the owner of the limousine shall have filed,
with the Borough Clerk of Waldwick, an insurance policy of a company
duly licensed to transact business under the insurance laws of the State
of New Jersey, in the sum of one million five hundred thousand dollars
($1,500,000) against loss by reason of the liability imposed by law upon
every limousine owner, for damages on account of bodily injury or death
suffered by any person as the result of an accident occurring by reason
§ 70-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-12
1:195
§ 70-13. Power of attorney. [Amended 6-11-02 by Ord. No. 12-02]
The owner of the limousine shall execute and deliver to the Division of
Motor Vehicles concurrently with the filing of a policy, referred to in 70:13,
a power of attorney, wherein and whereby the owner shall appoint the
Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles his true and lawful attorney for
the purpose of acknowledging service of any process out of a court of
competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured by virtue of the
indemnity granted under the insurance policy filed.
§ 70-14. Certificate of compliance. [Amended 6-11-02 by Ord. No.
12-02]
of the ownership, maintenance or use of the limousine upon any public
street. Such operation shall be permitted as long as the insurance
policy shall remain in force to the full and collectible amount of
$1,500,000.
B. The insurance policy shall provide for the payment of any final
judgment recovered by any person on account of the ownership,
maintenance and use of such limousine or any fault in respect thereto,
and shall be for the benefit of every person suffering loss, damage, or
injury as aforesaid.
A. The Clerk of the Borough of Waldwick, upon the filing of the required
insurance policy and the payment of a fee which shall not exceed fifty
dollars ($50.), shall issue a in duplicate a license to operate showing
that the owner of the limousine has complied with the terms and
provisions of this Article.
B. The license shall recite the name of the insurance company, the number
and date of expiration of the policy, a description of every limousine
insured hereunder and the registration number of the same.
C. The duplicate license shall be filed with the Division of Motor Vehicles
before any such car is registered as a limousine.
D. The original license shall be retained within the limousine and shall be
available for inspection by any police officer in the State. In lieu of the
recital of insurance information required on the license pursuant to this
section, the owner of a limousine may affix to the original license
retained within the limousine a notarized letter from an insurance
company containing the same insurance coverage, and which shall also
be available for inspection by any police officer in the State. A copy of
the notarized letter shall constitute proof to the Director of Motor
Vehicles, that the applicant has complied with the insurance provisions
of this section.
§ 70-12 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 70-15
1:196
§ 70-15. Operation in multiple municipalities. [Amended 6-11-02 by
Ord. No. 12-02]
Where a limousine service operates in more than one (1) municipality, the
insurance policy required by Chapter 70-12 of this Article shall be filed with
the Clerk of the municipality in which the owner has his principal place of
business.
§ 70-16. Penalty and revocation of consent. [Amended 6-11-02 by
Ord. No. 12-02]
§ 70-17. Fee.
See Chapter 48:70-17.
A. No person shall operate a limousine service in any street in this State
without a license to operate issued by a municipality in which the owner
has his principal place of business and without otherwise complying
with the provisions of this article.
B. A consent granted under this Article may be revoked by the Mayor and
Council after notice and hearing, whenever it shall appear that the
person to whom the consent was granted has failed to furnish or keep in
force the insurance policy and power of attorney required by this
Article, or to comply with any terms or conditions imposed by the Mayor
and Council or any law of the State of New Jersey.
§ 70-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-17
1:197
Chapter 71
RECYCLING
§ 71-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Source separated
nonputrescible recyclable material generated from the construction,
alteration, repair, maintenance and/or demolition of structures within the
Borough of Waldwick. This material shall include concrete, bricks, block,
ferrous and nonferrous scrap, asphalt, asphalt shingles, recyclable wood
scrap, and any and all other material generated from the construction,
alteration, repair, maintenance and/or demolition of a structure or
structures within the Borough of Waldwick.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Structural material shaped in parallel furrows and
ridges for rigidity, used to make packing and shipping containers.
ELECTRONICS — All computers, monitors, laptops, tablets, portable
computers, desktop printers, desktop fax machines and televisions as
required and periodically amended by state regulations.[Added 8-27-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-22]
FERROUS SCRAP — All metal scrap containing steel and or cast
iron.[Added 9-14-93 by Ord. No. 19-93]
FOOD AND BEVERAGE CONTAINERS — All bimetal cans or cans consisting
entirely of aluminum used in the storage of food and beverages. All bottles
and jars made entirely of glass, or plastic and used in the storage of food
and beverages.[Amended 9-24-91 by Ord. No. 10-91]
HIGH GRADE OFFICE PAPER — White typing and ledger paper, white note
pad paper, copier paper, carbonless computer printout paper, manila tab
cards and file folders.
MIXED PAPER — Source separated mixture of all types of paper including,
but not limited to, corrugated, high grade paper, newspaper, magazines,
telephone directories, wrapping paper, box board, books, grocery bags, and
junk mail[Added 9-14-93 by Ord. No. 19-93]
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Food and beverage containers, used
newspaper and yard waste, corrugated paper, high grade office paper, all as
defined herein.
REGULATIONS — Includes such rules, implementation dates, schedules of
times and such other requirements promulgated by the Mayor and Council
as may be necessary to carry out the purposes and objectives of this
chapter.
SOLID WASTE — Includes all garbage and rubbish normally placed at the
curb by the residents, business occupants and public institutions of the
Borough of Waldwick for regular municipal collection.
§ 70-17 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 71-1
1:198
USED NEWSPAPER — Newspaper and magazine paper of the type
commonly referred to as "newsprint" and distributed at stated intervals,
usually daily or weekly, having printed thereon news and opinions and
containing advertisements and other matters of public interest. Expressly
excluded, however, are all other paper products of any nature whatsoever.
WHITE GOODS — Used appliances such as refrigerators, washers, dryers,
and stoves.[Added 9-14-93 by Ord. No. 19-93]
YARD WASTE — Includes leaves and brush, but specifically excluded are
any limbs, branches or twigs.
§ 71-2. Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
The Mayor and Council shall appoint a Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
This individual shall have sufficient educational background, employment
experience and training to enable him/her to perform his/her duties in such
a manner as to ensure the Borough's compliance with the requirements of
N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99 et seq., the provisions of the county recycling plan and the
municipal recycling ordinance passed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99 et seq.
The Coordinator shall maintain and report recycling tonnage, as required
by N.J.S.A. 13:1E99.16e. The report shall contain the same information as
is required for an application for a Recycling Tonnage Grant, codified at
N.J.A.C. 7:26-15.5. The Coordinator shall be responsible for all aspects of
the municipal recycling program.
§ 71-3. Separation required. [Amended 9-14-93 by Ord. No. 19-93]
All persons, except those physically disabled who are owners, lessees or
occupants of residences and condominiums, including garden apartments,
shall separate the following items from all other solid waste produced:
a) Used newspapers.
b) Aluminum, bimetal, and glass food and beverage containers.
c) Ferrous scrap.
d) White goods.
e) Yard waste.
f) Corrugated cardboard.
These items shall be separately bundled or placed in containers for
recycling in strict conformity with this chapter and all applicable
regulations. It is specifically prohibited for any such person to dispose
of any recyclable material(s) in the same container as solid waste or
other types of recycled material(s).
g) Electronics. [Added 8-27-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-22]
§ 71-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-4
1:199
§ 71-4. Newspapers.
Used newspapers shall be separated from other solid waste and shall be
tied or otherwise secured in bundles not to exceed 30 pounds in weight or
12 inches in height and shall not be contained in plastic bags. Such bundles
shall be placed at curbside for pickup in accordance with the schedule of
collection as promulgated from time to time by the Borough Council.
§ 71-5. Aluminum, bimetal, corrugated cardboard, mixed paper and
glass food and beverages containers. [Ord. No. 9-2017]
Aluminum, bimetal, corrugated cardboard, mixed paper and glass food and
beverage containers shall be separated from other solid waste and shall be
recycled by depositing same at designated Borough recycling centers and/
or by placing said recyclables at curbside for pick-up and collection by the
Borough or its authorized agent, provided that such a program is available.
All recycling of aluminum, bimetal, corrugated cardboard, mixed paper and
glass food and beverage containers shall be carried out in strict conformity
with the following regulations:
§ 71-6. Yard waste.
Yard waste shall be separated from other solid waste and shall be recycled
in any of the following manners:
A. Recyclable containers placed at curbside for collection by the Borough
of Waldwick or its authorized agent shall be placed in permanent, nondisposable
and reusable receptacles.
B. Cardboard cannot be placed in the same container as the one used for
aluminum, bimetal and glass food and beverage containers. Containers
that contain both cardboard and other recyclables will not be picked
up.
A. By composting on the property of the owner, occupant or lessee;
B. By depositing the same at designated Borough recycling centers; and/
or
C. By placing said yard waste at curbside for pickup, collection and
recycling by the Borough or its authorized agent. Beginning in the
spring, according to a route schedule, all brush/branch material along
with grass clippings will be collected at the same time. Leaves can be
mixed with grass and must be put out the night before pickup in a trash
can, plastic bag, or recyclable lawn bags. All brush and branches must
be put in garbage cans placed curbside the night before pick up. A
maximum of four containers/ garbage cans will be picked up per
collection day. The Borough will not pick up brush and branch material
left on the ground. Residents will be responsible to remove it from the
curb and put into containers for collection the following week.
§ 71-4 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 71-6
1:200
§ 71-7. Collection by authorized collectors only.
§ 71-8. Additional methods of disposal.
While the Borough of Waldwick endorses and authorizes the use of its
recycling facility for the depositing of recyclable materials, any owner,
occupant or lessee of the Borough may deposit recyclable materials at
any other authorized recycling center which will accept such materials
or may donate or sell recyclable materials to any person, partnership or
corporation, whether operating for profit or not for profit. Said person,
partnership or corporation may not, however, under any circumstances pick
up said recyclable materials from the curbside or from designated Borough
recycling centers.
§ 71-8.1. Commercial, industrial recycling. [Amended 9-14-93 by
Ord. No. 19-93]
All owners of commercial or industrial properties in the Borough are hereby
required, or cause their tenant and lessee, to recycle the following items:
D. Beginning in the fall, sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing
leaves at the curb or along the street is only allowed seven days prior to
the date scheduled and announced for in the leaf collection schedule,
and shall not be placed closer than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet.
Garbage, branches, shrubs or lawn debris of any sort will not be picked
up as part of the leaf program. Placement of such yard waste and leaves
at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any other manner
is a violation of this ordinance. If such placement of yard waste occurs,
the party responsible for placement of the yard waste must remove the
yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of
this ordinance. The resident may only put leaves in paper lawn bags to
be collected by the Borough during the leaf bag collection program in
addition to participating in the leaf collection program at the curb.
A. From the time of placement at the curb for pickup, collection and
recycling, recyclables shall be and become the property of the Borough
of Waldwick or its authorized agent. It shall be a violation of this
chapter for any person unauthorized by the Borough of Waldwick to
collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such
recyclables.
B. Recyclable materials shall not be included with solid waste for pickup at
curbside by the scavenger hired by the Borough of Waldwick to pick up
solid waste.
C. Any and such collection in violation hereof shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
a) Used newspaper.
b) Aluminum, bimetal, and glass food and beverage containers.
§ 71-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-8.1
1:201
§ 71-9. Regulations.
§ 71-10. Enforcement. [Amended 6-6-90 by Ord. No. 8-90]
The Department of Police, Department of Health and Personnel, Municipal
Recycling Coordinator, and the employees of the Recycling Department of
the Borough of Waldwick are hereby authorized and directed to enforce this
chapter.
§ 71-11. Exemption.
Persons occupying commercial and institutional premises may apply to the
Mayor and Council for exemption from the municipal source separation
requirements.
c) High grade office paper.
d) Corrugated cardboard.
e) Ferrous scrap.
f) White goods.
g) Mixed paper.
h) Construction and demolition debris.
i) Used motor oil.
These property owners and/or their tenants and lessee shall be
required to contract with a private recycler or utilize a Borough
recycling depot if the item is accepted at said depot. Copies of the
contract shall be provided to the Borough upon demand. All recycling
efforts shall be reported annually to the Recycling Coordinator. The
report shall state what material is being recycled, the weight of the
material, and the market used. The report shall be submitted within 30
days of the close of the calendar year.
j) Electronics. [Added 8-27-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-22]
A. The Mayor and Council is hereby authorized to establish and
promulgate additional regulations as to proper recycling procedures
and as to the manner, days and times for the collection of recyclable
materials in accordance with the terms hereof.
B. Notification of pickup. Under emergency conditions the time and place
for pickup as otherwise prescribed by this chapter may be varied by
resolution of the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Waldwick with
notice to the residents given in the official newspaper of the Borough of
Waldwick or, where necessary, by radio, television or any other means
of communication.
§ 71-8.1 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 71-11
1:202
Such persons must obtain the services of a materials recovery facility to
separate from the waste generated at the premises, all recyclable materials
designated in the district recycling plan found in solid waste generated at
the generator's premises. Provision of these services shall be documented
in writing through contract or correspondence with the materials recovery
facility providing the service and the documentation shall be submitted to
the municipal recycling coordinator.
The generator shall annually provide written documentation to the
municipality of the total number of tons recycled. Alternately, the generator
may arrange, in writing, for the provision of this documentation directly
from the materials recovery facility to the municipality.
The generator shall maintain the original letter of exemption or a copy
on the premises for referral by authorized enforcement officers or the
municipal recycling coordinator.
§ 71-12. Effective date for mandatory recycling.
Effective immediately, upon adoption and publication as required by State
law.
§ 71-13. Violations and penalties.
See Chapter 1:14-1.
§ 71-14. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect on passage and publication as required by
law.
Chapter 72
(RESERVED)
Chapter 73
RIPARIAN ZONES
§ 73-1. Definitions.
ACID PRODUCING SOILS — Means soils that contain geologic deposits of
iron sulfide minerals (pyrite and marcasite) which, when exposed to oxygen
from the air or from surface waters, oxidize to produce sulfuric acid. Acid
producing soils, upon excavation, generally have a pH of 4.0 or lower.
After exposure to oxygen, these soils generally have a pH of 3.0 or lower.
Information regarding the location of acid producing soils in New Jersey can
be obtained from local Soil Conservation District offices.
APPLICANT — Means a person, corporation, government body or other
legal entity applying to the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or the
§ 71-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-1
1:203
Construction Office proposing to engage in an activity that is regulated by
the provisions of this ordinance, and that would be located in whole or in
part within a regulated Riparian Zone.
CATEGORY ONE WATERS or C1 WATERS — Shall have the meaning
ascribed to this term by the Surface Water Quality Standards, N.J.A.C.
7:9B, for purposes of implementing the antidegradation policies set forth in
those standards, for protection from measurable changes in water quality
characteristics because of their clarity, color, scenic setting, and other
characteristics of aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance,
exceptional recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
or exceptional fisheries resources.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — Means a surface water body with definite bed
and banks in which there is not a permanent flow of water and shown
on the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic
Information System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a Special
Water Resource Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater
Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS
quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys.
LAKE, POND, or RESERVOIR — Means any surface water body shown
on the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic
Information System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a Special
Water Resource Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater
Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS
quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys; that is an impoundment,
whether naturally occurring or created in whole or in part by the building
of structures for the retention of surface water. This excludes sedimentation
control and stormwater retention/detention basins and ponds designed for
treatment of wastewater.
PERENNIAL STREAM — Means a surface water body that flows
continuously throughout the year in most years and shown on the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic Information
System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a Special Water
Resource Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater
Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS
quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys.
RIPARIAN ZONE — Means the land and vegetation within and directly
adjacent to all surface water bodies including, but not limited to lakes,
ponds, reservoirs, perennial and intermittent streams, up to and including
their point of origin, such as seeps and springs, as shown on the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection's GIS hydrography coverages or,
in the case of a Special Water Resource Protection Area (SWRPA) pursuant
to the Stormwater Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as
shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys. There is
no riparian zone along the Atlantic Ocean nor along any man-made lagoon
or oceanfront barrier island, spit or peninsula.
SPECIAL WATER RESOURCE PROTECTION AREA or SWRPA — Means a
300 foot area provided on each side of a surface water body designated as a
§ 73-1 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 73-1
1:204
C1 water or tributary to a C1 water that is a perennial stream, intermittent
stream, lake, pond, or reservoir, as defined herein and shown on the USGS
quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys within the associated HUC
14 drainage, pursuant to the Stormwater Management rules at N.J.A.C.
7:8-5.5(h).
SURFACE WATER BODY(IES) — Means any perennial stream, intermittent
stream, lake, pond, or reservoir, as defined herein. In addition, any
regulated water under the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules at N.J.A.C.
7:13-2.2, or State open waters identified in a Letter of Interpretation issued
under the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:7A-3 by
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Division of Land
Use Regulation shall also be considered surface water bodies.
THREATENED OR ENDANGERED SPECIES — Means a species identified
pursuant to the Endangered and Nongame Species Conservation Act,
N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1 et seq., the Endangered Species Act of 1973, 16 U.S.C.
§§ 1531 et seq. or the Endangered Plant Species List, N.J.A.C. 7:5C-5.1, and
any subsequent amendments thereto.
TROUT MAINTENANCE WATER — Means a section of water designated
as trout maintenance in the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection's Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
TROUT PRODUCTION WATER — Means a section of water identified as
trout production in the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection's Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
§ 73-2. Intent and authority.
It is the intent of this Article to provide compliance with N.J.A.C.
7:15-5.25(g)3 which requires municipalities to adopt an ordinance that
prevents new disturbance for projects or activities in riparian zones.
Authority is provided or limited as follows:
A. Compliance with the riparian zone requirements of this Article does not
constitute compliance with the riparian zone or buffer requirements
imposed under any other Federal, State or local statute, regulation or
ordinance.
B. Use powers given to the Borough of Waldwick under the provisions of
the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.,
which authorizes each municipality to plan and regulate land use in
order to protect public health, safety, and welfare through the
protection and maintenance of native vegetation in riparian areas. The
Borough of Waldwick is also empowered to adopt and implement this
ordinance under provisions provided by the following legislative
authorities of the State of New Jersey:
1. Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.
2. Water Quality Planning Act, N.J.S.A. 58:11A-1 et seq.
§ 73-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-2
1:205
§ 73-3. Riparian zone protection.
Riparian zones adjacent to all surface water bodies as described below in
this paragraph shall be protected from avoidable disturbance:
3. Spill Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23 et seq.
4. Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
5. Flood Hazard Area Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq.
A. The riparian zone shall be 300 feet wide along both sides of any
Category One water (C1 water), and all upstream tributaries situated
within the same HUC 14 watershed.
B. The riparian zone shall be 150 feet wide along both sides of the
following waters not identified in A above:
(1) Any trout production water and all upstream waters (including
tributaries);
(2) Any trout maintenance water and all upstream waters (including
tributaries) within one linear mile as measured along the length of
the regulated water;
(3) Any segment of a water flowing through an area that contains
documented habitat for a threatened or endangered species of
plant or animal, which is critically dependent on the regulated
water for survival, and all upstream waters (including tributaries)
within one linear mile as measured along the length of the
regulated water; and
(4) Any segment of a water flowing through an area that contains acid
producing soils; and
C. For all other surface water bodies, a riparian zone of 50 feet wide shall
be maintained along both sides of the water.
D. The portion of the riparian zone that lies outside of a surface water
body is measured landward from the top of bank. If a discernible bank is
not present along a surface water body, the portion of the riparian zone
outside the surface water body is measured landward as follows:
(1) Along a linear fluvial or tidal water, such as a stream or swale, the
riparian zone is measured landward of the feature's centerline;
(2) Along a non-linear fluvial water, such as a lake or pond, the riparian
zone is measured landward of the normal water surface limit; and
(3) Along an amorphously-shaped feature such as a wetland complex,
through which water flows but which lacks a discernible channel,
the riparian zone is measured landward of the feature's centerline.
§ 73-2 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 73-3
1:206
§ 73-4. Exceptions.
The applicant or designated representative shall be responsible
for the initial determination of the presence of a riparian zone
on a site, and for identifying the area on any plan submitted to
the Borough of Waldwick in conjunction with an application for
a construction permit, subdivision, land development, or other
improvement that requires plan submissions or permits. This initial
determination shall be subject to review and approval by the
municipal engineer, governing body, or its appointed
representative, and, where required, by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
A. The following disturbances are excepted:
(1) Redevelopment within the limits of existing impervious surfaces;
and
(2) New disturbance in the riparian zone necessary to protect public
health, safety or welfare; to provide an environmental benefit; to
prevent extraordinary hardship on the property owner peculiar to
the property; or to prevent extraordinary hardship, provided the
hardship was not created by the property owner, that would not
permit a minimum economically viable use of the property based
upon reasonable investment.
B. An Exception to any of the disturbances listed in A(1) above shall be
granted by the Municipal Engineer upon proof by virtue of submission
of appropriate maps and drawings, that the proposed redevelopment is
within the limits of impervious surfaces that existed at the time of
passage of this ordinance and shall be in conformance with the
Stormwater Management Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:8, and the Flood Hazard
Area Control Act Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13.
C. For all riparian zones an Exception to any of the disturbances listed in
A(2) above shall be granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment upon
proof by virtue of submission of appropriate maps, drawings, reports
and testimony, that the disturbance protects public health, safety or
welfare; provides an environmental benefit; prevents extraordinary
hardship on the property owner peculiar to the property; or prevents
extraordinary hardship, provided the hardship was not created by the
property owner, that would not permit a minimum economically viable
use of the property based upon reasonable investment.
D. Appeals of a determination by the Municipal Engineer made in
accordance with B above may be made to the Planning Board. The party
contesting the determination or decision shall have the burden of proof
in case of any such appeal.
§ 73-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-5
1:207
§ 73-5. Adjustments.
Adjustments to the riparian zones established by this article are allowed to
the extent they comply with the Stormwater Management Rules (N.J.A.C.
7:8), the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:13), and the
Highlands Water Protection and Planning Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:38), and
shall be subject to review and approval by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, unless exempt.
§ 73-6. Permits-by-rule.
The Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:13), Subchapter 7.
PERMITS-BY-RULE, establishes permits-by-rule for certain regulated
activities. This Article hereby adopts by reference said Subchapter as it
exists at the time of passage of this ordinance and as it may change from
time to time, as a means of allowing regulated activities in the riparian
zone without any other permits or approvals. In addition, any permit-byrule
provision that requires notification to the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection shall also be copied to the Waldwick Municipal
Engineer.
§ 73-7. Enforcement.
A prompt investigation shall be made by the appropriate personnel of the
Borough of Waldwick of any person or entity believed to be in violation
hereof. If, upon inspection, a condition which is in violation of this ordinance
is discovered, a civil action in the Special Part of the Superior Court, or in
the Superior Court, if the primary relief sought is injunctive or if penalties
may exceed the jurisdictional limit of the Special Civil Part, by the filing
and serving of appropriate process. Nothing in this ordinance shall be
construed to preclude the right of the Borough of Waldwick pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-25, to initiate legal proceedings hereunder in Municipal
Court. The violation of any section or subsection of this ordinance shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense independent of the violation of
any other section or subsection, or of any order issued pursuant to this
ordinance. Each day a violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
The enforcement agent for the Borough of Waldwick shall be the
Construction Code Official.
§ 73-8. Conflicts.
All ordinances, parts of ordinances, or other local requirements that are
inconsistent or in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed to the
extent of such inconsistencies and the provisions of this ordinance apply.
§ 73-9. Severability.
1. Interpretation: This ordinance shall be so construed as not to conflict
with any provision of New Jersey or Federal law.
§ 73-5 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 73-9
1:208
Chapter 74
(RESERVED)
Chapter 75
SEWER USE
2. Notwithstanding that any provision of this ordinance is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, all
remaining provisions of the ordinance shall continue to be of full force
and effect.
3. The provisions of this ordinance shall be cumulative with, and not in
substitution for, all other applicable zoning, planning and land use
regulations.
§ 73-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-9
1:209

ARTICLE I
Intent
§ 75-1. Intent.
These rules and regulations are established:
A. To require use of public sewers.
B. To prohibit the discharge of sewage and waste into the sewerage
system in excess of its carrying capacity.
C. To prohibit or regulate the discharge of sewage, industrial wastes or
other wastes which may cause maintenance and/or operating
difficulties of the sewers or other structures and equipment
appurtenant to the sewerage system.
D. To require the treatment before introduction to the sewerage system of
such wastes as may otherwise impair the strength and/or the durability
of structures appurtenant to the system by direct or indirect chemical
action or which may adversely affect normal treatment processes at
sewage treatment plants.
E. To establish the characteristics of the sewage and industrial wastes that
are prohibited from discharge into the public sewers.
F. To establish the design standards, materials and methods of
construction for connecting to the public sewer.
G. To establish the fees for permit application and connection to the public
sewer.
§ 75-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-1
1:211

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 75-2. Terms defined.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this ordinance shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — Shall mean the Northwest Bergen County Sewer Authority
or its duly authorized representative or agent.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND — Shall mean the quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade,
expressed in parts per million by weight.
BOROUGH — Shall mean the Borough of Waldwick, New Jersey.
BOROUGH ENGINEER — Shall mean a registered professional engineer
licensed in the State of New Jersey and employed by the Borough of
Waldwick or its authorized representative.
BUILDING DRAIN — Shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping
of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning five (5) peripheral feet outside the inner face of
the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — Shall mean the extension from the building drain to
the building sewer lateral or other place of disposal.
BUILDING SEWER LATERAL — Shall mean that part of the sewerage
system extending between the public sewer and the curbline.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean an establishment which prepares
hot food for consumption.[Added 3-23-93 by Ord. 4-93]
GARBAGE — Shall mean solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR — A device designed and installed so as to
separate and retain harmful, hazardous or undesirable matter from normal
wastes while permitting normal sewage or liquid wastes to discharge into
the sewerage system by gravity. The interceptor shall automatically or semiautomatically
remove and store grease from the sewer. The interceptor
shall include a flow control device to regulate the flow into the interceptor.
This flow control device must eliminate all siphonage. All removed grease is
to be disposed of by the owner or operator of the establishment.[Amended
3-23-93 by Ord. 4-93]
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial
processes as distinct from sanitary sewage.
TRAP — Shall mean a receptacle designed and constructed to intercept or
separate and prevent the passage of oil, grease, sand or similar materials
into the drainage system to which it is directly or indirectly connected.
§ 75-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-2
1:213
NATURAL OUTLET — Shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond,
ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.
pH — Shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution.
PLUMBING INSPECTOR — Shall mean a person licensed and authorized to
inspect plumbing pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S. 26:1A-38 to 44 and
N.J.S. 26:3-20 and in the employment of or as agent of the Waldwick Board
of Health.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — Shall mean the wastes from the
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to
such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half
(1/2) inch in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — Shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority.
SAND INTERCEPTOR — Shall mean an interceptor designed primarily for
sand.
SANITARY SEWAGE (domestic or home sewage) — Shall mean wash water,
water-carried animal waste, culinary wastes and liquid wastes containing
human excreta and other matter, flowing in or from a building drainage
system or sewer originating in a dwelling, business building, factory or
institution.
SANITARY SEWER — Shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to
which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted
SEWAGE — Shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments,
together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be
inadvertently present.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM — Shall mean a system of sewers and appurtenances
for the collection, transportation and pumping of sewage and industrial
wastes.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Shall mean any arrangement of devices
and structures used for treating sewage.
SEWER — Shall mean a pipe or enclosed conduit for carrying sewage.
SHALL — Is mandatory; MAY is permissive.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — Shall mean a sewer which carries
storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted
industrial wastes.
§ 75-2 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 75-2
1:214
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Shall mean solids that either float on the surface,
or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids; and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
WASTE — Shall mean sanitary sewage, garbage, properly shredded
garbage and industrial waste, as defined in this section.
WATERCOURSE — Shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs,
either continuously or intermittently.
§ 75-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-2
1:215

ARTICLE III
Use of Public Sewers Required
§ 75-3. Unlawful deposit.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit in an unsanitary manner
upon public or private property within the Borough of Waldwick, or in
any area under the jurisdiction of said Borough, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
§ 75-4. Unlawful discharge.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Borough
of Waldwick, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Borough, any
sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent
provisions of this ordinance, or in accordance with the Sanitary Code of the
Waldwick Board of Health.
§ 75-5. Toilet facilities, connection with public sewer, required.
The owner of every house, building or property used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purpose, situated within the Borough and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way, or located in the rear of other
properties so abutting and having access to such street in which there is
now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the
Borough, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities
therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer
in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and the requirements
of the Waldwick Board of Health, within six (6) months after the date of
completion of the sanitary sewer system, and after official notification from
the Borough of Waldwick.
§ 75-6. Private sewage-disposal systems to be abandoned.
As public sewers become available to property presently being served by
a private sewage-disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to
the public sewer pursuant to the terms of this Article and any septic
tanks, cesspools and/or similar private sewage-disposal systems shall be
abandoned and disconnected from all pipes discharging or receiving
sewage. Abandoned septic tanks, cesspools and/or similar private sewagedisposal
systems may be used for disposal of subsurface and/or surface
water from sump pumps and house leaders.
§ 75-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-6
1:217

ARTICLE IV
Use of the Public Sewers
§ 75-7. Types of water discharge prohibited.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water
or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
§ 75-8. Unpolluted drainage permitted.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm drains or storm sewers, or
to a natural outlet approved by the Borough Engineer. Where this may not
be feasible, the deactivated individual disposal system may be used for this
purpose, upon approval of the Waldwick Board of Health. Industrial cooling
water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of
the Borough Engineer, and the Waldwick Board of Health, to a storm drain
or natural outlet.
§ 75-9. Types of waste prohibited.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any public sewer:
A. Gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil, lubricating oils and greases,
inflammable or explosive liquids, solid or gases, paint and lacquers, or
other combustible materials.
B. Improperly shredded garbage.
C. Abrasives, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass,
rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure.
D. Solid or viscous substances which are capable of causing obstructions
in sewers, or interference with the proper functioning of the treatment
processes.
E. Wastes containing viable pathogenic bacteria other than those normal
to domestic sewage.
F. All wastes containing corrosive matters or toxic or poisonous
substances, or chemicals in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere
with the sewage-treatment process, or create any hazard to sewers,
structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage works.
G. Any noxious or malodorous solids, liquids or gases, which either singly
or by interaction with other substances are capable of creating a public
nuisance or hazard to life or preventing entry into sewers for their
maintenance and repair.
H. Any radioactive materials or isotopes without obtaining a special permit
from the Waldwick Board of Health.
§ 75-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-9
1:219
§ 75-10. Additional waters and wastes prohibited.
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public
sewers:
§ 75-11. Restrictions on waste material specified.
The admission into the public sewers of any water or wastes having (a) a
five-day Biochemical Oxygen Demand greater than three hundred fifty (350)
parts per million by weight, or (b) containing more than three hundred fifty
(350) parts per million by weight of suspended solids, or (c) containing
any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in section
75-10, or (d) having an average daily flow greater than two percent (2%)
of the average daily sewage flow of the Borough, shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Borough. Where necessary in the opinion of
the Borough, the owner shall provide at his expense, such preliminary
treatment as may be necessary to (a) reduce the Biochemical Oxygen
Demand to three hundred fifty (350) parts per million and the suspended
solids to three hundred fifty (350) parts per million by weight, or (b) reduce
objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the acceptable limits
provided for in section 75-10, or (c) control the quantities and rates of
discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications and any other
I. All waters, wastes or deleterious substances which shall be excluded
from discharge to intercepting or trunk sewers of the Northwest
Bergen County Sewer Authority as defined by existing or future
regulations of the Authority, and existing or future agreements between
the Borough and the Authority.
A. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150 F.).
B. Any water or wastes which may contain more than one hundred (100)
parts per million by weight of fat, oil or grease.
C. Any water wastes having a pH lower than five point five (5.5) or higher
than nine point five (9.5), or having any other corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and
personnel of the sewage works.
D. Any water or wastes having a five-day Biochemical Oxygen Demand
greater than three hundred fifty (350) parts per million by weight.
E. Any water or wastes containing more than three hundred fifty (350)
parts per million by weight of suspended solids.
F. Any waters, wastes or deleterious substances which require
pretreatment or dilution before introduction to intercepting or trunk
sewers of the Northwest Bergen County Sewer Authority as defined by
existing or future regulations of the Authority and existing or future
agreements between the Borough and the Authority.
§ 75-9 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 75-11
1:220
pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities
shall be submitted for the approval of the Borough of Waldwick, the
Waldwick Board of Health and of the Department of Health of the State of
New Jersey, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until
said approvals area obtained in writing.
§ 75-12. Owner responsible for maintenance.
Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously by satisfactory and effective
operation, and facilities for sampling shall be installed by the owner at his
own expense.
§ 75-13. Control manhole.
When required by the Borough, the owner of any property served by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be
accessibly and safely located, available for inspection, and shall be
constructed under the supervision of the Borough Engineer, in accordance
with plans approved by the Borough. The manhole shall be maintained by
him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 75-14. Measurements, tests, analyses.
A. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in sections 75-9, 75-10 and
75-11 hereof shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition
of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Waste Water,"
published by the American Public Health Association, Inc., a copy of
which is hereby adopted, is annexed hereto and made a part hereof and
incorporated herein as fully as if set forth at length.
B. Two (2) copies of said "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Waste Water" have been placed on file in the office of the Borough
Clerk of the Borough of Waldwick upon the introduction of this
ordinance and will remain on file there until final action is taken on this
ordinance, for the use and examination of the public. Upon adoption of
this ordinance, said copies shall remain on file in said office so long as
said ordinance is in effect, and in addition, two (2) copies shall be
placed on file and remain on file in the office of the Board of Health of
the Borough of Waldwick so long as said ordinance is in effect, for the
use and examination of the public.
C. All such measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes shall be determined at the control manhole provided
for in section 75-13 hereof, or upon suitable samples taken at said
control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
§ 75-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-14
1:221
§ 75-15. Special agreements with industries.
No statement contained in this Article shall be construed as prohibiting
any special agreement or arrangement between the Borough, the Board of
Health and any person whereby an industrial waste system, either before or
after pretreatment, provided that there is no impairment of the functioning
of the sewerage system or any sewerage-treatment plan by reason of the
admission of such wastes, and no extra costs are incurred by the Borough
without recompense by the person.
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected.
§ 75-14 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 75-15
1:222
ARTICLE V
Sump Pumps
§ 75-15.1. Intent and Purpose.
The implementation of this section will aid the Borough by limiting and
reducing the inflow of additional water into the sanitary sewer systems.
By prohibiting the discharge of water from any roof, surface ground, sump
pump, swimming pool, other natural precipitation, and other sources of
inflow into the Borough's sanitary sewer system, the Borough is seeking
to reduce costs as well as protect against other damaging affects. The
Borough's sanitary sewer system will and has on occasions in the past been
overloaded and flooded thereby creating the potential to cause significant
damage or threat to individual's property as well as the system. Further,
all water that enters the system must be treated at the sewage treatment
plant. Therefore, by reducing and eliminating this inflow of "clean water"
into the sanitary sewer system and the subsequent unnecessary treatment,
the expenses to the Borough and the citizens will be reduced and will assist
in protecting the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Borough.
§ 75-15.2. Violation.
A. Prohibited Discharges. No person or entity shall discharge or cause to
be discharged any stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, yard drainage,
yard fountain, swimming pool, pond, overflow, or any other substance
other than sanitary sewage into the sanitary sewer collection system.
No person, business or other entity shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any hazardous substances into any public sewers.
B. Amnesty Period for Disconnection.
1. On or before December 31, 2011, any person, business, or other
entity who shall have a connection described above and who shall
voluntarily report said connection to the Borough, so that said illicit
connection shall be remedied, shall have any and all permit,
connection and inspection fees waived by the Borough. This waiver
of fees applies only to Borough fees, and does not include the actual
cost of remediation.
2. After December 31, 2011, any person, business, or other entity who
shall have a connection described above, any shall fail to
voluntarily report such connection by December 31, 2011, shall be
liable for all permit fees, inspection fees, and connection fees as
required by the Borough, to remedy the illicit connection.
C. Manner of Disconnection.
1. Any property owner, tenant, landlord, or other person with a
property interest who shall have a connection in violation of this
Ordinance, or not obtained a waiver pursuant to Section 75:15.7,
shall immediately remove such connection and correct such
§ 75-15.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-15.2
1:223
§ 75-15.3. Inspections.
The Building Inspector, Borough Engineer, Borough Fire Code official and/
or a Borough sub-code inspector, as long as they display the proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to request entrance to any
property for the purpose of inspecting, observing, testing and sampling to
confirm that there is no sump pump or other prohibited discharge into the
sanitary sewer system in accordance with this Chapter.
Any owner, tenant, landlord, or other person with a property interest who
shall refuse entrance to the Building Inspector, Borough Engineer, Borough
Fire Code official or Borough subcode inspector, shall immediately become
subject to the monthly Surcharge noted in Section 75:15.4 of this ordinance.
Said property shall remain subject to the monthly Surcharge until such time
as an inspection is permitted to ensure compliance by the Borough of all
terms of this Chapter.
§ 75-15.4.. Surcharge.
situation. If not removed or corrected within one hundred and
twenty (120) calendar days after receiving a Notice of Violation
which has been personally delivered or delivered via certified mail,
the Borough shall impose a Surcharge in the amount provided for
in Section 75:15.4.
2. All disconnections of said illicit connections shall be accomplished
by a complete and permanent method and performed in a
competent manner and approved and inspected by the Borough
Building Inspector, any Borough sub-code inspector, Borough Fire
Code official and/or Borough Engineer. Any disconnection,
plugging, capping, re-routing, altering, or modifying must be done
in accordance with all applicable state and municipal building
codes.
3. Upon issuance of the Surcharge pursuant to Section 75:15.4, if the
property owner, tenant, landlord, or other person with a property
interest remedies the illicit connection, said property owner,
tenant, landlord, or other person with a property interest shall call
the Borough's Building Department for an inspection of the
connection by the Borough's Building Inspector, a Borough subcode
inspector, Borough Fire Code official or Borough Engineer,
and upon certification that the illicit connection has been remedied,
the Surcharge shall be lifted, beginning the month following the
inspection and certification. If, however, on a subsequent and
periodic inspection for which a property was subject to the
Surcharge, the illicit connection exists, the Surcharge amount as
provided for in Section 75:15.4 shall be calculated from the
previous inspection date.
§ 75-15.2 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 75-15.4.
1:224
§ 75-15.5. Appeal of surcharge.
Any property owner who shall be assessed a Surcharge pursuant to this
ordinance shall have a right to appeal to the Municipal Court for the
purposes of proving compliance with this ordinance.
§ 75-15.6. Municipal assistance.
The Borough shall assist and provide guidance to any property owner,
tenant, landlord, or other person with a property interest in remedying the
situation as it involves a matter of public concern to the resident's health,
safety and welfare of the community in remedying the illicit connection.
Except as specifically set forth in this ordinance, all costs associated to
comply with this ordinance shall be borne by the property owner, tenant,
landlord, or other person with a property interest.
§ 75-15.7. Waiver.
Any person, business, or other entity, who shall by inspection or voluntary
reporting is determined to be in violation of any section of this ordinance,
shall be permitted to file for a waiver of the Surcharge requirement of
Section 75:15.4, if they can prove that they have exhausted all possible
remedial measures. Remedial measures include but are not limited to,
the installation of a dry-well, the connection to a storm sewer, and/or
use of one's own property for discharge of the water so long as such
discharge does not adversely affect any neighboring property owner. Upon
certification of the Building Inspector and/or Borough Engineer, the person,
business, or other entity shall be granted such waiver, but only for such time
as to when a remedy becomes available. If such remedy is made available by
the Borough, the Borough shall notify the person, business, or other entity,
that they shall comply with this ordinance within one hundred twenty (120)
days of receiving said notice. Failure to comply will result in the imposition
of a Surcharge as per Section 75:15.4.
A. A surcharge of fifty dollars ($50) per month is hereby imposed upon
every sewer utility bill to property owners, tenants, landlords, or other
persons with a property interest for the following conditions:
1. Not in compliance with this ordinance
2. Refusal of property inspection.
B. If the Surcharge is not paid and received by the Borough of Waldwick, a
lien shall be imposed upon the property as per N.J.S.A. 40:14B-42.
C. Said Surcharge shall remain on the property and sewer utility bill until
such time as the Borough Building Inspector or Borough Engineer
certifies that the property owner, tenant, landlord, or other person with
a property interest is in full compliance with this ordinance.
§ 75-15.4. GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-15.7
1:225

ARTICLE VI
Building Sewers, Building-Sewer Laterals and Connections
§ 75-16. Written permit required.
No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use,
alter or disturb any building-sewer lateral or any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
Waldwick Board of Health.
§ 75-17. Classes of permits.
(See Chapter 48:75-17.)
§ 75-18. Costs to be borne by owner.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer and building-sewer lateral shall be borne by the owner.
The owner shall indemnify the Borough from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
§ 75-19. Separate sewer required for each building. [Amended
5-12-70 by Ord. No. 3-70]
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and the Land Subdivision Ordinance prohibits dividing said lot
to create a separate lot for each such building, the building sewer may be
extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one (1) building
sewer.
§ 75-20. Old building sewers for new buildings.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the local Board of Health,
to meet all requirements of this ordinance.
§ 75-21. Specifications for construction of building sewer.
The diameter of the building sewer shall not be less than four (4) inches,
and the diameter of the building-sewer lateral shall not be less than six (6)
inches. The slope of such pipes shall not be less than three-sixteenths (3/
16) inch per foot. Where necessary, in the opinion of the Borough Engineer,
if the above sizes and slope are not adequate, he shall have the right to
require a larger diameter pipe or an increased slope that is adequate. Under
special circumstances, lesser slopes that will provide a minimum velocity
of two (2) feet per second will be permitted upon approval of the Borough
Engineer.
§ 75-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-22
1:227
§ 75-22. Grade, alignment, elevation of building sewer.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the new building
at an elevation below the basement floor. Building sewers for existing
buildings shall be brought to the building at an elevation not exceeding that
of the existing building drain. If the building sewer is brought to the existing
building at a lower elevation than the existing building drain, suitable
fittings and cleanouts shall be installed subject to inspection and approval
of the Waldwick Board of Health. No building sewer shall be laid parallel
to and within three (3) feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be
weakened, except under special circumstances, and only with the approval
of the Borough Engineer. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection
from frost. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight
alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with
properly curved pipe and fittings, and shall be subject to the approval of the
Waldwick Board of Health.
§ 75-23. Gravity flow preferred; artificial means.
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow
to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by
approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer.
§ 75-24. Materials required for building sewers.
Building sewers and building-sewer laterals shall be one of the following:
§ 75-25. Specifications for joints and connections.
All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight, as follows:
A. Asbestos cement nonpressure sewer pipe including fittings conforming
to ASTM Designation C428-59T, of a class of 2400 or as required by the
Mayor and Council, or authorized representative. Rubber sealing
gaskets shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D-1869, latest
issues, and consist of a vulcanized rubber compound as specified by the
manufacturer.
B. Cast iron pipe with lead joints shall be used (a) where the building
sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots if so directed by the Plumbing
Inspector, and (b) in filled or unstable ground, except that nonmetallic
pipe may be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed, cradle or
bedding, as approved by the Borough Engineer.
A. Joints in asbestos-cement pipe shall be formed of a sleeve-type coupling
and rubber rings or gaskets, and shall be made in accordance with the
standards and specifications which are current at the time of passage of
this ordinance or, as may be approved, subsequently by the borough.
B. Joints in cast-iron soil pipe shall be firmly packed with oakum or hemp
and filled with molten lead, Federal Specification QQ-L-156; not less
than one (1) inch deep after caulking. Lead shall be run in one (1)
§ 75-22 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 75-25
1:228
§ 75-26. Interceptors. [Amended 11-24-92 by Ord. No. 15-92]
§ 75-27. Enforcement and mandatory inspections of interceptors.
[Amended 11-24-92 by Ord. No. 15-92]
pouring and caulked tight. No paint, varnish or other coatings shall be
applied to the jointing material until after the joint has been tested and
approved.
A. Interceptors are required to be installed in each facility, business or
commercial establishment generating liquid waste containing grease,
oil, flammable waste, sand, solids, and other ingredients which in the
opinion of the Health Officer, Building or Plumbing Code Official are
harmful to the building drainage system, or public sewer or sewerage
treatment plant or process. All food establishments, and laundromats
are specifically mandated to have interceptors. Dry cleaning
establishments shall be required to install interceptors except for those
dry cleaning establishments which use only biodegradable soaps and
provide the Borough Clerk with a certification to that effect on or before
January 1 and July 1 of each year. Residential premises are exempt from
installing interceptors. [Added 3-23-93 by Ord. 3-93]
B. Design - The type and size of each interceptor shall be in compliance
with the Uniform Construction Code regulation N.J.A.C. 5:23 et seq. as
amended. The appropriate construction permit shall be obtained before
the installation of any device pursuant to and in accordance with this
section.
C. Accessibility - Each interceptor shall be so installed that it is readily
accessible for inspection by the appropriate municipal department
responsible for the enforcement of this section of the ordinance.
D. Maintenance - Interceptors shall be maintained in an efficient operating
condition by periodic removal of accumulated grease, scum, oil or other
floating substance and solids deposited in the interceptor. In any event,
periodic removal shall be no less often than every six months and a
written record must be kept of each and every such maintenance
procedure.
A. The plumbing inspector and the Board of Health of the Borough are
hereby designated to administer the provisions of this section and are
hereinafter referred to as the "enforcement officers".
B. An inspection shall be made of each premises required to have an
interceptor on a quarterly basis by the enforcement officers. This
inspection shall review the operation and maintenance records
required to be kept by the owner in addition to inspecting that the unit
is operational. There shall be an annual fee established under Chapter
48 for this inspection payable to the Borough Clerk at the beginning of
each calendar year. (See Chapter 48:75-27.) [Amended 3-23-93 by
Ord. No. 4-93]
§ 75-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-28
1:229
§ 75-28. Building sewer to conform to construction requirements.
Before any portion of the building drain outside of the house is connected to
the building sewer, the owner shall prove to the satisfaction of the Plumbing
Inspector that the building drain is clean and conforms in every respect to
the requirements of the Waldwick Board of Health. Before any portion of
the building sewer is connected to the building sewer lateral, the Plumbing
Inspector shall be satisfied that the building sewer is in good order and
conforms in every respect to the requirements for construction thereof.
§ 75-29. Permit required for installation and connection to public
sewer.
Where there is no existing building sewer or building sewer lateral available
that connects to a public sewer, the property owner shall, prior to issuance
of a certificate of occupancy, apply to the Borough Clerk for a permit for the
installation of a building sewer lateral and/or building sewer for connection
to the public sewer.
§ 75-30. Maintenance of public sewer and building sewer.
See Ch. 48:75-30.
§ 75-31. Proof of competency; surety bond.
The building sewer laterals may not be installed or the public street
disturbed therefor by any person or concern who is not a responsible
contractor. Such contractor shall provide the Borough of Waldwick with
satisfactory evidence of his capacity to perform the work and first file an
individual surety bond in the penal sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000),
payable to the Borough of Waldwick, in such form and under such conditions
as shall be approved by the Borough Attorney for the faithful compliance
with this and all other borough ordinances pertaining to the work.
§ 75-32. Connection of building sewer lateral to public sewer; Ybranch.
The connection of the building sewer lateral into the public sewer shall be
made at the Y branch, if it is available at a suitable location. If the public
sewer is twelve (12) inches or less in diameter and no properly located Ybranch
is available, the owner shall, at his expense, install a Y-branch in the
public sewer at the location specified by the Borough Engineer. Where the
public sewer is greater than twelve (12) inches in diameter, and no properly
located Y branch is available, the owner shall at his own expense have a
neat hole cut into the public sewer to receive the building-sewer lateral with
entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about forty-five degrees. A
forty-five degree ell may be used to make such connection, with the spigot
end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The
invert of the building sewer lateral at the point of connection shall be at the
same or at a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth,
neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight
§ 75-28 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 75-32
1:230
by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection
only when approved by the Borough Engineer.
§ 75-33. Specifications for laying of sewer pipe.
Each sewer pipe shall be laid so as to have a continuous bearing on the
bedding material, true to line and grade and in such manner as to form a
close concentric joint with the adjoining pipe and to prevent sudden offsets
of the flow line. As the work progresses, the interior of the pipe shall be
cleared of all dirt and superfluous materials of every description. A suitable
swab or drag shall be kept in the pipe and pulled forward past each joint
immediately after the joining has been completed. Trenches shall be kept
free from water and pipe shall not be laid when the condition of the trench
or the weather is unsuitable for such work. At times, when work is not in
progress, open ends of pipe and fittings shall be securely and satisfactorily
closed so that no trench water, earth or other substance will enter the pipe
or fittings.
§ 75-34. Specifications for excavations; backfill; compaction.
A. Excavation for building sewers and building sewer laterals shall follow
lines parallel to and equidistance from the location of the pipe center
line. Trenches shall be excavated to the depths and widths required to
accommodate the construction of the sewers. Excavation shall not be
carried below the approved grade. Any excavation made below grade
for any reason shall be backfilled with the granular material specified
hereinafter. Excavation and trenches in rock shall extend to a depth of
five (5) inches below the outside bottom of the pipe barrel, and brought
to required elevation with granular bedding material consisting of pea
gravel or broken stone graded as required by the Borough Engineer.
B. Excavation and trenches in earth shall extend to a depth of four (4)
inches below the outside bottom of the pipe barrel, and brought to
required elevation with the above specified granular bedding material.
Where unsatisfactory foundation material is found in earth trenches,
such material shall be removed to the extent directed by the Borough
Engineer. In backfilling trenches, loose fine earth free of frozen clods,
stones larger than two inches in greatest dimension, and debris shall be
used to a depth of two (2) feet over the top of the pipe. The backfill
material shall be carefully tamped under the pipe haunches, on the
sides and above the pipe in layers not more than six (6) inches deep
before compaction. The remainder of the trench shall contain not more
than twenty percent (20%) stone by volume and no one stone shall be
more than six (6) inches in greatest dimension. This material shall be
thoroughly tamped on layers not to exceed ten (10) inches in thickness
after compaction. Backfilling and compaction up to two (2) feet over the
pipe shall be done by hand.
C. Compaction of each layer of backfill shall be to a density at least equal
to that of the surrounding earth and to a degree which will prevent
§ 75-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-34
1:231
§ 75-35. Safety precautions.
§ 75-36. Dry house connection; inspection.
Dry house connection installations may be permitted subject to the
following steps to be taken by the property owner:
§ 75-37. Approval of Plumbing Inspector.
Upon official notice requiring connection with the public sanitary sewer,
in accordance with the local ordinance of the Board of Health, Borough of
settlement of restored or proposed future pavement. The surface shall
be mounded over and left in a uniform and neat condition satisfactory
to the Borough Engineer.
D. Excavated materials shall be piled in compact heaps, so placed as to
cause the least possible inconvenience to the public. Extreme care shall
be taken to prevent any dirt, stones or other undesirable material from
entering the public sewer system through the building sewer during
these operations.
A. Blasting operations for excavation will be subject to the approval of the
Borough Engineer, and shall conform to the requirements of all laws,
ordinances and regulations having jurisdiction over such work.
B. Trenches shall be protected by such sheeting, shoring, bracing and the
like as may be required to perform the excavations, for safety including
the protection of persons, structures, utilities, etc., and to conform to
existing laws. All sheeting, shoring and bracing shall be removed after
the completion of backfill to the extent directed by the Borough
Engineer.
C. All excavations for building sewers and building sewer laterals shall be
adequately graded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazard. Sidewalks and other public property disturbed in the
course of installing building sewers shall be backfilled within fortyeight
(48) hours from the beginning of excavation. Streets, parkways
and other public property disturbed in the course of installing buildingsewer
laterals shall be backfilled within such reasonable period of time
as may be determined by the Borough Engineer in each particular case.
A. Application shall be made to the Waldwick Board of Health for the dry
house connection.
B. Both ends of the dry house connection shall be provided for expandable
blocks.
C. Prior to backfilling any trenches or covering any sewer pipes, the
applicant for the building-sewer permit shall notify the Plumbing
Inspector when the dry-house-connection sewer is ready for inspection.
§ 75-34 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 75-37
1:232
Waldwick, final connection of the dry house connection with the building
sewer lateral shall be made, and the following steps shall be taken:
§ 75-38. Supervision by Borough representative.
The connection to the public sewers shall be made under the supervision of
a duly qualified representative of the Borough of Waldwick.
§ 75-39. Sewers and laterals subject to tests.
Building sewers and building-sewer laterals shall be subject to all tests set
forth by the Board of Health, Borough of Waldwick.
§ 75-40. Discharge of wastes prohibited during construction.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any waters or wastes
through any building sewer during construction of the building sewer
without written approval of the Board of Health, Borough of Waldwick.
§ 75-41. Plan of Borough Engineer placed on file.
Prior to final approval and acceptance of a building sewer lateral by the
Borough, a plan showing the location, depths, elevations or other
information as determined by the Borough Engineer shall be furnished and
placed on file at the Waldwick Board of Health's office by the applicant.
§ 75-42. Restoration of pavements.
All sidewalk and roadway pavements and curbs directly or indirectly
affected, disturbed or injured in connection with the construction of
building sewers or building-sewer laterals shall be restored in accordance
with Borough standards to a condition at least equal to that which existed
prior to the start of the installation work. Pavements and curbs so restored
shall be of the same type as that existing and shall match and line up with
A. Application shall be made to the Plumbing Inspector for a house
connection permit as listed below:
B. Prior to the final connection of the dry house connection with the house
drain at one end and the house sewer laterals at the other end, the
expandable plugs heretofore installed shall be removed and the entire
length of the dry house connection shall be completely flushed and
cleaned in the presence of the Plumbing Inspector.
C. Reasonable notice of the date and time when such flushing will be
performed shall be given to the Plumbing Inspector and no flushing
shall be done except in the presence of the Plumbing Inspector.
D. After completion of final connection with the house drain at one end and
the house sewer lateral at the other end, both connections shall be
inspected and approved by the Plumbing Inspector.
§ 75-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-42
1:233
existing adjacent construction to the satisfaction of the Borough Engineer
or his representative.
§ 75-42 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 75-42
1:234
ARTICLE VII
Protection from Damage
§ 75-43. Penalty for damaging or tampering with system.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently, break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the Waldwick sewerage
system. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate
arrest, and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter set
forth under Article VIII hereof.
§ 75-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-43
1:235

ARTICLE VIII
Powers and Authority
§ 75-44. Right of entry.
The Borough Engineer or his representative, the Plumbing Inspector, and
duly authorized employees of the borough, the Northwest Bergen County
Sewer Authority or the Waldwick Board of Health, or their representatives,
bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter
upon all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of
this ordinance.
§ 75-45. Notice of violation.
Any person found to be violating any provision of this ordinance, except
Ch. 75-43 which requires immediate arrest, shall be served by the borough
with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender
shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
such violations.
§ 75-46. Penalty.
See Chapter 1:14.1.
§ 75-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-46
1:237

ARTICLE IX
Validity
§ 75-47. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances.
All ordinances or parts or ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 75-48. Severability.
The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence or provision of this ordinance
shall not affect the validity of any other part of this ordinance which can be
given effect without such invalid part or parts.
§ 75-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-48
1:239

ARTICLE X
Ordinance in Force
§ 75-49. When effective.
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval, recording and publication as provided by law.
§ 75-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-49
1:241
Chapter 75A
SHOPPING CARTS
§ 75A-1. Definitions.
As used herein:
STREET — Means any street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway and parking
lot, and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavements, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks,
parking areas and other places within the street lines, and places used by
the general public.
PERSON — Shall include a natural person, corporation, partnership or
association.
SHOPPING CART or CART — Means a cart of the type commonly provided
by retail stores and/or supermarkets and used for the convenience of
patrons.
OWNER — Means the person who has possession, custody or control of
shopping carts which are made available for the use of patrons in
connection with the operation of a retail business.
BOROUGH — Means the Borough of Waldwick.
§ 75A-2. Names of owner to be on carts.
The owner or owners of shopping carts used in connection with any retail
business and intended for use by patrons shall clearly designate on each
cart the name of such owner or owners.
§ 75A-3. Removal from premises prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a shopping cart from the
premises of a retail establishment.
§ 75A-4. Responsibility of owner.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or owners to leave any such cart or permit
any such cart to be left unattended or abandoned on any street or public
place within the Borough of Waldwick. Any owner who shall directly or
indirectly permit or suffer his customers to take said carts off the business
premises of said owner shall be responsible if such carts are abandoned or
left unattended on a public street or public place, or on private property
without the expressed consent of the owner or tenant thereof.
§ 75A-5. Borough to remove abandoned carts.
The Borough shall remove or cause to be removed any cart found
abandoned or left unattended on any street and shall take the same to
§ 75-49 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 75A-5
1:242
Borough property where it shall be held until redeemed, sold or otherwise
disposed of as hereinafter provided.
§ 75A-6. Notice to owner; redemption.
Whenever the Borough shall take any cart containing the owner's
identification, a notice shall be sent by ordinary mail to such owner advising
that the cart is held by the Borough and may be redeemed upon payment of
five dollars ($5) to the Borough at anytime prior to the sale, dismantling or
destruction thereof as hereinafter provided.
No cart shall be delivered to a person seeking to redeem the same unless
such person shall furnish satisfactory evidence of ownership or right to
possession.
§ 75A-7. Notice of sale if carts not redeemed.
When any cart remains in the custody of the Borough for a period of
fifteen (15) days after removal and with respect to which no person has
presented to the Borough proof establishing to its satisfaction such person's
ownership or right to possession, the Borough shall give public notice in its
official newspaper that, at a specified place and time, not less than five (5)
days after such notice is published, such cart will be sold at public auction
for not less than five dollars ($5) plus the costs of advertising the sale. If
after such notice of sale is given, any person desires to redeem any cart
prior to the sale such person shall pay to the Borough for redemption the
sum of five dollars ($5) plus the costs of advertising the sale. A general
description of the cart to be sold shall be sufficient. Said sale shall be
conducted by the Business Administrator or by such person as the Common
Council shall designate.
§ 75A-8. Disposition if not sold.
If said cart is not sold at public auction, the Borough may offer it again
for sale or may dismantle, destroy or otherwise dispose of such cart. Any
disposition of such cart made pursuant to this ordinance shall be without
any liability of the Borough to the owner of such cart or other person
lawfully entitled thereto or having an interest therein.
§ 75A-9. Disposition of proceeds of sale.
Upon a redemption or sale of a cart, the proceeds shall be deposited in the
general funds of the Borough.
§ 75A-10. Penalties for violation.
See Chapter 1:14.1.
§ 75A-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75A-11
1:243
§ 75A-11. Validity.
The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence or provision of this ordinance
shall not affect the validity of any other part of this ordinance which can be
given effect without such invalid part or parts.
§ 75A-12. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication as required by law.
Chapter 76
SIDEWALK AND GUTTER AREA, MAINTENANCE OF
§ 76-1. Premises - owner to maintain sidewalks and curbs.
[Amended 2-13-01 by Ord. No. 3-01]
The owner of any premises in the Borough of Waldwick abutting a sidewalk
or curb shall, at the owner's cost and expense, keep and maintain such
sidewalk or curb in good condition and state of repair so as to not permit
the same to become unfit or unsafe to walk upon. In the event that such
sidewalk or curb or any part thereof becomes unsafe or unfit to walk upon,
the abutting owner at his own cost and expense, shall with reasonable
diligence, reconstruct or repair, as the facts may require, such sidewalk or
curb or that part thereof which requires reconstruction or repair.
It shall further be the responsibility of the abutting property owner to
maintain the area between the curb and sidewalk. This responsibility
extends to all grass, flowering plants, weeds, and trees. Planting of any
trees or bushes in the area between the curb and sidewalk is prohibited.
§ 76-2. Line and grade of sidewalks and curbs.
All new sidewalks and curbs constructed by an abutting owner shall be
constructed in accordance with the line and grade established by the
Borough Engineer. All old and existing sidewalks reconstructed or repaired
by an abutting owner shall be reconstructed or repaired in accordance with
the existing line and grade in the area.
§ 76-3. Construction specifications.
All curbs and sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the
following regulations:
A. Curbs shall be constructed of poured concrete or of material of equal or
greater quality. Construction shall be in accordance with the New
Jersey Department of Transportation and Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge construction as amended. [Amended 9-24-96 by
Ord. No. 17-96]
§ 75A-11 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 76-3
1:244
§ 76-4. Removal of sidewalk.
Any existing sidewalk may be replaced in accordance with the requirements
of this Chapter. An existing sidewalk, however, may not be permanently
removed without the approval of the Planning Board of the Borough of
Waldwick. The request shall be made in writing setting forth the reasons for
removal of the sidewalk. The Planning Board shall schedule a hearing. The
applicant shall notify the owners of the properties abutting the portion of
the sidewalk that connects to the sidewalk for which removal is requested.
The notice shall be in writing and served ten days prior to the hearing
in accordance with the Planning Board's hearing notice requirements. The
Planning Board shall review the request, giving consideration to the need
for a sidewalk to maintain and promote pedestrian safety, public welfare
and the character of the neighborhood.
§ 76-5. Enforcement. [Amended 2-13-01 by Ord. No. 3-01]
The Mayor and Council, by resolution, shall establish a policy of inspection
of sidewalks to detect a need for repair. The Construction Code Official or its
designees is empowered to enforce all provisions of this chapter. This shall
include the authority to issue summonses for violations of the provisions of
this chapter. The summonses shall be returnable in the Waldwick Municipal
Court.
It is the Borough's intention to enforce this ordinance in accordance with
the following schedule. In the first year after adoption the Borough's
enforcement will concentrate on the arterial streets named in the Borough's
Master Plan, which are East Prospect Street, State Highway 17 and all
County roads. In subsequent years the enforcement will concentrate by
election district starting with district one. Each year the next highest
number district will be done until all sidewalks in all districts comply
with this ordinance. At that time, enforcement will concentrate again with
arterial streets and cycle through the districts.
§ 76-6. Penalty for noncompliance.
See Chapter 1:14.1.
§ 76-7. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as required
by law.
B. Sidewalks shall be forty-eight (48) inches in width; located at least six
(6) inches away from any property line in order to accommodate the
installation of monuments; and shall be contiguous with existing
sidewalks on adjacent properties.
C. At intersections, sidewalks and curbs shall be constructed with ramps
designed to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act.
§ 76-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-7
1:245
Chapter 77
(RESERVED)
Chapter 78
(RESERVED)
Chapter 79
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
§ 79-1. Removal from sidewalks required. [Amended 8-16-94 by
Ord. No. 16-94]
The owner or occupant of premises abutting or bordering upon any street in
the Borough of Waldwick shall remove all snow and ice from the sidewalks
of any such street within 24 hours after the same shall cease to fall or
to be formed thereon, or in the case of ice which may be so frozen to
the sidewalks as to make removal impractical, shall cause the same to be
thoroughly covered with sand or ashes within the same period. All sidewalks
must be shoveled for the full width of the sidewalk and driveway apron. Any
sidewalk terminating at a corner must be shoveled to the point where the
paved surface of the street meets the sidewalk.
§ 79-2. Depositing snow or ice on streets. [Amended 8-16-94 by Ord.
No. 16-94]
No person, including the owner or occupant of any premises abutting on
any street, shall throw, place or deposit any snow or ice into or upon any
street in the Borough except such as falls upon or is formed upon that
portion of the property so abutting said street lying within the sidewalk
lines thereof. No person shall throw, place or deposit snow or ice into or
upon the property of another person without the property owner's express
permission. It is the intent purpose of this section to prohibit all persons
from throwing, casting, placing or depositing snow and ice which
accumulated within the private property belonging to said persons, upon
the sidewalks or streets of the Borough, or upon other real property without
the owner's permission.
§ 79-3. Noncompliance procedure. [Amended 8-16-94 by Ord. No.
16-94; 4-27-10 by Ord. No. 9-10]
In any case in which snow or ice is not removed from any sidewalk as
required in § 79-1, or whereby snow or ice is deposited, thrown or placed
upon any sidewalk or street in violation of Section 79-2 above, then the
Police Department will issue a summons 24 hours after the snow has ceased
falling to the owner or occupant of the property in violation. Each day that
§ 76-7 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 79-3
1:246
the owner or occupant of the premises is in violation of Chapter 79 shall be
considered a separate violation.
Should the Police Department, Fire Department, or the Board of Health
deem that the location of snow and ice on any sidewalk or street represents
an immediate danger to the public health safety and welfare, then such
snow and ice may be removed by and under the direction of the
Superintendent of Public Works. All reasonable efforts shall be made to
notify the owner or occupant of the condition and the need to remedy
such hazard. The cost thereof shall be certified by the Superintendent of
Public Works to the governing body, which shall examine such certificate
of cost, and if it finds said certificate to be correct, shall cause such costs
to be charged against the real estate abutting upon such sidewalks. The
amount so charged shall thereupon become a lien and tax upon said real
estate and be added to and become a part of the taxes next to be levied
and assessed thereon, and enforced and collected, with interest, by the
same officers and in the same manner as other taxes. The imposition and
collection of any penalty imposed by the provisions of § 79-5 hereof shall not
constitute any bar to the right of the Borough to collect such assessment of
costs as certified for the removal of said snow or ice in the manner herein
authorized.
§ 79-4. Definitions.
DISABLED PERSON — A person having an impairment which is expected to
be of long-continued and indefinite duration and substantially impedes the
person's ability to live independently unless the person receives supportive
services.[Added 8-28-2018 by Ord. No. 16-2018]
DRIVEWAY — A private roadway providing access to a public street or
highway, including any pathway necessary to access the driveway from a
qualified residential property.[Added 8-28-2018 by Ord. No. 16-2018]
DWELLING UNIT — A detached house, townhouse, apartment, cooperative,
condominium, mobile home, or any other similar habitable
structure.[Added 8-28-2018 by Ord. No. 16-2018]
ENTRANCEWAY — A private pathway providing access to the abutting
sidewalks from a qualified residential property.[Added 8-28-2018 by Ord.
No. 16-2018]
OCCUPANT — Shall mean any person, firm, partnership or corporation
other than an "owner," as hereinabove defined, regularly occupying such
premises, whether such occupancy be by written or oral lease or otherwise.
OWNER — Shall mean any person, firm, partnership or corporation vested
with legal title, and shall include the spouse of a record owner. Where the
legal title is vested in two or more persons, firms or corporations, jointly or
in common, any of such persons, firms or corporations shall be deemed to
be an "owner".
PRIVATE COMMUNITY — A residential condominium, cooperative, fee
simple community, horizontal property regime, or mobile home park
compromised of a community trust or other trust device, condominium
§ 79-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-4
1:247
association, homeowners' association, or council of co-owners.[Added
8-28-2018 by Ord. No. 16-2018]
QUALIFIED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — A dwelling unit occupied by a
senior or disabled person or persons living by themselves or with young
children, except for a rental unit, the lease of which requires the landlord to
provide snow and ice removal equivalent to that provided under a volunteer
program, or a unit in a private community, the governing documents of
which require the entity responsible for managing the common elements
and facilities of the community to provide snow and ice removal equivalent
to that provided under a volunteer program.[Added 8-28-2018 by Ord.
No. 16-2018]
§ 79-5. Violations and penalties.
See § 1:14.1.
§ 79-6. Volunteer assistance program. [Amended 8-28-2018 by Ord.
No. 16-2018]
A. The Borough will solicit volunteers for the program each year via its
online outlets, email blasts and any other media source deemed
appropriate, and maintain a list of said volunteers.
B. The Borough will solicit information from seniors and the disabled in
need of these services each year via its online outlets, email blasts and
any other media source deemed appropriate, and maintain a list of
those in need.
C. The Borough will assign a minimum of two volunteers, one primary
volunteer and one backup volunteer, to each property in need based on
geographic distance.
D. The contact information for both volunteers and residents in need will
be kept confidential. The volunteers will have only the address of the
residents in need, and the residents in need will not have the contact
information of their assigned volunteer(s).
E. The Borough Administrator and/or her designee will be the official
coordinator of the program.
F. The volunteers shall serve without compensation, but shall be entitled
to request assistance and avail themselves of the facilities and
equipment of the Borough as may be required and as may be made
available for the purposes of the volunteer program.
G. The volunteers shall not be considered employees or agents of the
Borough, and shall not be entitled to worker's compensation or any
other benefits in the event of injury as a result of participation in the
volunteer program, and shall not be entitled to indemnification by the
Borough.
§ 79-4 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 79-6
1:248
Chapter 80
SOLID WASTE AND TRASH DISPOSAL
§ 80-1. Residential collection.
§ 80-2. Placement of containers.
All garbage, refuse, trash and solid waste, and/or containers containing the
same shall be set or placed for collection at the curbside pickup point;
however, in no event shall the same be placed in the street or roadway nor
be placed upon the sidewalk so as to interfere with pedestrian passage.
Where a sidewalk runs parallel to a street or roadway and the space
between the same is insufficient for proper placement of a container or item
of trash or garbage as provided above, such container or trash shall be
placed for collection at a point on the opposite side of the sidewalk.
§ 80-3. Time for placement and removal of containers.
No person shall set or place any container or trash at the curbside pickup
point for collection before 6:00 p.m. on the date prior to collection day nor
allow any empty containers to remain at the curbside pickup point as herein
defined after 8:00 p.m. of the day of collection.
§ 80-4. Collection schedule.
The Borough shall provide curbside service twice per week for all residents,
with a maximum of four containers/bundles as referenced in § 80-1C and
D per pickup. In addition to the four containers/bundles, a resident shall
H. Each volunteer will be required to sign a hold harmless waiver from the
Borough.6
A. The owner or occupant of any property, prior to the placement of
collection of garbage, refuse, trash and solid waste, shall store the same
in such a manner as not to become a nuisance to the owners or
occupants of any adjacent property.
B. Owners or occupants of all properties shall provide containers for the
collection of garbage, refuse, trash and solid waste at their own cost
and expense.
C. Containers, together with their contents, shall not weigh more than 50
pounds or measure more than 50 gallons.
D. Garbage, refuse, trash or other solid waste placed for collection which
is not placed in containers shall be securely tied in bundles, which
bundles shall not exceed four feet in length and shall not exceed 50
pounds total.
6. Editor's Note: Former § 79-7, When effective, was repealed 8-28-2018 by Ord. No. 16-2018.
§ 79-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-4
1:249
be permitted to place at the curbside pickup point up to a maximum of
two additional bulk items, limited to household furniture including couches,
dressers, mattresses, etc.
§ 80-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine of not more than $500 for the first offense, $1,000 for
any subsequent offenses, and/or to imprisonment for not more than 90 days,
or to both a fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the Court.
Chapter 81
STORM DRAINS
§ 81-1. Purpose.
An ordinance to prohibit illicit connections and the spilling, dumping or
disposal of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s)(MS4) operated by the Borough of Waldwick, so as to
protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the
failure to comply.
§ 81-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words,
and their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their
use in the text of this Chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning.
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions below are the
same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New Jersey Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or non-physical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of
Waldwick, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other
than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit
Number NJ0141852). Non-physical connections may include, but are not
limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Non-domestic waste, including, but not limited to,
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1317(a), (b), or (c))
§ 80-4 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 81-2
1:250
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or system
of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains)
that is owned or operated by the Borough of Waldwick or other public body,
and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Non-contact cooling water may however contain algaecides, or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than non-contact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off of the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Waldwick or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
§ 81-3. Prohibited conduct. [Amended 11-24-09 by Ord. No. 23-09]
No person shall discharge, spill, dump, dispose of materials other than
stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Borough of Waldwick. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other
than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants
to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
Additionally no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through
an illicit connection to the municipal separate storm sewer operated by
the Borough of Waldwick any domestic sewage, non–contact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 81-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-3
1:251
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstruction
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 81-4. Exceptions to prohibition.
1. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
2. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in Chapter 77-22E3 prior
to the completion of the project.
a. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
b. Uncontaminated ground water (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising ground water).
c. Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and non-contact cooling
water).
d. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
e. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
f. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges.
g. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
h. Flows from fire fighting activities.
i. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
-Beach maintenance equipment following their use for their intended
purposes; and
-Equipment used in application of salt and de-icing materials
immediately following salt and de-icing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum extent
practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and sweeping).
Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for reuse or properly
discarded.
Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation is limited to
exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not apply to
engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 81-3 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 81-5
1:252
§ 81-5. Enforcement.
The Police Department and/or Municipal Officials of the Borough of
Waldwick shall enforce this ordinance.
§ 81-6. Penalties.
See Chapter 1:14.1.
§ 81-7. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this ordinance is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this ordinance to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this ordinance.
Chapter 82
STREET AND SIDEWALK USES
§ 82-1. Obstructing sidewalks, curbs and gutters; exception for
garbage and refuse collections. [Amended 2-22-94 by Ord. No. 2-94;
2-13-01 by Ord. No. 3-01]
It shall be unlawful to put or place or keep any obstructions in any of the
gutters or on any of the curbs or sidewalks of any street of the Borough of
Waldwick, or to put or place or keep any glass, ashes, cans, bags, boxes,
garbage or refuse materials on any of the streets, curbs or sidewalks of
the Borough; but nothing herein contained shall be deemed to make it
unlawful for any resident of the Borough to put or place on the street in
front of the property or premises occupied by him a can, box or other
container containing household garbage and/or refuse, on the night before
the regularly scheduled day for the collection of garbage and refuse in his
section of the Borough. These containers shall be removed from the curb
no later than the end of the day of the regularly scheduled day for the
collection of garbage and refuse in their section of the Borough. Outdoor
display of goods and sales authorized under Chapter 62A are excluded
under this section.
§ 82-2. Permits required to drive over curb or sidewalk and to store
materials on street, curb or sidewalk.
It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle on or over any curb or sidewalk of
any street of the Borough, except on a driveway provided for that purpose,
or to put, place or keep any building or other materials on any street, curb
or sidewalk of the Borough, without first obtaining a permit in writing for
that purpose from the Borough Clerk.
§ 81-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-3
1:253
§ 82-3. Applications for permits; agreement. [Amended 1-28-92 by
Ord. 1-92]
The permit required by this ordinance shall be issued by the Borough Clerk
on application, in writing, signed by the person, firm or corporation seeking
permission to drive any vehicle on or over any curb or sidewalk of any street
in the borough or seeking permission to put, place or keep any building
or other materials on any street, curb or sidewalk in the borough. The
application shall state the type of, time when and place where such material
is to be stored, or shall state which curb or sidewalk is to be crossed, and
shall contain an agreement on the part of the applicant to repair any and
all damage to streets, sidewalks or curbs as may result from such storage,
crossing or driving for which the permit is granted. Permits may be renewed
once in a given year.
§ 82-4. Deposit or bond required.
See Chapter 48:82-4.
§ 82-5. Storage of materials. [Amended 1-28-92 by Ord. 1-92]
All building or other materials stored on any street, curb or sidewalk under
any such permit shall be placed in a compact pile adjoining the curb and
shall not extend more than six (6) feet from said curb into the street, and
shall be properly guarded by red lights at night and shall be so piled so
as not to interfere with the flow of water in the gutters. There shall be no
storage of any materials on the street from December 1st through March
15th.
§ 82-6. Repairs to be made.
The applicant shall, within one (1) month of the causing of any such damage,
cause the same to be repaired in a manner satisfactory to the borough.
§ 82-7. Revocation of permit.
The Mayor and Council shall have the right to revoke any permit when in
their judgment it shall be for the best interests of the public so to do.
§ 82-8. Permit fee.
See Chapter 48:82-8.
§ 82-9. Violations and penalties.
See Chapter 1:14.1.
§ 82-10. Repeal of prior ordinance.
This ordinance repeals Ord. No. 14-53, entitled "An Ordinance Relating to
and Regulating the Use of Streets in the Borough of Waldwick".
§ 82-3 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 82-11
1:254
§ 82-11. When effective.
This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon passage and
publication as required by law.
Chapter 83
STREET CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS
§ 83-1. Compliance with standard specifications required; adoption
by resolution.
All streets, roads, curbs, sidewalks, water mains and drains for use by
the public within the Borough of Waldwick shall be built, laid and/or
constructed in accordance with the "Standard Specifications and
Regulations Concerning Construction Work in Public Streets", adopted or
to be adopted by resolution of the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Waldwick and in force at the time such work is commenced or undertaken.
§ 83-2. Changes in standard specifications authorized.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Waldwick shall have the right from
time to time to change, alter and amend such specifications and regulations
by resolution of such body, and such specifications and regulations as
changed, altered and amended by resolution shall have the same force and
effect and be governed by the terms of this ordinance as if they were set
forth at length herein at the time of the adoption hereof.
§ 83-3. Filing of public copy in Clerk's office.
A copy of the "Standard Specifications and Regulations Concerning
Construction Work in Public Streets" in force shall be kept on file at the
Borough Clerk's office for examination, inspection and use during the
regular hours of business by persons interested therein.
§ 83-4. Violations and penalties.
See Chapter 1:14.1.
§ 83-5. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
Any ordinance or parts of ordinances inconsistent with this ordinance are
hereby repealed.
§ 83-6. When effective.
This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon passage and
publication as required by law.
Chapter 84
§ 82-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-6
1:255
STREET EXCAVATIONS
§ 84-1. Permit required to excavate in streets.
No person, firm, corporation or agency shall excavate, dig or disturb the
surface of any public street in the Borough of Waldwick for the purpose
of laying, removing, reconstructing, repairing, extending or examining any
pipes, conduits or other facilities, or for any other purpose whatsoever,
without first obtaining a road permit as hereinafter provided.
§ 84-2. Application fees.
See Chapter 48:84-2.
§ 84-3. Procedures.
A. The holder of a road opening permit shall notify the Superintendent of
Public Works and the Police Department of the Borough of Waldwick at
least twenty-four (24) hours prior to commencement of excavation in
any public street.
B. Before removing any part thereof, pavement shall be cut with a proper
cutting tool.
C. The width of any excavation shall be no more than required for the work
to be done.
D. All work shall proceed and all reasonable steps shall be taken to
minimize any disruption of traffic flow.
E. All trenches shall be backfilled as soon as possible and in accordance
with standard specifications of the Borough of Waldwick and a
minimum of eighteen-inch stone dust shall be maintained until final
repairs or restoration is completed. Temporary repairs shall be made
only at such times as designated by the Superintendent of Public Works.
F. Permanent pavement shall be restored in accordance with the standard
specifications of the Borough of Waldwick and at such times as shall be
designated by the Superintendent of Public Works.
G. Upon failure of any permit holder to comply with the conditions hereof,
the Borough of Waldwick may undertake to do whatever may be
necessary to protect the interests of the Borough and the safety of its
residents. Any cost or expense incurred by the Borough by reason of the
failure of any permit holder to comply with the provisions hereof shall
be certified by the Superintendent of Public Works and charged to the
permit holder or deducted from the amount which might otherwise be
refunded in accordance with section 84-4 below.
§ 83-6 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 84-4
1:256
§ 84-4. Certificate of completion. [Ord. No. 6-2017]
The Superintendent of Public Works shall so certify when a permit holder
has completed restoration of the permanent pavement in accordance with
the specifications of the Borough of Waldwick. Such certificate shall also
contain a statement of the action, if any required to be taken by the borough
by reason of the failure of the permit holder to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter together with all costs and expenses incurred by
the borough in connection therewith. No such certification shall be made
until at least one hundred eighty days (180) after all of the work has been
completed. Upon receipt of such certification, the permit holder shall be
entitled to a refund of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500) of the
application fee paid; provided, however, that any costs or expenses incurred
by the borough as set forth in said certificate shall be deducted from any
refund which might otherwise be due.
§ 84-5. Exceptions and special requirements.
The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to:
A. The opening or excavation of a County road for which a permit has been
obtained from the County of Bergen.
B. The openings or excavations made by a public utility corporation
subject to regulation by the Board of Public Utility Commissioners and
which has the right to lay, construct, install, maintain and operate its
works or facilities or any of them in any public road or street of the
Borough, which are to be made for the purpose of laying, relaying,
constructing, reconstructing, installing, maintaining, operating or
repairing any such works or facilities, if such public utility corporation
shall, prior to the doing of any such work, have filed with the Borough
Clerk its bond running to the Borough of Waldwick in the sum of one
thousand dollars ($1,000), conditioned for the temporary and
permanent restoration of any road, street or pavement thereof which
may be opened or excavated by such utility, its employees or
contractors, without undue delay, to as good condition as the same was
at the time of the opening thereof, and to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent of Public Works; which bond shall further provide that
the obligation thereof shall be a continuing obligation to the full amount
thereof for each opening of any road or pavement. Such utility
corporation shall, except in cases of emergency, give at least twentyfour
(24) hours' notice to the Superintendent of Public Works of its
intention to open or excavate, which notice shall describe with
reasonable certainty the road or street and section thereof so to be
opened and excavated and the purpose of such opening or excavation
and the probable length of time before the same will be restored to its
previous condition. In the case of emergency openings, a similar notice
shall be given to the Superintendent of Public Works as soon as
practicable after such opening is made. The utility corporation so
opening or excavating any such road or street for the purposes
aforesaid, or causing the same to be done by its employees or
§ 84-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-5
1:257
§ 84-6. Additional regulations.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed a waiver of any other
conditions or regulations in connection with the construction or extension
of water service facilities when the same is not done by the Borough of
Waldwick.
§ 84-7. Violations and penalties.
See Chapter 1:14.1.
Chapter 85
(RESERVED)
Chapter 86
(RESERVED)
Chapter 87
SWIMMING POOL, MUNICIPAL
§ 87-1. Establishment of positions.
The following positions are hereby established:
§ 87-2. Duties of the Certified Pool Operator.
The duties of the Certified Pool Operator are as follows:
contractors, shall, without undue delay, temporarily and permanently
restore such road or street and the surface thereof to as good condition
as the same was at the time of such opening, to the satisfaction of
the Superintendent of Public Works, and in case of its failure so to
do the work may be done by the Borough under the direction of the
Superintendent of Public Works at the expense of such utility
corporation.
A. Certified Pool Operator (CPO). The Certified Pool Operator is required
to hold all titles and licenses required by the State of New Jersey.
B. Head Lifeguard.
C. Lifeguards. Both the head lifeguard and all other lifeguards are
required to be certified as lifeguards by the American Red Cross. They
are also to be qualified in CPR, and first aid, and hold all other
certificates required by the State of New Jersey or other applicable
laws.
§ 84-5 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 87-2
1:258
A. Direct the operation and maintenance of the pool and its grounds and
facilities, reporting directly to the Borough Administrator and the
Mayor and Council of the Borough of Waldwick.
B. The CPO will be responsible for scheduling and maintaining timesheets
for the entire lifeguarding operation and its related activities in such a
way that there is always an appropriate number on staff to safely
control and supervise the number of swimmers in the water, check for,
and sell badges, and allow for breaks for the guards to rest and have a
meal period. The CPO will be responsible for all disciplinary problems
with the pool personnel, and report major problems directly to the
Borough Administrator.
C. Twice a season, (mid season and the last week of the pool season), the
CPO will evaluate all pool personnel's performances and his/her
findings shall be communicated directly to the people involved. An end
of the year report with all of the pool's personnel evaluation will be
forwarded to the Mayor and Council.
D. The CPO will formulate training plans for assigned employees, conduct
training and staff meetings as required to broaden employee skills.
E. The CPO will be responsible for the operation of the pool and ensuring
that the water quality is within State code standards. When the CPO is
not on duty, he/she will assign an individual to carry out these tests.
This person shall be either the head lifeguard and/or any other
management personnel.
F. All needed repairs of the filters, piping, or any other work piece of
equipment belonging to the facility will be reported to the
Superintendent of Public Works of the Borough of Waldwick so he may
schedule the appropriate repairs.
G. The CPO will be responsible for ordering all the necessary chemicals
and supplies needed to maintain the pool facility through vendors
normally utilized by the Borough of Waldwick. This includes the pool
bathrooms, filter house, and guard house.
H. The CPO will be required to assign personnel to sell pool badges daily,
collect fees, account for all transactions, and make deposits within 48
hours into the appropriate Borough of Waldwick bank accounts. Daily
receipts will be reconciled to badges sold.
I. The CPO will also coordinate all extra activities such as the weekly
crafts, annual water carnival, and demonstrations by various Borough
and other civic organizations.
J. The CPO at season's end will prepare the budgetary report needs for
the next season to insure proper levels of staffing, equipment and
chemicals.
§ 87-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-3
1:259
§ 87-3. Duties of the Head Lifeguard and lifeguards.
The duties of the Head Lifeguard and the lifeguards are as follows:
§ 87-4. Rules and regulations of the Municipal Pool.
A. The position of Head Lifeguard in this section will perform all the duties
of the lifeguards, as well as performing the duties of the Certified Pool
Operator (CPO) during his/her absence.
B. The lifeguards will receive their assignments under the direction of the
CPO and/or Head Lifeguard. The main duties of the lifeguard staff will
be to maintain constant vigilance over bathers in the bathing area.
C. They will enforce all rules of the Waldwick Pool facility, and dispense
punishment, or in the opinion of the Pool Manager, expel the individual
from the facility grounds.
D. All guards are required to wear their uniforms supplied by the Borough
when reporting for their duty each day.
E. Guards will be assigned other duties as required by the CPO or Head
Lifeguard which will be performed daily. These assignments are:
Cleaning of the bathrooms, empty garbage receptacles and pick up
trash on the grounds, clean pool deck, baby pool and main pool, sell
badges, lower all umbrellas at the day's end, put out sprinkler to deter
geese from landing in the water, and any other duty that the CPO or
Head Lifeguard deems necessary to be completed.
A. All users of the facility and its equipment will be required to purchase a
badge or daily pass to gain entrance. Individuals will be allowed to pick
up children without purchasing a pass. Only Waldwick residents and
their guests will be allowed with the exception of those limited number
of out of town residents that are allowed to join. Residents of other
communities may be able to utilize the pool on an annual basis upon the
approval of the Mayor and Council at a fee to be determined by
resolution.
B. No swimming will take place without a lifeguard being on duty.
C. No shorts will be allowed to be worn when in the water.
D. Only Coast-Guard-approved flotation devices are permitted. [Amended
8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-19]
E. Profanity, rough housing or any other unacceptable behavior will not be
tolerated. In the judgment of the Pool Manager, Head Lifeguard, said
individuals will be expelled from the pool grounds. In any event of a
serious act of an individual, the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Waldwick may revoke his/her pool badge for the remainder of the pool
season.
F. Running will not be allowed on any surfaces around the pool grounds.
§ 87-3 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 87-4
1:260
§ 87-5. Times of operation.
The municipal swimming pool and enclosure shall be opened during the
periods of the year and during such hours of the day as the Mayor and
Council shall, by resolution prescribe, and no person shall enter the pool or
pool enclosure except during such times.
§ 87-6. License required to sell merchandise on municipal grounds
around pool.
No person, firm or corporation shall sell or maintain a place for the sale of
any article of food, clothing, or liquid refreshment on the municipal grounds
surrounding the municipal swimming pool unless licensed so to do so by the
Mayor and Council.
§ 87-7. Fees for permits and tags to use pool.
See § 48:87-4.
§ 87-8. Bathing in Borough Lake.
The use of White's Pond for bathing is hereby prohibited.
§ 87-9. Violations and penalties.
See § 1:14.1.
G. Badges will be presented upon entering the facility, or at any time when
requested by Pool facility personnel.
H. Inflatable or any type of water toys will not be allowed in the main pool.
I. Infants must wear diapers at all times. Waterproof diapers or rubber
pants are required.
J. No face masks or snorkels are permitted. [Amended 8-13-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-19]
K. The Municipal Pool closes at 8:00 p.m. or sundown. [Amended
8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-19]
L. If at any time the Pool Manager or his/her assistant deem it unsafe due
to weather conditions, etc., for bathers to swim, they will order the pool
closed to all individuals.
M. No animals except for service animals shall be permitted at the
Municipal Pool. [Amended 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-19]
N. There shall be a complete prohibition on smoking, including smokeless
tobacco, tobacco products, vaping and vaping products within the
property boundaries of the Waldwick Municipal Pool. [Added 12-27-12
by Ord. No. 17-12; amended 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-19]
§ 87-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-9
1:261
Chapter 88
SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE
§ 88-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the words and phrases listed below shall
be defined as follows:
ARTIFICIAL POOL — Any pool composed of entirely artificial construction.
PARTLY ARTIFICIAL POOLS — Any pool formed from a natural body of
water which has either so limited a flow of such an inadequate size that the
quantity or quality of the water must be maintained by artificial means.
PERMANENT POOL — Any private swimming pool designed to remain as
an installation for more than one (1) year.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Any pool designed and maintained for
swimming or wading purposes and used as an accessory to a residence by
the persons living therein and their guests. Unless otherwise qualified, the
term "private swimming pool" shall be construed as including both artificial
and partly artificial permanent pools, but shall not be deemed to include
temporary private pools.
TEMPORARY PRIVATE POOL — Any private swimming pool not intended or
designed as a permanent pool.
§ 88-2. Permits required to construct.
It shall be unlawful to construct or install within the Borough of Waldwick
a private swimming pool, as herein defined, without first having obtained a
permit therefor in the manner hereinafter prescribed.
§ 88-3. Applications for construction permits, permit fee; approval
of plans and specifications.
See Chapter 48:88-3.
§ 88-4. (Reserved)
§ 88-5. (Reserved)
§ 88-6. Notice of denial of permit. [Amended 8-24-76 by Ord. No.
17-76]
Persons denied a permit to construct or install a private swimming pool or
temporary private pool, as herein defined, shall be notified in writing by the
Building Inspector. Such notification shall specify the reason for such action
and the remedial action necessary to obtain approval for the issuance of
such permit or license.
§ 87-9 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 88-7
1:262
§ 88-7. Design, construction and maintenance requirements.
The structural design of all private swimming pools and the materials used
or to be used in the construction of such pools shall be of such character
and quality as to secure adequately the safety of persons working thereon
during the course of construction or installation and to secure adequately
the safety and protect the health of persons using such facilities for the
uses and purposes for which they were designed and intended. All materials
used in the construction of private swimming pools shall be waterproof and
easily cleaned. Uncovered sand or earth bottoms in such pools shall not
be permitted. All such pools shall be maintained in such condition as to
prevent water in such pools from seeping through the walls or floor into
the ground. Water from such pools shall not be permitted to overflow onto
adjacent properties. The immediate area surrounding such pools shall be
sloped away from the pools so that surface water will drain away from such
pools.
§ 88-8. Connections with potable water supply.
There shall be no physical connection between a potable public or private
water supply system and such private swimming pools or temporary private
pools at a point below the maximum water line of the pool or to a
recirculating or heating system for such pools.
§ 88-9. Draining requirements.
All private swimming pools shall be provided with one (1) drainage outlet
not in excess of three (3) inches in diameter, extending from the pool to
either a brook, storm sewer or lawn-sprinkling system on the premises on
which said private swimming pool is located. The discharge of water from
such pools into a brook or storm sewer shall be permitted only following
approval by the proper state, county and/or municipal officials, as the case
requires. Approval of an application shall only be given if it is feasible to
discharge water from a pool into an accessible brook or storm sewer or to
use such water for purposes of lawn sprinkling on said premises. Approval
shall not be given to discharge such water at the curb or upon the surface
of any street.
§ 88-10. Distance restrictions.
No private swimming pool hereafter constructed or installed shall be
created nearer to a street property line or nearer to a side or rear property
line than as provided for accessory buildings in Chapter 97-13 of the Zoning
Ordinance of the Borough of Waldwick, as amended or hereafter amended.
All private swimming pools shall be considered as structures in the
determination of yard sizes or lot coverage. Anything to the contrary
notwithstanding, no private swimming pool shall be located within twenty
(20) feet of any individual sewerage disposal system or part thereof.
Editor's Note: Included as Ch. 97, Zoning.
§ 88-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-11
1:263
§ 88-11. Fencing. [Amended 9-12-72 by Ord. No. 15-72]
All private swimming pools or temporary private pools within the Borough
of Waldwick which are twenty-four (24) inches or greater in height shall
be enclosed by a substantial fence the height of which shall be not less
than four (4) feet nor more than six (6) feet in height above the established
grade; provided, however, that no fence more than four (4) feet in height
above the established grade shall be located within eight (8) feet of any
property line. Such fencing shall be so constructed as to prevent, within
reason, any person from gaining access beneath or through said fence, and
shall have similarly substantial gates or doors with facilities for locking
said gates or doors at all times when the pool is unguarded, unattended
or not in actual use. The provisions of this section relating to fencing or
pool facilities shall not, however, be applicable where a private swimming
pool or temporary private pool is located more than three hundred (300)
feet from the front property line, and where there is present on the side
and rear lot lines walls or fencing the height of which shall be not less than
the maximum height permitted for fences under the relevant sections of the
Zoning Ordinance, and which shall be so constructed as to prevent, within
reason, any person from gaining access beneath or through said fencing.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 97, Zoning.
§ 88-12. Artificial lighting.
No artificial lighting shall be maintained or operated in connection with
private swimming pools or temporary private pools in such a manner as to
be a nuisance or an annoyance to neighboring properties.
§ 88-13. Water quality.
The physical, chemical and bacterial qualities of the water in any private
swimming pool or temporary private pool shall at all times comply with the
latest recommendations made therefor by the New Jersey State Department
of Health or the Board of Health of the Borough of Waldwick.
§ 88-14. Abatement of health nuisances; suspension of license.
Any nuisance or hazard to health or safety which may exist or develop in, in
consequence of or in connection with any such swimming pool or temporary
private pool shall be abated and removed by the owner or occupant of
the premises on which the pool is located within ten (10) days of receipt
of notice from the Building Inspector or Board of Health of the Borough
of Waldwick, as the case may be. The license of any person to maintain,
operate or use a private swimming pool or temporary private pool may
be suspended at any time when, in the opinion of the Building Inspector
or the Board of Health, as the case may be, or the authorized agent of
either, such action is deemed necessary to abate a present or threatened
menace to public health or safety. Notice of such suspension, in writing,
shall be served upon the owner or occupant of the premises on which the
offending facility is located. Service shall be deemed to have been made
§ 88-11 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 88-14
1:264
when delivery of such notice in writing is made in person to such owner or
occupant as appears upon the tax records of the Borough of Waldwick, and
if no service can be so made, then by posting such notice of suspension in a
prominent place at the site of the offending facility. Such notice shall include
the reason for such action and the remedial action deemed necessary to be
taken before the suspension may be lifted.
§ 88-15. Hearings upon denial of permit or license.
Persons who have been denied permits to construct or install a private
swimming pool or temporary private pool, or who have had licenses to
maintain, operate or use such facilities denied or suspended, shall, at such
person's option, be afforded a hearing before the Board of Adjustment at
a time appointed by such Board. The Board shall, after due consideration,
render a written decision confirming or rescinding the denial or suspension,
and shall furnish the appellant with a copy thereof.
§ 88-16. Violations and penalties.
See Chapter 1:14.1.
§ 88-17. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is
for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not
affect the remaining portions of this ordinance.
§ 88-18. Repeal of prior ordinance.
This ordinance expressly repeals and rescinds an ordinance entitled "An
Ordinance to Regulate the Construction, Installation, Maintenance, and
Operation of Private Swimming Pools and Other Such Facilities in the
Borough of Waldwick," enacted on or about April 12, 1960, and identified as
Ord. No. 3-60.
§ 88-19. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication according to law.
Chapter 89
TOWING AND STORAGE REGULATIONS
§ 89-1. Definitions.
DECOUPLING FEE — A charge by a towing company for releasing a motor
vehicle to its owner or operator when the vehicle has been, or is about to
be, hooked or lifted by a tower, but prior to the vehicle actually having been
moved or removed from the property or roadway location.
§ 88-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-1
1:265
DISABLED VEHICLE — A vehicle which has been abandoned, impounded
or rendered inoperable as a result of a mechanical failure or involvement
in an accident. A vehicle, the location of which constitutes a hazard to
the motoring public shall be deemed disabled for the purposes of this
ordinance.
EMERGENCY DUTY CALL LIST — An annual list kept by the Borough
of Waldwick containing the names of towing operators who have been
approved pursuant to this ordinance.
IMPOUNDMENT — The act of storing and confining a vehicle upon an order
from the Police Department at either the towing operator's storage area
or at the Borough facility as a result of abandonment, involvement in an
accident or suspected criminal activity, or disabled as defined above.
MOTOR VEHICLE CRASH — The collision of any motorized vehicle with
another motorized vehicle, pedestrian, animal, debris, or any stationary
object which results in the need for the motorized vehicle to be removed
from public or private roads via towing service.[Added 9-25-2018 by Ord.
No. 21-2018]
NON-CONSENSUAL TOWING — The towing of a motor vehicle from private
or public property without the consent of the owner or operator of the
vehicle.
OWNER — A person, firm, partnership or corporation who owns and/or
operates a vehicle on the roads and highways within the Borough of
Waldwick, which vehicle by reason of being abandoned or disabled on the
public roadways of the Borough of Waldwick requires towing services.
PRIVATE PARKING LOT — Any parking lot or area owned by a private entity
that provides parking spaces for a fee or requires the permission of the
owner, lessee or agent before a person may park at that location. A private
parking lot includes vehicle parking spaces in an apartment complex and
condominium association.
TOWING — The moving or removing from public or private property or from
a storage facility at the request of an agent of the Borough of Waldwick
a motor vehicle that is damaged as a result of an accident or otherwise
disabled, recovered after being stolen, or is parked illegally or otherwise
without authorization, or the immobilization of or preparation for moving or
removing of such motor vehicle, for which a service charge is made, either
directly or indirectly.
TOWING OPERATOR — A person, firm, partnership or corporation engaged
in the business of providing towing and storage services for vehicle towed.
WRECKER — A vehicle driven by mechanical power and employed for the
purpose of towing, transporting, conveying or removing any and all kinds
of vehicles or parts of vehicles which are unable to be operated under their
own power.
§ 89-1 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 89-2
1:266
§ 89-2. Application for placement on emergency duty list. [Amended
2-23-10 by Ord. No. 4-10]
Towing operators who seek to provide wrecking, towing, storage and
emergency road service within the Borough of Waldwick to motor vehicle
owners at the request of the Police Department shall submit an application
to be approved by the Chief of Police upon forms prepared and provided by
the Chief of Police. Upon approval, the towing operator will be placed on the
annual emergency duty call list to be maintained at the Police Department,
in order of the date and time the application is received. The emergency
duty call list shall expire on May 31 of each year. Any towing operator on
the prior year's list will have to file a new application to be approved for
placement on the new emergency duty call list.
The application shall include as a minimum the following information:
§ 89-3. Requirements of approval.
The Chief of Police shall approve an application when he finds that the
following requirements have been met by the applicant:
1. Name of the firm;
2. Owner(s) of firm;
3. Address of primary place of business;
4. Corporate mailing address;
5. Telephone numbers of firm and owner(s) of firm;
6. Listing of all vehicles to be used;
7. Proof of heavy-duty wrecker availability;
8. Proof of insurance;
9. Certificate of occupancy from municipality where operation is located;
10. Responsible party for records maintenance;
11. Listing of all drivers;
12. Payment of $300 licensing fee.
A. The insurance policies required herein have been obtained by the
towing operator.
B. The towing operator's wrecker(s) have been properly licensed and
conform to state motor vehicle laws. All wreckers must display New
Jersey commercial license plates.
C. The towing operator's company name, address and telephone number
are permanently displayed on both sides of the wrecker.
§ 89-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-3
1:267
D. The requirements of this ordinance and all other laws, statutes and
ordinances have been satisfied.
E. Application fee having been paid. [Amended 11-9-10 by Ord. No.
19-10]
F. Any person, firm, corporation or partnership operating a towing and
storage business shall conform to a legally approved zoning and/or site
plan and shall comply fully with all of the local community's zoning,
land use and property maintenance codes. Towing operators may
conduct business and store vehicles outside the boundaries of the
Borough, but at no time be further than 2.5 miles from the Waldwick
Public Safety complex.
G. Towing operators shall maintain a storage yard with sufficient capacity
for the safe storage of all vehicles towed. The yard shall have a
continuous fence and lockable gate of suitable material not less than six
feet in height. All vehicles towed shall be secured within the locked
storage yard when no employees are present. The storage yard shall be
lighted from dusk to dawn. The business office shall remain open to the
public at least five days a week between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m., excluding holidays, and the towing company shall provide
reasonable accommodations for after-hours release of stored vehicles
and shall not charge any additional fees for release of vehicles after
normal business hours or weekends.
H. All towing operators' trucks must be equipped with either two-way
radio and/or mobile telephone communications equipment with their
principal place of business to ensure the proper availability of services
and equipment on behalf of the Borough and motorists.
I. All towing operators' trucks shall be equipped with brooms, shovels and
any other street sweeping equipment for the purpose of clearing debris
off the roadways.
J. All towing operators must guarantee the availability of all services to
the Borough seven days a week, 24 hours a day. In this respect, a
towing operator shall immediately respond to any type of towing
emergency road service or storage call with the appropriate vehicle
and/or equipment within 20 minutes after receipt of the telephone
notification from the police department. Unless heavy or unusual traffic
conditions or inclement weather within the Borough prevents a towing
operator from arriving at the scene within 20 minutes, failure to
respond within the time frame may cause cancellation of that tow and
the appointment of another towing operator to complete the service.
K. The towing operator shall accept either cash, money order, a check
issued by an insurance company, a valid debit card or a valid major
credit card for all services rendered unless the towing operator had a
bona fide reason to believe the credit/debit card is not valid.
§ 89-3 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 89-3
1:268
§ 89-4. Emergency duty calls.
Emergency duty calls to approved towing operators will be based upon
establishing of a towing operator list for services to be performed within the
Borough of Waldwick. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to establish
and maintain a system to assign towing operators on the emergency duty
call list to respond to disabled vehicles and impoundments within the
Borough of Waldwick. The towers shall be placed on towing operator list in
order of the date and time the application was received.
§ 89-5. Charges for towing and related services.
The towing operator's charges for towing and related services provided
pursuant to this ordinance shall not exceed the maximum charges set forth
on the fee schedule for removal and storage of vehicles set forth herein.
§ 89-6. Cleanup incidental to towing services.
The towing operator shall at the time of removing any motor vehicle in
response to a Police request, remove from the public or private roads
or highways all vehicle debris or material in the area surrounding the
vehicle, except for any debris or material which may be hazardous, such
as oil, gasoline, kerosene, or other petroleum or chemical products. Such
cleanup shall be performed by the towing operator without charge to the
Borough of Waldwick or the vehicle owner. Failure to provide these services
satisfactorily may be cause for suspension or removal from the approved
towing operator list as provided by this ordinance.
§ 89-7. Service performed on behalf of vehicle owners.
The towing operator shall, if called by the Borough of Waldwick, charge
vehicle owners for service which it renders, in no instance shall the towing
operator look to the Borough of Waldwick for payment of services
performed pursuant to this ordinance.
§ 89-8. Powers and duties of the Chief of Police.
The Chief shall have the right at all times to inspect all wreckers and
storage facilities providing services. Should the Chief at any time determine
L. Upon request, prior to providing any towing services, a driver of a tow
truck shall provide the person whose vehicle is to be towed a written
schedule of fees.
M. When a valid request is made by the owner or operator of a vehicle that
is about to be hooked or lifted but not actually been moved or removed
from a property or roadway, the tow operator shall decouple the vehicle
in lieu of towing upon payment of the appropriate decoupling fee.
N. All other requirements appended to the application for approval have
been satisfied.
§ 89-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-8
1:269
that the equipment or storage facilities being used do not comply with the
requirements of this ordinance, he/she shall have the power and authority
to direct the immediate correction or repair of the same within a specified
period of time. The Chief of Police is also hereby authorized and empowered
to establish and publish from time to time such additional rules and
regulations, not inconsistent herewith, as may be reasonable and necessary
in carrying out the provisions of this ordinance.
§ 89-9. Suspension and removal for noncompliance.
The Chief of Police shall have the power to suspend a towing operator from
the emergency duty call list for a period of 30 days for failing to comply with
any section of this ordinance. A subsequent violation by the towing operator
will result in the towing operator's permanent removal from the emergency
duty call list.
The Chief of Police shall investigate all complaints made by property owners
for losses to their vehicles, complaints for excessive charges, and
incomplete clean up pursuant to Article 6. An appeal of a removal by the
Chief of Police may be filed with the Borough Administrator within 10
calendar days of the Chief's decision. Upon the filing of an appeal a hearing
shall be held by the Waldwick Borough Council within 30 calendar days
after the receipt of the appeal. The Waldwick Borough Council shall render
its determination within 20 calendar days of the conclusion of final hearing
date and its determination as rendered shall be final and conclusive.
§ 89-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this ordinance shall upon
conviction thereof, be liable for penalties prescribed in Chapter 1 of the
Code of the Borough of Waldwick.
§ 89-11. Indemnification.
The towing operator hereby agrees to hold harmless and indemnify the
Borough of Waldwick from any and all obligations, expenses and/or
damages arising out of any claims which may hereafter be asserted against
the Borough of Waldwick by anyone for loss or damages to personal
property, for personal injury, or for any other damages in connection with
the rendering of services pursuant to this ordinance.
§ 89-12. Fee schedule for removal and storage of vehicles.
[Amended 2-25-03 by Ord. No. 5-03; 2-23-10 by Ord. No. 4-10;
9-25-2018 by Ord. No. 21-2018]
Towing-storage fee schedule.
A. Fees for towing and storage of private passenger vehicles damaged in
an accident, disabled, impounded by the police or recovered after being
stolen, may not exceed the fees established by the Predatory Towing
§ 89-8 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 89-12
1:270
Prevention Act (N.J.S.A. 56:13-7 et seq.) or the regulations promulgated
thereto (N.J.A.C. 13:45A-31.1 et seq.).
B. The following is a fee schedule for basic automobile, motorcycles,
motorized bikes, towing services and heavy-duty recovery of such
vehicle which are not involved in a motor vehicle crash:
(1) Basic towing service anywhere within the Borough of Waldwick or
to storage yard (two-axle vehicle) under 8,000 pounds.
(a) Wheel lift: $150.
(b) Additional axles: $35 each.
(c) Motorcycle: $100.
(2) Basic towing service within the Borough of Waldwick or to storage
yard (two-axle vehicle) 8,001 to 16,000 pounds.
(a) Towing: $250.
(b) Additional axles: $35 each.
(3) Heavy-duty towing within the Borough of Waldwick or to storage
yard (over 16,001 pounds).
(a) Towing: $550.
C. For any motorized vehicle involved in a motor vehicle crash, the Towing
Operator shall be permitted to charge the fees outlined in Subsection B,
and, additionally, those outlined in Subsections D, E, and F.
D. The following is a fee schedule for storage services of all types of
vehicles involved in a motor vehicle crash:
(1) Inside building, storage facility (per calendar day):
(a) Under 10,000 pounds: $45 per day.
(b) Each additional axle: $20 each per day.
(2) Outside secured storage facility (per calendar day):
(a) Under 10,000 pounds: $35.
(b) Additional axle: $20 each per day.
(c) Over 10,000 pounds: $75 per day.
(d) Tandem axle truck: $100 per day.
(e) Tractor-trailer combo: $140 per day.
For purposes of calculating the above storage fees, a day
commences when the vehicle(s) to be stored arrive at the
towing facility and ceases when the owner(s) retrieves the
§ 89-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-12
1:271
vehicle(s). For example, if a vehicle arrives at a towing facility
at 5:00 p.m. and the owner retrieves the vehicle at 4:59 p.m.
the next day, the towing operator shall be entitled to charge
a one-day fee. If, however, the owner retrieves the vehicle at
5:01 p.m. the next day, the towing operator shall be entitled to
charge a two-day fee. The towing operator's bill shall include a
time stamp indicating the time the vehicle arrived in storage.
E. Rates for vehicle recovery and winching:
(1) Light duty:
(a) Winching (car does not roll or has flat tires): $75 per 1/2 hour.
(b) Off-road recovery or uprighting vehicle: $150 per 1/2 hour.
(2) Medium duty.
(a) Winching/Off-Road Recovery un-righting: $250 per 1/2 hour.
(3) Heavy Duty.
(a) Winching/Off-Road Recovery or un-righting: $425 per 1/2 hour.
F. Additional services.
(1) Crash wrap (if windows are broken or will not close):
(a) Per side window: $25.
(b) Front/rear window: $40.
(2) Administration fee: $35. An administration fee is only permitted in
the event the towing operator must make four trips or more to the
vehicle(s) towed while in storage. The trip necessary for the towing
operator to retrieve the vehicle(s) for the owner(s) shall not
constitute a "trip" for purposes of this administrative fee. Such
trips shall include, but not be limited to, faxes, going over car with
insurance adjustors, photographs, and inventory reports.
(3) Waiting time: $25 per 15 minutes, beginning after the first 15
minutes on scene.
(4) Cleanup fees.
(a) Cleanup of debris: $35.
(b) Speedy dry: $30 first bag.
(c) Each additional bag: $12.
(5) Decoupling fee: $50.
(6) Flatbed fee: $250. Flatbed fee only permitted where flatbed is only
safe means of transportation.
§ 89-12 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 89-12
1:272
§ 89-13. Proof of insurance required.
No towing operator shall be called by the Police Department unless the
towing operator has submitted proof to the Chief of Police that the towing
operator is insured by a regular service station or garage liability insurance
policy with the following policy limits:
G. Heavy vehicle recovery (over 16,000 pounds).
(1) To provide heavy vehicle recovery, the Borough of Waldwick
requires that the licensee have on scene a recovery supervisor with
Level 3 certification from the Towing and Recovery Association of
America (TRAA) or another nationally recognized certification.
(2) To perform heavy vehicle recovery under this chapter the licensee
must:
(a) Visually document the recovery scene through photos or
videotape.
(b) Prepare a written report of all procedures employed, actions
taken, equipment used and manpower requirements to
complete the recovery process in the safest manner and
provide and copy to the vehicle owner with the statement of
services.
(c) Prepare an itemized billing invoice for all services rendered.
(d) If the licensee finds it necessary, due to the nature of the
recovery, to contract additional recovery service to supplement
its equipment and manpower recovery, the contracted service
providers must work under the supervision of the licensee. The
licensee may not subcontract the entire recovery. In the event
that a heavy-duty operator is unable to handle the recovery
then the next heavy-duty wrecker on the rotating list shall be
called.
(e) There is a 3% annual cost of living increase on all fees listed
herein.
H. Waldwick Borough-owned vehicles. Any service provided to Waldwick
Borough-owned/leased vehicles shall be 1/2 of the above-listed rates.
A. Liability for personal injury to one person in any one occurrence:
$1,000,000.
B. Total liability for all personal injuries sustained in any one occurrence:
$1,000,000.
C. Liability for property damage arising in any one occurrence:
$1,000,000.
§ 89-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-13
1:273
§ 89-14. Severability.
If any article, section, subsection or sentence, clause or phrase of the
ordinance shall be held to be invalid for any reason, such decision shall not
affect the remaining portions of this ordinance.
§ 89-15. When effective.
This ordinance will take effect after final passage and publication as
required by law.
Chapter 90
(RESERVED)
Chapter 91
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 91-1. Definitions.
Words and Phrases
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle I of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes
of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phases used
herein. The following words or phrases shall have the respective meanings
ascribed herein:
PARKING METER — A mechanical device located upon a public street or
sidewalk in a place designated by ordinance as a parking meter zone as
hereinafter defined, which device shall record a certain number of hours or
minutes by the use of a clock mechanism determining the period of time for
which parking privileges may be extended to the person depositing a coin
therein.
PARKING METER SPACE — Any space within a parking meter zone,
adjacent to a parking meter, which is duly designated for the parking of
a single vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably marked on the curb
D. Liability for damage to property of others while in the care, custody, and
control of the towing operator and for loss or damage by fire or theft of
property of others while in the care, custody or control of the towing
operator for each item of property: $250,000.
Said insurance policy shall be endorsed to include the Borough of
Waldwick as a named insured and shall include a standard severability
of interest clause. Any additional cost for said insurance shall be paid by
the towing operator. Said insurance policy shall provide that the same
cannot be canceled or materially changed without 10 days prior written
notice to the Borough.
§ 89-13 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-1
1:274
or on the surface of the street or lot adjacent to or adjoining the parking
meters.
PARKING METER ZONE — An area designated by ordinance within which
vehicles may be temporarily parked and allowed to remain for the period of
time indicated on the meter.
Official Standard Time
Whenever certain hours are named in the chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Savings Time as may be in
current use.
§ 91-2. Authorization for the closing of any street.
§ 91-3. Tow-away.
Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter, which creates a nuisance
and a menace to the public safety and the proper regulation of traffic
may be towed. The owner shall bear the reasonable costs of removal and
storage, which may result in such removal before regaining possession of
the vehicle.
§ 91-4. Penalties.
Unless another penalty are expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this ordinance or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to penalties outlined in § 1-14.1.
§ 91-5. Effect of ordinance.
If any part or parts of this ordinance are, for any reason, held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
ordinance.
a. The Mayor or in his/her absence, disability or inability to act, the
Council President or, in his/her absence, disability or inability to act, the
highest ranking police official is hereby authorized to provide by
regulation for the closing of any street or portion thereof to motor
vehicle traffic on any day or days during specified hours on any day or
days whenever he/she finds that such closing is necessary for the
preservation of the public safety, health or welfare.
b. Any regulations promulgated by the Mayor, Council President or his/her
designee and in accordance with Subsection a above, shall provide for
the posting of proper warning signs of such closing on any street or
portion thereof during the time the same is closed in pursuance thereof.
c. Any regulation adopted that mandates the closing of any street for a
period greater than 48 consecutive hours shall not become effective
unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Transportation.
§ 91-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-6
1:275
§ 91-6. Repeal.
All former traffic ordinances contained within Chapter 91 of the Code of
the Borough of Waldwick are hereby repealed, and all ordinances or parts
of ordinances in conflict with or inconsistent with the provisions of this
ordinance are hereby repealed, except that this repeal shall not affect or
prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any act done or
committed in violation of any ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking
effect of this ordinance.
§ 91-7. Traffic controls for street and highway construction and
maintenance operations for municipal roads.
The Council hereby finds and declares that problems of traffic control
occur when traffic must be moved through or around street construction,
maintenance operations, and utility work, above and below ground, which
requires blocking the roadway and obstructing the normal flow of traffic;
and that such obstructions are or can become dangerous when not properly
controlled. In order to better promote the public health, safety, peace and
welfare, it is necessary to establish controls and regulation directed to
the safe and expeditious movement of traffic through construction and
maintenance zones and to provide safety for the work force performing
these operations.
The Borough of Waldwick does hereby adopt the current Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, hereinafter known as M.U.T.C.D., as supplemented
and amended, as it controls and regulates construction operations of utility
work, which obstructs the normal flow of traffic. Any person, contractor
or utility that fails to comply with the provisions of M.U.T.C.D. while
performing such work is in violation of this section.
PRE-CONSTRUCTION MEETING
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or in the case of
a public utility as required under the public utility agreement, wishing to
conduct work on, under or above the roadway to contact the Traffic Bureau
of the Waldwick Police Department in order to arrange a pre-construction
meeting to submit plans for the safe movement of traffic during such period
of construction of work. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to comply
with this section prior to the start of such work or whose plans are not
approved by the Traffic Bureau of the Waldwick Police Department is in
violation of this section.
EMERGENCY CONTACT TELEPHONE NUMBERS
The person, contractor, or utility shall provide the Traffic Bureau of the
Waldwick Police Department with at least two (2) emergency contact phone
numbers to be called in case of emergency problems at the construction or
maintenance site prior to the start of any work. If for any reason emergency
contact cannot be reached, or if the emergency contact person does not
respond to the call from the Police Department to correct a hazardous
§ 91-6 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-7
1:276
condition, the Borough may respond to correct such hazardous conditions.
The reasonable costs for such emergency services by the Borough shall be
charged to the person, contractor or utility.
HOURS
Except in the case of an emergency, there shall be no construction,
maintenance operations or utility work on any roadway in the Borough
before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. Road closing and/or traffic
detours shall not be permitted unless approved by the Traffic Bureau of the
Waldwick Police Department.
ROAD CLOSING
Road closing and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved
by the Waldwick Police Department.
TRAFFIC DIRECTORS
A traffic director shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when determined by the Traffic Bureau of the Waldwick Police Department
that they are necessary to provide for the safe and expeditious movement of
traffic.
STOP WORK
In order to abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard, the Traffic Bureau of
the Waldwick Police Department shall have the authority to order (i) work
stop; (ii) the removal of equipment, vehicles and materials stored within the
street right of way; (iii) the back filling of open excavations and/or other
related work.
SITE PREPARATION
No vehicles or equipment are to be placed in the roadway or sidewalk
area until all construction signs, lights, devices and pavement markings are
installed.
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
See § 1-14.1.
§ 91-8. Parking.
Regulations not Exclusive
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other, more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping or standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey Statute or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 91-9. Parking prohibited during state of emergency.
§ 91-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-9
1:277
§ 91-10. Temporary parking prohibition for snow plowing and
removal.
§ 91-11. Stopping or standing prohibited during certain hours on
certain streets.
(Reserved)
§ 91-12. Parking time limited on certain streets.
a. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary EMERGENCY NO
PARKING signs are displayed. The chief of police or in his/her absence,
the ranking police officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to
direct the posting of EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs when weather
conditions, accidents, road construction, fire or public celebrations
dictate or require avoidance of hazards or other conditions which
interfere with the free flow of traffic. Notification that EMERGENCY
NO PARKING signs are being or will be posted shall be given to the
operator or owner of any vehicle, which has been parked prior to the
posting of the signs.
b. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
a. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the streets or highways, an emergency shall exist and no vehicle shall
be parked on any street or highway within the Borough. The above
parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has ceased
until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent that
parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
b. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation shall be deemed
a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic and
any police officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The
owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage, which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the
vehicle.
A. Parking Time Limited Certain Hours. No person shall park a vehicle for
longer than the time limit between the hours listed on any day (except
Saturdays, Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described. [Amended Ord 8-09; 4-12-16 by Ord. No.
8-2016; 5-10-16 by Ord. No. 10-2016]
§ 91-9 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-12
1:278
Name of Street Sides
Time
Limit Hours Location
Dora Avenue Both 2 Hours 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From Ridge
Street to New
Jersey State
Highway # 17
East Prospect
Street
South 2 Hours 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From a point
100 feet east
of Nordham
Street to a
point 100 feet
west of Ridge
Street
East Prospect
Street
South 2 Hours 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From a point
50 feet east of
Ridge Street
extending 180
feet east
therefrom
East Prospect
Street
North 2 Hours 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From New
Jersey State
Highway # 17
to Sheridan
Avenue (CR 7)
Frederick Street North 2 Hours 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between
Franklin
Turnpike (CR
No.507) and
Harrison
Avenue
Frederick Street North 2 Hours 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From
Harrison
Avenue to
Hewson
Avenue
Frederick Street
[Added
5-10-16 by
Ord. No.
10-2016]
South 2 Hours 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From a point
120 feet west
of Franklin
Turnpike (CR
No.507) to a
point 35 feet
east of
Harrison
Avenue
§ 91-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-12
1:279
Name of Street Sides
Time
Limit Hours Location
Harrison Avenue West 2 Hours 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From a point
400 feet north
of Wyckoff
Avenue (CR
No. 502) to
Frederick
Street
Harrison Avenue East 2 Hours 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From a point
400 feet north
of Wyckoff
Avenue (CR
No.502) to
West Prospect
Street
Hewson Avenue
[Deleted
4-12-16 by
Ord. No.
8-2016]
Hewson Avenue West 2 Hours 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From a point
355 feet north
of Walter
Nightengale
Place to a
point 100 feet
north
therefrom
Howard Place Both 2 Hours 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Entire length
Hudson Avenue Both 2 Hours 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Easterly curb
line of Donald
Place to New
Jersey State
Highway # 17
Ridge Street East 2 Hours 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From East
Prospect
Street to
Donald Place
Ridge Street West 2 Hours 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From Hudson
Avenue to
Donald Place
§ 91-12 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-12
1:280
Name of Street Sides
Time
Limit Hours Location
Van Court
[Added
8-14-2018 by
Ord. No.
13-2018]
East,
west
— 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon,
Monday
through
Friday
Entire length
Wagner Street South 2 Hours 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From a point
74 feet west
of the
intersection of
Maple Avenue
101 feet west
therefrom
Wagner Street South 2 Hours 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From a point
150 feet west
of the
intersection of
Maple Avenue
175 feet west
therefrom
Wanamaker
Avenue
West 2 Hours 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From a point
150 feet north
of West
Prospect
Street to
Vernon Court
West Prospect
Street
South 30 Minutes 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From a point
100 feet west
of Franklin
turnpike to
Harrison
Avenue
West Prospect
Street
South 2 Hours 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From
Layfayette
Street to
Harrison
Avenue
B. Parking Time Limited. No person shall park a vehicle for longer than
the time limit between the hours listed on any day upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described below:
§ 91-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-12
1:281
§ 91-13. Residential permit parking. [Added Ord. 8-09; amended
07-23-13 by Ord. No. 10-13, 05-12-15 by Ord. 12-15; 4-12-16 by Ord.
No. 8-2016; 8-22-18 by Ord. No. 15-2017]
No person shall park a vehicle on streets or parts of streets as described
within the following sections unless an appropriate and current parking
permit as issued by the Borough of Waldwick is displayed on said vehicle for
those streets or parts of streets as described or listed within the following
sections.
In order to obtain a parking permit the applicant must provide proof of
residency on one of the streets for which parking is restricted under this
section and the vehicle for which the permit is to be displayed must be
registered to the resident who is applying for the permit at that street
location.
Name of Street Sides Time Limit Location
East Prospect
Street [Added
5-27-14 by
Ord. No.
14-14; Ord.
No. 20-2016;
repealed
9-24-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-23]
East Prospect
Street [Added
9-24-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-23]
South 15 minutes; 7:00
a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
3 parking spots
located at 22 East
Prospect Street, 3
parking spots
located at 30 East
Prospect Street, and
the one western
most spot located at
32 East Prospect
Street
Zazzetti Street
[Added
8-14-2018 by
Ord. No.
14-2018;
amended
11-20-2018 by
Ord. No.
23-2018]
East 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday
Starting 50 feet
south of the stop
sign at Bohnert
Place and ending 50
feet south of that
location
§ 91-12 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-13
1:282
Name of Street Sides Hours Days Location
Bohnert Place Both 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Mon - Fri Entire length
Cleveland Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Mon - Fri From West
Prospect Street
to a point 150
feet South of
Wyckoff Avenue
(CR No.502)
Conklin Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Mon - Fri Entire length
Dora Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Mon - Fri From Hudson
Avenue to New
Jersey State
Highway # 17
East Prospect
Street
North 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Mon - Fri Between Hudson
Avenue and
Sheridan Avenue
(CR No.7)
East Prospect
Street [Added
3-13-2018 by
Ord. No.
06-2018]
North Five residentonly
spots
immediately
adjacent to Route
177
Frederick Street North 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Mon - Fri From Harrison
Avenue to
Hewson Avenue
Gateway Court North
(WB)
8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Mon - Fri From Crescent
Avenue
intersection to a
point 400' east
therefrom
Gateway Court South
(EB)
8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Mon - Fri Entire length of
Street
7. Editor's Note: In addition, Ord. No. 06-2018 added the following provisions: A resident
parking permit shall be issued to residents of Waldwick who own a motor vehicle with a
gross weight of no more than 2.5 tons. There shall be no cost for the permits. Permits
shall be initially issued by lottery, after which they will be renewable each year. Residents
must present proof of residency and auto registration with a Waldwick address to obtain a
permit. The resident's permit shall be placed in the rear window of the driver's side, in the
lower left-hand corner of the registered vehicle. Permits are not available to commercial,
retail or institutional vehicles. The sale of the use of the permits is prohibited. Permits
shall expire annually and must be renewed in January of each year. The Waldwick Police
Department shall have the authority to issue summonses or have a vehicle towed for
violation of this ordinance.
§ 91-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-13
1:283
Name of Street Sides Hours Days Location
Grove Street Both 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Mon - Fri From Sheridan
Avenue (CR No.
7) to New Jersey
State Highway #
17
Harrison Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Mon - Fri From West
Prospect Street
to Hewson
Avenue
Harrison Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Mon - Fri From Frederick
Street to Hewson
Avenue
Hewson Avenue
[Deleted
4-12-16 by Ord.
No. 8-2016]
Hewson Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Mon - Fri From a point 355
feet north of
Walter
Nightengale
Place to a point
100 feet north
therefrom
Hudson Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Mon - Fri From East
Prospect Street
to Waldwick
Avenue
Lafayette Place Both 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Mon - Fri Entire length
Manhattan
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Mon - Fri From Hudson
Avenue to New
Jersey State
Highway # 17
Maple Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Mon - Fri From Wyckoff
Avenue (CR
No.502) to
Wagner Street
Maple Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Mon - Fri From Wyckoff
Avenue (CR
No.502) to West
Prospect Street
§ 91-13 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-13
1:284
Name of Street Sides Hours Days Location
Smith Street Both 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Mon - Fri From West
Prospect Street
to Bohnert Place
Wagner Street Both 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Mon - Fri From Cleveland
Avenue to
Wanamaker
Avenue
Wagner Street North 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Mon - Fri From Maple
Avenue to
Cleveland Avenue
Walter
Nightengale
Place
Both 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Mon - Fri From Hewson
Avenue to
Harrison Avenue
Walter
Nightengale
Place
South 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Mon - Fri From Franklin
Turnpike (CR No.
507 to Harrison
Avenue
Wanamaker
Avenue
West 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Mon - Fri From a point 150
feet north of
West Prospect
Street to Vernon
Court
Wanamaker
Avenue
East 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Mon - Fri From a point 150
feet north of
West Prospect
Street to Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No.
502)
West Prospect
Street
South 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Mon - Fri From Maple
Avenue to
Wanamaker
Avenue
West Prospect
Street
South 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Mon - Fri From a point 200
feet west of
Wanamaker
Avenue to Van
Court
Zazzetti Street
[Ord. No.
15-2017]
West 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Mon - Fri Entire length
§ 91-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-13
1:285
Name of Street Sides Hours Days Location
Zazzetti Street
[Ord. No.
15-2017]
East 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Mon - Fri From a point 705
feet north of
West Prospect
Street to Bohnert
Place
§ 91-14. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets.
a. No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any streets or parts
thereof described. [Amended Ord. 8-09; 8-10-10 by Ord. 16-10;
4-12-16 by Ord. No. 8-2016; 8-22-18 by Ord. No. 15-2017]
Name of Street Sides Location
Bergen Avenue South From Franklin Turnpike (CR
No. 507) extending 200 feet
east therefrom
Cleveland Avenue East From West Prospect Street
extending 100 feet south
therefrom
Crescent Avenue (CR
No. 81)
Both Entire length
Demarest Place Both Entire length
Dow Avenue West Entire length
East Prospect Street North From NJ State Highway #17 to
Franklin Turnpike (CR No. 507)
East Prospect Street South From the westerly curb line of
Sheridan Avenue (CR No. 7)
extending 150 feet easterly
thereof
East Prospect Street South From a point 210 feet east of
Stanley Place to a point 100
feet east of Nordham Street
East Prospect Street South From NJ State Highway #17 to
a point 230 feet east of Ridge
Street
East Prospect Street South From a point 100 feet west of
Ridge Street to a point 50 feet
east of Ridge Street
Franklin Turnpike (CR
No. 502/507)
Both Entire length
Grove Street South From Franklin Turnpike (CR
No. 507) extending 230 feet
east therefrom
§ 91-13 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-14
1:286
Name of Street Sides Location
Harrison Avenue Both From Wyckoff Avenue (CR No.
502) extending 400 feet North
therefrom
Hewson Avenue East Entire length
Hewson Avenue West From the northwest comer of
West Prospect Street extending
100 feet north therefrom
Hewson Avenue West From a point 165 feet north of
Walter Nightengale Place
extending 190 feet north to a
point 355 feet north of Walter
Nightengale Place
Hewson Avenue West From a point 200 feet north of
the northwest comer of West
Prospect Street to Frederick
Street
Hewson Avenue West From a point 455 feet north of
Walter Nightengale Place to
Harrison Avenue
Hewson Avenue [Added
4-12-16 by Ord. No.
8-2016]
West From the northwest corner of
West Prospect Street extending
490 feet north therefrom
Hopper Avenue Both Entire length
Industrial Park Both Entire length
John Dow Avenue West Entire length
Lafayette Place South—WestEntire length
Lincoln Place North From Franklin Turnpike (CR
No. 507) extending 125 feet
east therefrom
Lincoln Place South From Franklin Turnpike (CR
No. 507) extending 200 feet
east therefrom
Mackay Avenue Both From Franklin Turnpike (CR
No. 507) to Summit Avenue
Maple Avenue East From Wyckoff Avenue (CR No.
502) extending 100 feet north
therefrom
Maple Avenue [Added
4-12-16 by Ord. No.
8-2016]
East From a point 28 feet south of
the curb line of West Prospect
to a point 112 feet south
therefrom
§ 91-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-14
1:287
Name of Street Sides Location
Monroe Street Both Entire length
North Street North Entire length
Ridge Street West From East Prospect Street to
Hudson Avenue
Sheridan Avenue (CR
No. 7)
Both Entire length
Stanley Place East Entire length
Tamaron Drive Both a. No parking allowed in the
cul-de-sac at the extreme north
end of Tamaron Drive to a point
100 feet south
Waldwick Avenue South From Franklin Turnpike (CR
No. 507) extending 200 feet
east therefrom
Walter Hammond Place East From Wyckoff Avenue (CR No.
502) extending 400 feet north
therefrom
Walter Hammond Place West Entire length
Wanamaker Avenue West From Wyckoff Avenue (CR No.
502) to Vernon Court
Wanamaker Avenue West From West Prospect Street to a
point 150' south therefrom
West Prospect Street North From Franklin Turnpike (CR
No. 507) to Hewson Avenue
West Prospect Street North From Maple Avenue to
Lakeview Drive
West Prospect Street South From Crescent Avenue (CR No.
81) extending 100 feet east
therefrom
West Prospect Street South From Van Court to a point 260
feet west of Hopper Avenue
West Prospect Street South From Oak Place extending 140
feet east therefrom
West Prospect Street South From Wanamaker Avenue
extending 300 feet west
therefrom
West Prospect Street South From Franklin Turnpike (CR
No. 507) extending west to a
point 100 feet therefrom
§ 91-14 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-14
1:288
§ 91-15. Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets.
[Amended 09-08-15 Ord. 16-15]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified any day (except
Saturday, Sunday and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Ridge Street Both 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
From Summit
Avenue to East
Prospect Street
Summit Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
From Ridge
Street
extending 125
feet east
therefrom
White Pond Road South 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Corner of
Crescent
Avenue to the
property line
between 108
and 102 White
Pond Road
§ 91-16. Metered parking.
Name of Street Sides Location
West Saddle River Road East From East Prospect Street
extending 180 feet south
therefrom
West Saddle River Road West From East Prospect Street
extending 80 feet South
therefrom
Whites Lane East From Wyckoff Avenue (CR No.
502) to Van Dan Place
Wyckoff Avenue (CR No.
502)
Both Entire length
Zazzetti Street [Ord.
No. 15-2017]
East From West Prospect Street to a
point 705 feet north
b. No vehicle bearing other than passenger registration plates, except for
a duly authorized law enforcement vehicle, or emergency vehicle of the
State of New Jersey or its political subdivisions, whose registered or
actual gross vehicle weight is under six tons shall be parked on any
street in the Borough of Waldwick between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m.
§ 91-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-16
1:289
§ 91-17. Parking of certain trucks, vehicles, and trailers prohibited.
(Reserved)
§ 91-18. Routes for trucks over four tons.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.1, the streets or parts of streets as described
are hereby designated as route for vehicles over four tons but less than the
gross weight listed below. All trucks having total combined registered gross
weight of vehicle plus load in excess of four tons shall be excluded from all
streets except from those streets listed which form a part of the system of
a. The areas adjacent to curb lines and within the following described
streets or portions of streets are hereby designated as parking meter
zones. No person shall park a vehicle in a parking meter zone except
parallel with the curb and fully within a delineated parking meter
space. Between the hours listed (except Saturday, Sunday and public
holidays), no person shall park a vehicle within a parking meter zone
without depositing the appropriate coin(s) in the parking meter
adjacent thereto nor allow a vehicle to remain parked when such meter
indicates illegal parking.
b. The parking meter fees shall be as set forth on § 48:91-12.2.
c. No unauthorized person shall open, deface, tamper with, destroy, or
impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed in accordance
herewith.
Name of Street Side Location Hours
Frederick Street South From
Harrison
Avenue to
Hewson
Avenue
5:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
Hewson Avenue West From a point
165 feet north
of Walter
Nightengale
Place to
Frederick
Street
5:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
Maple Avenue East From West
Prospect
Street to
Wagner Street
5:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
Wagner Street South From Maple
Avenue to
Cleveland
Avenue
5:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
§ 91-16 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-18
1:290
truck routes. Vehicles will be permitted on all streets for the purpose of the
pick up and delivery of materials.
Name of Street Location
Hopper Avenue Entire length
West Prospect Street From Franklin Turnpike (CR No.
507) to Hewson Avenue
§ 91-19. Vehicles over designated weight excluded from certain
streets.
(Reserved)
§ 91-20. One-way streets.
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated. Parking on these streets will be
permitted on the sides indicated below.
Name of Street Direction Limits
Parking
Permitted
Cleveland Avenue Southbound Entire length Both sides
East Prospect
Street
Westbound From Sheridan
Avenue to New
Jersey State
Highway 17
Both sides
John Dow Avenue Southbound Entire length East side only
Lafayette Place Westbound Entire length North - East side
only
Maple Avenue Northbound Entire length Both sides
Stanley Place Northbound From East
Prospect Street
for a distance of
300 feet
Both sides
West Prospect
Street
Westbound From Maple to
Zazzetti Street
South side
§ 91-21. Through streets. [Amended by Ord. 24-09 and 11-10]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
§ 91-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-21
1:291
Name of Street Limits
Cambra Road Entire length
Centre Street Between East Prospect Street and Summit
Avenue
Cleveland Avenue Entire length
Crescent Avenue (CR
No. 7)
Entire length
St. Between Franklin Turnpike (CR No. 507) and
New Jersey State Highway 17
Franklin Turnpike (CR
No. 502 and 502/507)
Entire length
Gerard Drive Entire length
Harrison Avenue Between West Prospect Street and Hewson
Hewson Street Entire length
Hickory Lane Entire length
Hopper Avenue Between West Prospect Street and Allendale
corporate line.
Hudson Avenue Between East Prospect Street and Bergen
Avenue
John Dow Avenue Entire length
Leonard Drive Entire length
Lindbergh Parkway (a) Between Lakeview Drive and Crescent
Avenue (CR No. 7)
(b) Between Crescent Avenue (CR No. 7 and
Longview Drive
Lockwood Drive Between Sycamore Drive and Crescent Avenue
Longview Drive From Pineview Drive to Van Dyke Road
Lotus Lane Entire length
Lyon Road Entire length
Maple Avenue Entire length
Monroe Street Entire length
Moore Avenue Between Summit Avenue and Centre Street
Nordham Street Entire length
Ridge Street Between East Prospect Street and Summit
Avenue
Sheridan Avenue (CR
No. 7)
Entire length
Summit Avenue Between Moore Avenue and Nordham Street
§ 91-21 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-21
1:292
Name of Street Limits
Sycamore Drive Entire length
Wanamaker Avenue Between West Prospect Street and Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No. 502)
West Prospect Street a. Between Maple Avenue and Crescent
Avenue (CR No. 81)
b. Between Hopper Avenue and Crescent
Avenue (CR No.81)
c. Extending from Franklin Tpke (CR No.507
west to terminus
West Saddle River
Road
Entire length
Wyckoff Avenue (CR
No.502)
Entire length
§ 91-22. Stop intersections. [Amended Ord. No. 8-09; Ord. No.
19-09; Ord. No. 11-10; Ord. No. 10-15]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign On
Birch Lane and Van Dyke Road Birch Lane
Campbell Street and Stuart Street Campbell Street
Central Avenue and Bergen Avenue Central Avenue
Central Avenue and Grove Street Central Avenue
Central Avenue and Lincoln Place Central Avenue
Central Avenue and Waldwick
Avenue
Central Avenue
Centre Street and Nordham Road Centre Street
Centre Street and Highwood Avenue Highwood Avenue
Cortland Street and Bergen Avenue Cortland Street
Cortland Street and Highwood
Avenue
Cortland Street
Cortland Street and Lincoln Place Cortland Street
Douglass Street and East Prospect
Street
Douglass Street
Douglass Street and Campbell
Street
Campbell Street
Durante Road and Gibb Court Gibb Court
§ 91-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-22
1:293
Intersection Stop Sign On
Durante Road and King Street King Street
Garibaldi Place and Grand Avenue Garibaldi Avenue
Garibaldi Place and Mackay Avenue Garibaldi Avenue
Howard Place and Hudson Avenue Howard Place
Hemlock Street and Evergreen
Street
Hemlock Street
Hudson Street and Bergen Avenue Bergen Avenue
Hudson Street and East Prospect
Street
Hudson Street
Hudson Street and Ridge Street Hudson Street
Irving Place and Pennington Avenue Irving Place
Lakeview Drive and Yvonne Street Lakeview Drive
Lindbergh Parkway and Lakeview
Drive
Lindbergh Parkway
Lockwood Drive and Gibb Court Gibb Court
Longview Drive and Pineview Drive Longview Drive
MacKay Avenue and Summit Avenue Summit Avenue
Mary Lane and Longview Drive Mary Lane
Masterson Court and Pineview
Drive
Masterson Court
Pine Street and Pennington Avenue Pine Street
Smith Street and Bohnert Street
[Ord. No. 5-2017]
Smith Street
Summit Avenue and Moore Avenue Summit Avenue
Summit Avenue and Ridge Street Ridge Street
Summit Avenue and Centre Street Centre Street
Warren Place and Waldmere Place Warren Place
Van Dyke Road and Waldmere Place Waldmere Place
Zazzetti Street and Bohnert Place Zazzetti Street
§ 91-23. Multiway stop intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as multiway stop intersections. Stop signs shall be
installed as provided therein.
§ 91-22 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-23
1:294
Intersection Stop Sign On
West Prospect Street and Hopper
Avenue
All approaches
§ 91-24. Yield intersections.
(Reserved)
§ 91-25. Turn prohibitions.
Intersection Turn Prohibited Movement Prohibited
Wyckoff Avenue (CR No.
502) and exit driveway at
22 Franklin Tpk (CR No.
502/507)
Left Southbound from
driveway to eastbound
Wyckoff Avenue (CR No.
502)
Wyckoff Avenue (CR No.
502) and driveway at 64
Crescent Avenue (CR No.
81)
Left Westbound from Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No. 502) to
southbound into
driveway.
Wyckoff Avenue (CR No.
502) and driveway at 64
Crescent Avenue (CR No.
81)
Left Northbound from
northern driveway to
westbound Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No. 502)
Wyckoff Avenue (CR No.
502) and driveway at 72
Crescent Avenue (CR No.
81)
Left East bound Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No. 502) to
northbound driveway
Wyckoff Avenue (CR No.
502) and Lee Court
Left From west bound Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No. 502) to
south bound Lee Court
between the hours of 7:45
a.m. - 8:15 a.m. and 2:30
p.m. - 3:30 p.m.
Wyckoff Avenue (CR No.
502) and driveway at 72
Crescent Avenue (CR No.
81)
Left South bound from
driveway to east bound
Wyckoff Avenue (CR No.
502).
Grove Street and driveway
at 71 Franklin Turnpike (CR
No. 507)
Right Northbound from
driveway to east bound
Grove Street
140 Franklin Turnpike (CR
No. 507) and Franklin
Turnpike (CR No. 507)
Left Eastbound from southern
driveway at 140 Franklin
Turnpike to north bound
Franklin Turnpike (CR
No. 507)
§ 91-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-25
1:295
Intersection Turn Prohibited Movement Prohibited
140 Franklin Turnpike (CR
No. 507) and Franklin
Turnpike (CR No. 507)
Left North bound Franklin
Turnpike (CR No. 507)
into southern most
driveway at 140 Franklin
Turnpike
§ 91-26. No turn on red.
No person shall make a right turn on the red signal at any location listed:
Intersection Approach Times
East Prospect Street
and Franklin Turnpike
(CR No. 507)
All 7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Monday through Friday
Wyckoff Avenue (CR
No. 502)and Franklin
Turnpike (CR No.502/
507)
East on Wyckoff Avenue
(CR No. 502)
7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Monday through Friday
Wyckoff Avenue (CR
No. 502and Franklin
Turnpike (CR No. 502/
507)
South on Franklin
Turnpike (CR No. 502/
507)
All
Wyckoff Avenue (CR
No. 502) and Crescent
Avenue (CR No. 81)
All All
§ 91-27. Loading zones. [Amended 07-23-13 by Ord. 10-13; 04-22-14
by Ord. 9-14; 5-10-16 by Ord. No. 10-2016]
The locations described are hereby designated as loading zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in said location during the times indicated other than
for the loading or unloading of goods, materials, and passengers in
conformance with the rules established by the entity on which said loading
zone borders.
§ 91-25 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-27
1:296
Street Time Sides Location
Frederick Street
[Amended
5-10-16 by Ord.
No. 10-2016]
4:00 a.m.-10:00
a.m.
South (EB) From a point 120
feet west of
Franklin
Turnpike (CR
No.507) to a
point 35 feet east
of Harrison
Avenue
Gateway Court 8:00 a.m.-4:00
p.m., Mon.- Fri.
North (WB) From a point 400
feet east of
Crescent Avenue
to the east
terminus of
Gateway Court
Summit Avenue During School
Hours
North (WB) From a point 434
feet west of the
Traphagen
School driveway,
including the
entire length of
Traphagen
School Property
§ 91-28. Bus stops. [Amended by Ord. No. 19-2016]
The locations described are hereby designated as bus stops. No vehicle
other than an omnibus, picking up or discharging passengers, shall be
permitted to occupy said location between the hours indicated.
§ 91-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-28
1:297
Street Location
Prospect Street, Eastbound, on the
southerly side. [Ord. No. 19-2016]
Between Franklin Turnpike and
Wayne Court (mid-block), beginning
70 feet east of the easterly curbline
of Franklin Turnpike and extending
135 feet easterly therefrom
(location 13952).
Franklin Turnpike (CR No. 507),
Northbound, on the easterly side.
[Ord. No. 19-2016]
a. Between Rosencrantz Place and
Wyckoff Avenue (mid-block)
(prolongation), beginning 550 feet
north of the prolongation the
northerly curbline of Rosencrantz
Place and extending 135 feet
northerly therefrom (location
13942).
b. East Prospect Street (far side),
beginning at the northerly curbline
of East Prospect Street and
extending 100 feet northerly
therefrom (location 13943).
c. Lincoln Place (near side),
beginning at the southerly curbline
of Lincoln Place and extending 105
feet southerly therefrom (location
13944).
d. North Street (near side)
(prolongation), beginning at the
prolongation of the southerly
curbline of North Street and
extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom (location 13945).
e. MacKay Avenue (near side),
beginning at the southerly curbline
of MacKay Avenue and extending
105 feet southerly therefrom
(location 13946).
§ 91-28 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-28
1:298
Street Location
Franklin Turnpike (CR No. 507),
Southbound on the westerly side.
[Ord. No. 19-2016]
a. MacKay Avenue (far side)
(prolongation), beginning at the
prolongation of the southerly
curbline of MacKay Avenue and
extending 100 feet southerly
therefrom (location 13947).
b. Park Avenue (far side)
(prolongation), beginning at the
prolongation of the southerly
curbline of Park Avenue and
extending 100 feet southerly
therefrom (location 13948).
c. Waldwick Avenue (near side)
(prolongation), beginning at the
prolongation of the northerly
curbline of Waldwick Avenue and
extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom (location 13949).
d. Frederick Street (far side),
beginning at the southerly curbline
of Frederick Street and extending
100 feet southerly therefrom
(location 13950).
e. Wyckoff Avenue (far side),
beginning at the southerly curbline
of Wyckoff Avenue and extending
100 feet southerly therefrom
(location 13951).
§ 91-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-28
1:299
Street Location
Wyckoff Avenue, (CR No.502),
Eastbound, on the southerly side.
[Ord. No. 19-2016]
a. Dante Place (near side),
beginning at the westerly curbline
of Dante Place and extending 105
feet westerly therefrom (location
13955).
b. Leonard Drive (far side),
beginning at the easterly curbline of
Leonard Drive and extending 100
feet easterly therefrom (location
13956)
c. Wilson Terrace (near side),
beginning at the westerly curbline
of Wilson Terrace and extending 105
feet westerly therefrom (location
13957).
d. Lee Court (far side), beginning at
the easterly curbline of Lee Court
and extending 100 feet easterly
therefrom (location 13958).
e. Salrit Avenue (far side), beginning
at the easterly curbline of Salrit
Avenue and extending 100 feet
easterly therefrom (location 13959).
f. Walter Hammond Place (near
side) (prolongation), beginning at
the prolongation of the westerly
curbline of Walter Hammond Place
and extending 105 feet westerly
therefrom (location 13961).
§ 91-28 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-28
1:300
Street Location
Wyckoff Avenue, (CR No. 502),
Westbound, on the northerly side.
[Ord. No. 19-2016]
a. Walter Hammond Place (far side),
beginning at the westerly curbline
of Walter Hammond Place and
extending 100 feet westerly
therefrom (location 13962).
b. Maple Avenue (far side),
beginning at the westerly curbline
of Maple Avenue and extending 100
feet westerly therefrom (location
13963).
c. Monroe Street (near side)
(prolongation), beginning at the
prolongation of the easterly curbline
of Monroe Street and extending 105
feet easterly therefrom (location
13964).
d. Lee Court (near side)
(prolongation), beginning at the
prolongation of the easterly curbline
of Lee Court and extending 105 feet
easterly therefrom (location 13965).
e. Birch Lane (near side), beginning
at the easterly curbline of Birch
Lane and extending 105 feet
easterly therefrom (location 13966).
f. Tamaron Drive (far side),
beginning at the westerly curbline
of Tamaron Drive and extending 100
feet westerly therefrom (location
13968).
§ 91-29. U-turns. [Amended 07-23-13 by Ord. 10-13]
No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction along
the following roadways as described.
Road Hours Direction Location
Gateway Court 8:00 a.m. — 4:00
p.m., Mon.-Fri.
South (EB) From Crescent
Avenue to a
distance of 950 feet
east therefrom.
§ 91-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-29
1:301
The regulations adopted under this ordinance shall become effective upon
the installation of proper markings and signage as outlined in the Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and as provided by law.
§ 91-30. Lane use reservations.
The lane locations described are designated as lane use reservations and
traffic shall move as indicated.
Intersection Movement
Cleveland Avenue and Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No. 502)
a. South bound left lane of
Cleveland Avenue reserved for left
turn only.
b. South bound right lane of
Cleveland Avenue reserved for right
turn only.
East Prospect Street and Franklin
Turnpike (CR No. 507)
a. West bound left lane of east
Prospect Street reserved for left
turn only
b. West bound right lane of East
Prospect Street reserved for
straight ahead and right turn only.
Franklin Turnpike (CR No. 507) and
West Prospect Street [Added
5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-14]
A. Southbound left lane of Franklin
Turnpike reserved for left turn only
John Dow Avenue and Crescent
Avenue (CR No. 81)
a. South bound left lane of John Dow
Avenue reserved for left turn only.
b. South bound right lane of John
Dow Avenue reserved for right turn
only.
Monroe Street and Wyckoff Avenue
(CR No. 502)
a. West bound left lane on Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No. 502) reserved for
left turn only.
b. West bound right lane on Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No. 502) reserved for
straight ahead and right turn only.
c. East bound left lane on Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No. 502) reserved for
left turn only.
d. East bound right lane on Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No. 502) reserved for
straight ahead and right turn only.
§ 91-29 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-30
1:302
Intersection Movement
West Prospect Street and Franklin
Turnpike (CR No. 507)
a. East bound left, lane of West
Prospect Street reserved for left
turn only.
b. Eastbound right lane of West
Prospect Street reserved for
straight ahead and right turn only.
Wyckoff Avenue (CR No. 502) and
Crescent Avenue (CR No. 81)
a. West bound left lane of Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No. 502) reserved for
left turn only.
b. West bound right lane of Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No. 502) reserved for
straight ahead and right turn only.
c. East bound right lane of Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No. 502) reserved for
right turn only.
d. East bound center lane of
Wyckoff Avenue (CR No. 502)
reserved for straight ahead traffic
only.
e. East bound left lane of Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No. 502) reserved for
left turn only.
f. North bound right lane of
Crescent Avenue (CR No. 81)
reserved for right turn only.
g. North bound center lane of
Crescent Avenue (CR No. 81)
reserved for straight ahead traffic
only
h. North bound left lane of Crescent
Avenue (CR No. 81) reserved for left
turn only.
i. South bound left lane of Crescent
Avenue (CR No. 81) reserved for left
turn only.
j. South bound right lane of
Crescent Avenue (CR No. 81)
reserved for straight ahead and
right turn only.
§ 91-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-30
1:303
Intersection Movement
Wyckoff Avenue (CR No. 502) and
Franklin Turnpike (CR No. 507)
Eastbound left lane on Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No. 502) shall be for left
turns and straight ahead traffic only.
Eastbound right lane on Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No. 502) shall be for
right turn only.
Wyckoff Avenue (CR No. 502) and
western entrance to Waldwick Jr./Sr.
High School
a. East bound left lane on Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No. 502) reserved for
left turn only
b. East bound right lane on Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No. 502) reserved for
straight ahead traffic only.
§ 91-31. Speed limits. [Amended by Ord. No. 10-2016]
a. The speed limit for traffic along the following roads are established as
follows:
Road Location Direction Speed
Monroe Street
[Amended
10-22-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-24]
Entire length Both 25 mph
Wyckoff Avenue
(CR No.502)
[Amended
5-10-16 by
Ord. No.
10-2016]
Franklin Turnpike
to Crescent Avenue
Both 30 mph
Wyckoff Avenue
(CR No.502)
[Amended
5-10-16 by
Ord. No.
10-2016]
Crescent Avenue to
westerly Waldwick
Borough line
Both 35 mph
b. The speed limit for traffic along the following roads, under the following
conditions, are established as follows:
§ 91-30 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-31
1:304
§ 91-32. Mid-block crosswalks.
§ 91-33. No passing zones.
(Reserved)
§ 91-34. Handicapped parking. [Amended Ord. 8-13, 08-12-14 by
Ord. 17-14; 6-28-16 by Ord. No. 13-2016]
Road Location Direction Speed
Wyckoff Avenue
(CR No. 502)
[Amended
5-10-16 by
Ord. No.
10-2016;
10-22-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-24]
From a point
approximately 100
feet east of Lee
Court to the
intersection of
Salrit Avenue
Both 25 miles per hour
when passing
through the school
zone during recess
when children are
clearly visible from
the roadway or
while children are
going to or leaving
school during
opening or closing
hours.
A. The following locations are hereby established as mid-block crosswalks:
[Amended Ord. 4-12]
Name of Street Location
Walter Hammond Place 225 north of the northern curb
line of Wyckoff Avenue and
extending to a point 10 feet
therefrom
A. Handicapped parking on street.
a. Handicapped Parking on Streets for Private Residences
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.6 and
N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.7, the following on street locations, are
designated as handicapped parking spaces. Such spaces are for
use by persons who have been issued special identification cards
or plates or placards by the Motor Vehicle Commission, or a
temporary placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person
shall be permitted to park in these spaces
§ 91-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-34
1:305
Street
Number
Of
Spaces
Block
Number
Lot
Number Location Permit #
Lincoln
Place
[Removed
6-28-16
by Ord.
No.
13-2016]
Lincoln
Place
1 15 1 On the
south side
in front of
46
Lincoln
Place
P133849
Lincoln
Place
1 74 40 On the
north side
In front of
7 Lincoln
Place
P941010
P571482
Summit
Avenue
1 54 3 On the
south side
in front of
172
Summit
Avenue
P1153756
West
Prospect
Street
[Added
9-11-2018
by Ord.
No.
20-2018]
1 111 25 18 West
Prospect
Street
P1761391
b. Handicapped parking in municipal parking lots. In accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.7 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-204 et seq.,
the following off-street municipal parking lots and property shall
provide designated handicapped parking spaces as set forth in this
section. Each parking space shall be appropriately identified for
handicapped parking only. Such spaces are for use by persons who
have been issued special identification cards, plates or placards by
the Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary placard issued by
the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in
these spaces. [Amended Ord. 8-09 and Ord. 11-10; 6-14-16 by
Ord. No. 12-2016]
§ 91-34 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-34
1:306
Property
Number of
Spaces
Administration Building 1
Fire Company #2 2
Municipal Pool Lot, Hopper Avenue
[Amended 6-14-16 by Ord. No. 12-2016]
4
Public Safety Complex 3
Waldwick Dept. of Public Works, Industrial
Park
1
Veteran's Park, Yvonne Street 2
The Waldwick Board of Education has filed a written consent with
the Borough of Waldwick that the provisions of Subtitle One of
Title 39 of the revised statutes of New Jersey to be made
applicable to the semi-public roads, streets, driveways, and
parking lots at the Waldwick High School, Waldwick Middle
School, Traphagen Elementary School and Crescent Elementary
School located in the Borough of Waldwick in the following
locations. [Amended Ord. 14-13]
Property
Block
Number Lot Number
Number of
Spaces
155 Summit Avenue 77 1 4
155 Wyckoff Avenue 136 7 6
165 Crescent
Avenue
153 1 3
c. Handicapped parking on private property open to the public and to
which the public is invited. The following properties have parking
areas which are open to the public or to which the public is invited
and which contain special parking spaces for the use of persons
who have been issued a placard or wheelchair symbol license plate
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46 et seq. by the Motor Vehicle
Commission or a temporary placard by the Chief of Police. No other
person shall be permitted to park in these spaces [Amended Ord.
8-09]
Property
Block
Number Lot Number
Number of
Spaces
71 Crescent Avenue
(CR No. 81)
136 1.01 3
72 Crescent Avenue
(CR No. 81)
163 10 5
7 East Prospect
Street
17 62.01 2
§ 91-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-34
1:307
Property
Block
Number Lot Number
Number of
Spaces
27-31 East Prospect
Street
19 40and36 1
4 Franklin Turnpike
(CR No. 502/507)
110 3 2
9 Franklin Turnpike
(CR No. 502/507)
18.01 14 1
10 Franklin
Turnpike (CR No.
502/507)
110 2.01 2
40 Franklin
Turnpike (CR No.
507)
108 9 2
26-32 Franklin
Turnpike (CR No.
507)
109.01 6 1
27 Franklin
Turnpike (CR No.
507)
18.01 10 1
35 Franklin
Turnpike (CR No.
507)
18.01 8 1
45 Franklin
Turnpike (CR No.
507)
18.01 4 1
53 Franklin
Turnpike (CR No.
507)
17 61.01 1
60 Franklin
Turnpike (CR No.
507)
107 13 2
71 Franklin
Turnpike (CR No.
507)
17 57.02 1
140 Franklin
Turnpike(CR
No.507)
101 6.01 5
168 Franklin
Turnpike(CR
No.507)
101 1.02 5
132-140 Hopper
Avenue
154 35.01,36,46 8
§ 91-34 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-34
1:308
§ 91-35. Control for the movement and the parking of traffic on
public and private property.
Property
Block
Number Lot Number
Number of
Spaces
145 Hopper Avenue 133 20 1
100 West Prospect
Street
128 37.02 2
11 Wyckoff Avenue
(CR No. 502)
109.01 6.03 2
19 Wyckoff Avenue
(CR No. 502)
109.02 6.04 2
220 Wyckoff Avenue
(CR No. 502)
135 1 1
d. Handicapped Parking on Municipal Parks. (Reserved)
e. Handicapped Parking on Postal Properties. (Reserved)
f. Signs, Pavement Markings, Installation and Maintenance. The
owners of the premises referred to in § 91-2.13C and D, shall
provide and install signs and pavement markings for each parking
space reserved for use by Handicapped Persons, which signing and
markings shall be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices. The costs of procurement and installation
of the signs and pavement markings shall be the responsibility of
the owner of said property. The owner shall, subsequent to initial
procurement and installation, maintain such signs and pavement
markings in good condition at no cost or expense to the Borough.
The owner shall be responsible for the repair and restoration or
replacement of same.
a. Regulation for the movement and the parking of traffic on municipal
property. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197 and
39:5A-1, the following Municipal Property shall have the movement of
traffic controlled by the type of regulation indicated. No person shall
operate, or park a vehicle in violation of the regulations indicated:
[Amended 11-10]
§ 91-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-35
1:309
Property
Block
Number Lot Number Regulation
Administration
Building Traffic
Ordinance 91-34
Traffic Ordinance
17 62.02 All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines, as
indicated by site
plan.
All vehicles must
stop at the
intersection of the
driveway exit and
Franklin Turnpike
(CR No. 507), as
indicated by site
plan.
The driveway exit on
the easterly side of
the building is to be
a one-way in the
eastbound direction,
as indicated by site
plan.
Fire Department
Building,
Company #2, and
Ambulance Corps
Bldg. Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No.
502)
119 1.05 Parking along the
east side of the
building and in
designated spaces
on the south side of
the building shall be
reserved for vehicles
of members of the
Waldwick Fire
Department only as
indicated by site
plan.
Parking in
designated spaces
along the west and
northeast sides of
the building shall be
reserved for vehicles
of members of the
Waldwick
Ambulance Corps
only, as indicated by
site plan.
§ 91-35 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-35
1:310
Property
Block
Number Lot Number Regulation
Public Safety
Complex
17 62.01 All vehicles must
park in the
designated area and
between the painted
lines, as indicated by
site plan.
Parking along the
east side of the
building shall be
reserved for vehicles
of the members of
the Waldwick Fire
Department only, as
indicated by site
plan.
The driveway along
the west side of the
building shall be
designated as a One
Way south, as
indicated by site
plan.
All vehicles must
stop at the
intersection of the
driveway exit and
East Prospect
Street, as indicated
by site plan.
Veteran's Park 148 1 All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines, as
indicated by site
plan.
All vehicles must
stop at the
intersection of the
driveway exit and
Yvonne Street.
§ 91-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-35
1:311
Property
Block
Number Lot Number Regulation
Waldwick Dept. of
Public Works, 19
Industrial Park
154 42 a. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines as
indicated by site
plan.
b. The northern
most driveway shall
be designated as an
entrance only as
indicated by site
plan.
c. The southernmost
driveway shall be
designated as an
exit only as
indicated by site
plan.
d. The traffic
movement shall be
in one direction
around the building
as indicated by site
plan.
b. Regulation for the movement and the parking of traffic on private
property open to the public and to which the public is invited. In
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46 and N.J.S.A.
39:4-197, the following private property that is open to the public and
to which the public is invited, the movement of traffic shall be
controlled by the type of regulations indicated. No person shall operate
or park a vehicle in violation of the following regulations: [Amended
Ord. 8-09]
§ 91-35 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-35
1:312
Property
Block
Number Lot Number Regulation
64 Crescent
Avenue (CR No.
81)
162.01 1 a. No person shall
make a left turn
from the driveway
intersecting Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No. 502)
as indicated by site
plan.
b. No person shall
make a left turn
from the northern
most driveway
intersecting
Crescent Avenue
(CR No. 81) as
indicated by site
plan.
71 Crescent
Avenue (CR No.
81)
136 1.01 a. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines as
indicated by site
plan.
b. The driveway
intersecting Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No. 502)
shall be designated
a one-way in the
southerly direction
as indicated by site
plan.
c. There shall be no
left turns from the
eastern driveway on
to Wyckoff Avenue
(CR No. 502) as
indicated by site
plan.
§ 91-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-35
1:313
Property
Block
Number Lot Number Regulation
72 Crescent
Avenue (CR No.
81)
163 10 a. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines as
indicated by site
plan.
b. No person shall
make a left turn
from the driveway
intersecting Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No. 502)
as indicated by site
plan.
4 Franklin
Turnpike (CR No.
502/507)
110 3 a. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines as
indicated by site
plan.
b. The southernmost
driveway shall be
designated as an
entrance only as
indicated by site
plan.
c. The northern most
driveway shall be
designated as an
exit only as
indicated by site
plan.
9 Franklin Tpke
(CR No. 502/507).
18.01 14 a. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines as
indicated by site
plan.
§ 91-35 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-35
1:314
Property
Block
Number Lot Number Regulation
10 Franklin
Turnpike (CR No.
502/507)
110 2.01 a. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines as
indicated by site
plan.
b. The northern
most driveway shall
be designated as an
Entrance Only as
indicated by site
plan.
c. The southernmost
driveway shall be
designated as an
Exit Only as
indicated by site
plan
d. All traffic exiting
from the lower
parking area must
stop as indicated by
site plan.
20 Franklin
Turnpike (CR No.
502/507)
110 1.02 a. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines as
indicated by site
plan.
§ 91-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-35
1:315
Property
Block
Number Lot Number Regulation
25 Franklin
Turnpike (CR No.
502/507)
18.01 11 a. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines as
indicated by site
plan
b. The southernmost
driveway
intersecting Franklin
Turnpike (CR502/
507) shall be
designated an
Entrance Only as
indicated by site
plan.
c. The northern most
driveway
intersecting Franklin
Turnpike (CR502/
507) shall be
designated an Exit
Only/ as indicated by
site plan.
§ 91-35 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-35
1:316
Property
Block
Number Lot Number Regulation
26-32 Franklin
Turnpike (CR
No.502/507)
109.01 11 a. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines as
indicated by site
plan.
b. The driveway
intersecting Franklin
Turnpike (CR502/
507) shall be
designated as an
Entrance Only as
indicated by site
plan.
c. The southernmost
driveway
intersecting Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No.502)
shall be designated
as an Exit Only as
indicated by site
plan.
d. No person shall
make a left turn
from the southerly
most driveway
intersecting Wyckoff
Avenue on to
Wyckoff Avenue as
indicated by site
plan.
e. The westerly most
driveway shall be
designated as an
Entrance Only
§ 91-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-35
1:317
Property
Block
Number Lot Number Regulation
27 Franklin Tpke
(CR No.502/507)
18.01 10 a. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines.
b. No vehicles shall
be permitted to
make a left turn
from the northern
most driveway.
45 Franklin
Turnpike (CR
No.507)
18.01 4 a. The southernmost
driveway
intersecting Franklin
Turnpike (CR
No.507) shall be
designated as an
Entrance Only.
b. The northern
most driveway
intersecting Franklin
Turnpike (CR
No.507) shall be
designated as an
Exit Only
c. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines.
§ 91-35 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-35
1:318
Property
Block
Number Lot Number Regulation
53 Franklin Tpke
(CR No.507)
17 61.01 a. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines.
b. The southern
driveway
intersecting Franklin
Turnpike (CR
No.507) shall be
designated as an
Entrance Only
c. The northern
driveway
intersecting Franklin
Turnpike (CR
No.507) shall be
designated as an
Exit Only.
60 Franklin Tpke
(CR No.507)
107 13 a. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines.
67 Franklin Tpke
(CR No.507)
17 60.01 a. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines.
b. The southernmost
driveway
intersecting Franklin
Turnpike (CR
No.507) shall be
designated an
Entrance Only.
c. The northern most
driveway
intersecting Franklin
Turnpike (CR
No.507) shall be
designated an Exit
Only.
§ 91-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-35
1:319
Property
Block
Number Lot Number Regulation
71 Franklin Tpke
(CR No.507)
17 57.02 a. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines.
b. No person shall
make a right turn
from the driveway
intersecting Grove
Street.
140 Franklin
Tpke (CR No.507)
101 6.01 a. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines.
b. No vehicles are
permitted to make a
left turn from the
southernmost
driveway on to
Franklin Turnpike
(CR No.507)
168 Franklin
Tpke (CR No.507)
101 1.02 a. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines.
b. The southernmost
driveway shall be
designated a One
Way.
c. All vehicles must
stop at the
intersection of the
above mentioned
roadway.
§ 91-35 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-35
1:320
Property
Block
Number Lot Number Regulation
7 East Prospect
Street
17 62.01 a. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines.
b. The eastern most
driveway shall be
designated as an
Entrance Only.
c. The western most
driveway shall be
designated as an
Exit Only.
27-31 East
Prospect Street
19 40and36 All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines.
The western most
driveway shall be
designated as an
Entrance Only.
The eastern most
driveway shall be
designated as an
Exit Only.
§ 91-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-35
1:321
Property
Block
Number Lot Number Regulation
132-140 Hopper
Avenue
154 35.01, 36, 46 a. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines as
indicated by site
plan.
b. All vehicles must
stop at the exits that
intersect with
Hopper Avenue.
c. All vehicles must
stop at the exit that
intersects Industrial
Way.
d. No left turn shall
be permitted from
the center driveway
on to Hopper
Avenue as indicated
on the site plan.
145 Hopper Ave 133 20 a. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines.
4 North Street 103 1 a. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines.
b. Traffic along the
northern parking lot
shall be designated
a One-way north
bound in the
westerly direction.
§ 91-35 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-35
1:322
Property
Block
Number Lot Number Regulation
11 Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No.
502)
109.01 6.03 a. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines.
The northern
parking area shall
be designated as a
one-way in the
westerly direction.
The western most
driveway
intersecting Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No. 502)
shall be designated
as an exit only.
The eastern most
driveway
intersecting Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No. 502)
shall be designated
as an entrance only.
19 Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No.
502)
109.01 6.03 a. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines.
20 Wyckoff
Avenue 11 (CR
No. 502)
110 8 a. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines.
220 Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No.
502
135 1 a. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines.
b. No person shall
make a left turn
from the driveway
intersecting Wyckoff
Avenue (CR No.
502).
c. Regulation for the movement and the parking of traffic on all other
private property. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-I,
the regulations of subtitle 1 of Title 39 are hereby made applicable to
§ 91-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-35
1:323
the properties listed below. The Waldwick Board of Education has filed
a written consent with the Borough of Waldwick that the provisions
of Subtitle One of Title 39 of the revised statutes of New Jersey to
be made applicable to the semi-public roads, streets, driveways, and
parking lots at the Waldwick High School, Waldwick Middle School,
Traphagen Elementary School and Crescent Elementary School located
in the Borough of Waldwick, County of Bergen, and Chapter 91 which
amends the following sections. [Amended Ord. 8-09; 04-22-14 by
Ord. 9-14]
§ 91-35 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-35
1:324
Property
Block
Number Lot Number Regulation
155 Summit
Avenue
77 1 a. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines as
indicated by the site
plan.
b. All vehicles must
stop at the exit lane
that intersects
Summit Avenue as
indicated on the site
plan.
c. All traffic shall
flow in one direction
as indicated on the
site plan.
d. No left turn from
the driveway onto
Summit Avenue
between the hours
of 7:45 a.m. - 8:15
a.m. and 2:30 p.m. -
3:30 p.m.
§ 91-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-35
1:325
Property
Block
Number Lot Number Regulation
155 Wyckoff
Avenue
136 7 All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines.
The western most
driveway
intersecting Wyckoff
Avenue shall be
designated as an
Exit only.
The driveway
immediately
adjacent to the
above mentioned
driveway shall be
designated as an
Entrance only.
No vehicles shall be
permitted to make a
left turn from the
western most exit
intersecting Wyckoff
Avenue between the
hours of 7:45 a.m. -
8:15 a.m. and 2:30
p.m. - 3:30 p.m.
All vehicles must
stop before entering
Wyckoff Avenue
The exit lane leading
from the east side
parking area to West
Prospect Street shall
be designated a
One-Way
northbound.
All vehicles must
stop before entering
street at the exit
lane.
§ 91-35 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-35
1:326
Property
Block
Number Lot Number Regulation
165 Crescent
Avenue
153 1 a. All vehicles must
park in designated
areas and between
the painted lines as
indicated by the site
plan.
b. All vehicles must
stop before entering
Crescent Avenue at
the northern most
driveway as
indicated on the site
plan.
c. All traffic shall
flow in one direction
along the northern
and southern
driveways as
indicated on the site
plan.
d. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on Municipal
Park Property. [Amended Ord. 8-09]
1. General Parking:
A. In all parking areas where white lines are provided for
vehicular parking, all vehicles shall park between the white
lines.
B. No person shall park any vehicle along the east or west side of
Park Drive in Area "A" as indicated on the site plan.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
All Roads and
Lots
All All As indicated on
the site plan
2. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be 12 foot wide as shown on
the attached site plan and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P
(Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty Plate), in the designated
parking areas for persons who have been issued the handicapped
parking permit by the Motor Vehicle Commission.
3. Speed Limits:
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking
lot(s) shall be 15 m.p.h.
§ 91-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-35
1:327
B. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
Name of Roadway M.P.H. Limits
Park Drive 15 Entire length
C. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained
to effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
4. Tow-Away Zones: Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic block entrances or exit ways,
loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or
present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by
towing the vehicle at the owners or operators expense.
5. Loading Zones: (Reserved)
6. Mid-Block Crosswalks. The following locations shall be established
as Mid-Block Crosswalks:
Name of Street Location
Park Drive As indicated on the site plan
7. Authorized Vehicles Only. The following streets or parts of streets
shall be designated as use for authorized vehicles only. No vehicle
other than an authorized vehicle shall enter upon the below
roadway.
Name of Street Limits
Service Road Lot "A" As indicated on the site plan
Service Road Lot "D" As indicated on the site plan
Service Road Lot "F" As indicated on the site plan
That all signs, posts, or other necessary materials be installed and
paid for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:4-198 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by the New Jersey
Statute, every person convicted of a violation of this ordinance or
any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty as provided by
the current violations schedule.
Effect of Ordinance
If any part of this Ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid,
such decision shall not effect the validity of the remaining portion
of the Ordinance.
§ 91-35 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 91-35
1:328
§ 91-36. Driveways. [Added 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. 04-2018]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park within 25 feet of any driveway
within the Borough on Dora Avenue from Ridge to Nordham.
Chapter 92
VIDEO AND MOVIE FILMING
§ 92-1. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILMING — Shall mean "to film" which shall include the taking of still
video or motion pictures, either on film, videotape or similar recording
medium intended for viewing on television or in the movies or in theaters
or for institutional use. Filming includes all preparation and rehearsals, and
assembly and dismantling of all equipment and structures, including but
not limited to scaffolding, lighting backdrops, tools, food service, and the
loading and unloading of vehicles containing the equipment, structures and
food.
MAJOR MOTION PICTURE — Shall mean any film for which the budget is
at least five million dollars (5,000,000).
NEWS STORIES — Shall mean the reporting or summarizing of information
concerning something that has either recently taken place or of current
events of general interest and includes such features commonly known as
newscasts, news bulletins and news anthology programs.
PUBLIC LANDS — Shall mean any and every public street, highway,
sidewalk or square, public park or playground or other public place within
the jurisdiction and control of the Borough of Waldwick.
e. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on United
States Post Office Property. (Reserved)
f. Signs, Pavement Markings, Installation and Maintenance. The owners
of the premises referred to in § 91-6.1 and B and C shall provide and
install signs and pavement markings as required, which signage and
markings shall be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices. The cost of procurement and installation of the signs
and pavement markings shall be the responsibility of the owner of said
property. The owner shall subsequently, to the initial procurement and
installation, maintain such signs and pavement markings in good
condition at no cost or expense to the Municipality. The owner shall be
responsible for the repair and restoration or replacement of same.
g. Parking in the Administration Building lot shall be for Borough business
only. [Added 2-27-2018 by Ord. No. 05-2018]
§ 91-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-1
1:329
RESIDENTIAL ZONES — Shall mean as established by Chapter 97 of the
Code of the Borough of Waldwick.
§ 92-2. Permits.
§ 92-3. Rules and regulations.
A. No person shall film or permit filming within the Borough of Waldwick
without first obtaining a permit therefore, which permit shall set forth
the approved location of such filming and the approved duration of such
filming by specific reference to date or dates.
B. Permits shall be obtained in the office of the Borough Clerk during
normal business hours. The form of the application shall be approved by
the Mayor and Council.
C. One (1) permit shall be required for each location.
D. One (1) permit shall be sufficient to authorize filming on three (3)
consecutive days and in no event shall filming by any applicant exceed a
total of six (6) days in any calendar year regardless of the number of
permits utilized without a waiver pursuant to Section 92-4C.
E. If a permit is issued and, due to inclement weather or other good cause,
filming does not in fact take place on the dates specified, the Borough
Clerk may, at the request of the applicant, and upon receipt of a written
certification from the applicant that filming did not in fact take place on
the dates specified, issue a new permit for filming on other dates
subject to full compliance with all other provisions of this section. No
additional fee shall be paid for this permit.
F. No permits will be issued by the Borough Clerk unless applied for
fourteen (14) days prior to the requested filming date; provided,
however, that the Borough Administrator, or in the absence of the
Borough Administrator, the Mayor may waive all or part of the fourteen
(14) day period pursuant to Section 92-4C.
A. No permit shall be issued for filming at a particular location in the
Borough of Waldwick which would result in filming at said location on
more than four (4) days during any one (1) calendar year unless a
waiver is granted pursuant to Section 92-4C.
B. No permit shall be issued for filming upon Public Lands within the
Borough of Waldwick unless the applicant provides proof of insurance
coverage as required by this section at least forty-eight (48) hours
before the filming date requested.
1. Provides proof of insurance coverage for bodily injury in the
amount of $5,000,000 combined single limit and for property
damage in the amount of $5,000,000 combined single limit.
2. Additional requirements as follows:
§ 92-1 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 92-3
1:330
(a) Certified copies of all insurance policies required or
certificates thereof satisfactory to the Borough of Waldwick
shall be furnished at the time the permit is issued. Each such
policy or certificate shall contain a provision that it is not
subject to change or cancellation unless thirty (30) days prior
written notice shall have been given to the Borough of
Waldwick by the applicant's insurer.
(b) The applicant agrees in writing that it will defend, indemnify
and hold harmless the Borough of Waldwick, its officers, agents
and employees from any and all liability, suits, actions, and
demands and all damages, costs or fees (including reasonable
attorney's fees and loss of business claims) on account of
injuries to persons or property, including accidental death,
arising out of or in connection with the filming, or by reason of
the filming.
(c) Insurance purchased and maintained by the applicant
pursuant to this Chapter shall designate the Borough of
Waldwick, its officers, officials, agents, employees and
consultants as additional insured.
(d) Except as modified by the Borough of Waldwick in writing, the
insurance requirements herein shall also apply to
subcontractors and to the subcontractors, and the applicant
will be responsible for supervision of the filing of certified
copies of the insurance policies and/or insurance certificates
prior to any subcontractor commencing work on the project.
3. In the event that the applicant provides evidence of insurance valid
for a period of time less than the period during which the applicant
is required to maintain insurance, the applicant shall be obligated
to renew its insurance policies as necessary and to provide new
evidence of insurance in order that the Borough of Waldwick is
continuously in possession of evidence of the applicant's insurance
in accordance with the foregoing provisions.
C. Applicant shall post a bond or cash deposit in the amount of $500.00 to
guarantee and secure the Borough against any damage to person or
property and to guarantee clean-up and restoration of the areas in
which the filming takes place or other areas which may be damaged or
destroyed because of the activities of the filming. If no claim is made
upon the bond or cash deposit, the bond or cash deposit shall be
returned to the applicant within thirty (30) days of the completion of the
filming.
D. The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize
interference with the free passage of pedestrian and traffic over Public
Lands and shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the
Waldwick Police and Fire Department with respect thereto.
§ 92-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-3
1:331
E. The holder of the permit shall reimburse the Borough of Waldwick for
the costs incurred in the use during filming of employees and
equipment of the Borough of Waldwick, including but not limited to
police officers, fire personnel and members of the Department of Public
Works, and police, fire and sanitation vehicles. The reimbursement fees,
which shall be paid to the Borough Clerk, are as set forth in Chapter 48,
Article 92 entitled "Fees" of the Waldwick Municipal Code. The Borough
reserves the right to require adequate police presence on-site in
situations where the proposed production may impede the proper flow
of traffic, the cost of police coverage to be borne by the holder of the
permit as a cost of production. Where existing electrical power lines are
to be utilized by the production, an on-site licensed electrician may be
similarly required if the production company does not have a licensed
electrician on staff.
F. The holder of a permit shall conduct filming in such a manner as to
minimize the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property owners
and occupants attributable to such filming and shall, to the extent
practicable, abate noise. The holder of the permit shall not allow any
lights used in connection with the filming to shine directly into any
windows upon any other property without the express written consent
from the owner or occupant. The holder of the permit shall avoid any
interference with previously scheduled activities upon Public Lands and
limit to the extent possible any interference with normal public activity
on such Public Lands.
G. The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize the
creation and spread of debris and rubbish during filming and shall be
responsible for removing all equipment, debris and other rubbish from
the filming location upon the completion of filming or the expiration of
the permit, whichever comes first.
H. In Residential Zones, filming shall be permitted only Monday through
Friday between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
I. The holder of the permit shall notify the Fire Official forty-eight (48)
hours before filming takes place and permit the Fire Official or his
designee to inspect the site and the equipment to be used. The holder of
the permit shall comply with all fire safety instructions issued by the
Fire Official or his designee.
J. The holder of the permit shall procure from the Assessor's Office, a list
of property owners within 200' of their proposed location. These
property owners shall be notified by certified mail, return receipt
requested, at least fourteen (14) days before filming takes place of the
date and location of the filming and inform the owners that objection
may be filed with the Borough Clerk, said objections to form a part of
the applicant's application, and be considered in the review of same.
Proof of service of notice shall be submitted to the Borough Clerk within
two (2) days prior to the requested filming date.
§ 92-3 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 92-3
1:332
§ 92-4. Denial, appeal and waivers.
K. Vehicles used in connection with the filming, including vehicles of
personnel associated with such filming, shall be parked off the public
right of way to the maximum extent permitted. Vehicles should not be
parked so as to encroach upon private property without the express
written consent from the owner or occupant thereof. Vehicles parked in
the public right of way shall comply with all applicable parking and
traffic regulations. Vehicles parked or located in violation hereof may be
towed by the Borough of Waldwick, and the cost thereof shall be
reimbursed to the Borough by the holder of the permit.
A. The Borough Clerk is empowered to approve individual applications for
permits that comply with this Ordinance. The Borough Clerk may refuse
to issue a permit whenever it is determined, on the basis of objective
facts, after a review of the application and a report thereon by the
Police Department and by other Borough agencies involved with the
proposed filming site, that filing at the location and or time set forth in
the application that the filming would violate any law or ordinance or
would unreasonably interfere with the public's use of Public Lands,
unreasonably interfere with the use of adjoining property, unreasonably
impede the free flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or otherwise
endanger the public's health or welfare.
B. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Borough Clerk denying or
revoking a permit or a person requesting relief may appeal to the
Borough Administrator. This appeal shall be received within ten (10)
days of the decision of the Borough Clerk, and shall be in writing and
shall set forth the reasons for the appeal. The Borough Administrator
shall then have ten (10) days to make a decision which shall be in
writing.
C. The Borough Administrator or in the absence of the Borough
Administrator, the Mayor may authorize a waiver of any of the
requirements or limitations of this Chapter and may authorize filming
other than during the hours herein described or may extend the
duration of a permit beyond three (3) days or may permit filming by an
applicant on more than six (6) days during any one (1) calendar year or
more than four (4) days in one (1) calendar year at a particular location
in a Residential Zone, or may waive all or part of the fourteen (14) day
period set forth in Section 92-2F whenever it determines that strict
compliance with such limitation will pose an unreasonable burden upon
the applicant and that such a permit may be issued without
endangering the public's health, safety and welfare.
D. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Borough Administrator or
Mayor pursuant to Sections 92-2F and 92-4C or the Borough
Administrator's decision pursuant to this Section 92-4B may appeal to
the Council. A written notice of appeal setting forth the reasons for the
appeal shall be filed with the Council. An appeal from the decision of
the Borough Administrator or Mayor pursuant to Sections 92-2F and
§ 92-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 92-4
1:333
§ 92-5. Fees.
The fees, which shall be paid to the Borough Clerk in advance of the filming
and issuance of the permit, are as set forth in Chapter 48, Article 92 entitled
"Fees" of the Waldwick Municipal Code.
§ 92-6. Violations and penalties.
See Chapter 1:14-1 of the Waldwick Municipal Code.
§ 92-7. Exemptions.
The provision of this section shall not apply to the filming of News Stories by
authorized press personnel within the Borough. In addition, filming by the
Borough of Waldwick Police Department, Fire Department or Ambulance
Corps for training purposes shall be exempt, as well as filming by Waldwick
Productions, Inc. and video clubs or video classes of the Waldwick Public
Schools, provided, however, that such filming shall comply with the
provisions of Section 92-3D, F, G. H and K of this Chapter.
To the extent practical, advance notification of filming shall be furnished
to the Borough Clerk. Such filming shall comply with all lawful directives
issued by the Waldwick Police and Fire Departments.
Chapter 93
WATER CONSERVATION
§ 93-1. Purpose of ordinance.
The purpose of this ordinance is to limit, restrict and regulate the use
of water by customers of the Borough of Waldwick Water Department
during periods of emergency caused by drought, lack of proper pumping
equipment, storage or other facilities or by acts of God or of public enemies,
and to prevent the waste thereof at all times.
§ 93-2. Definitions.
PERSON — As used in this ordinance, shall mean any natural person,
individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association or other legal entity.
WATER — As used in this ordinance, shall mean that water obtained,
delivered and supplied to any "person" by the Borough of Waldwick Water
Department.
92-4C or the Borough Administrator's decision pursuant to this Section
92-4B shall be filed within ten (10) days of the Borough Administrator's
or Mayor's decision. The Council shall set the matter down for a hearing
within thirty (30) days of the day on which the notice of appeal was
filed. The decision of the Council shall be in written form.
§ 92-4 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 93-2
1:334
EMERGENCY — As used in this ordinance, shall mean that period of time
publicly declared by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Waldwick to
be an emergency period of "water" shortage or potential "water" shortage
because of drought, lack of proper pumping equipment, storage or other
facilities or because of acts of God or of public enemies. The Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Waldwick are hereby authorized to declare that
an "emergency" exists.
§ 93-3. Compliance with rules and regulations required; wasting or
permitting waste of water.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any water during any emergency
period except in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by
the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Waldwick after the publication
thereof in the official newspaper designated as such for the Borough of
Waldwick. It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally to waste water
at any time or to maintain any plumbing fixture or other device which is in
need of repair and is discharging water unnecessarily any wastefully.
§ 93-4. Corrections required upon notice; noncompliance
procedure.
If any person shall violate the provisions contained in the second sentence
of Ch. 93-3 of this ordinance, he shall be served by the Borough of Waldwick
Water Department with a written notice stating the nature of the violation
and providing a reasonable time limit (not less than ten (10) days) for the
satisfactory correction thereof. If any person so served with such notice
shall, within the period of time stated in such notice or any lawfully issued
extension thereof, fail to permanently cease all such violations, he shall be
subject to all the penalties hereinafter provided.
§ 93-5. Violations and penalties; shutoff of water authorized.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty
of a violation thereof and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an
amount not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200) for each violation. Each
day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate
offense. In addition, if any person, whether he be an inhabitant of the
Borough of Waldwick or an inhabitant of any other municipality, who is
supplied water by the Borough of Waldwick Water Department, shall violate
any provisions of this ordinance, the Borough of Waldwick Water
Department shall have the right, and it is hereby empowered, to cut off
the supply of water to the premises and meter upon and from which said
violation shall have taken place, for such period or periods of time as
shall be deemed necessary to secure compliance with all the terms of this
ordinance.
§ 93-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-6
1:335
§ 93-6. Repeal of prior ordinance.
This ordinance expressly repeals Borough of Waldwick Ord. No. 10-57,
entitled "An Ordinance Empowering the Mayor and Council to Regulate
and Ban the Use of Water for Certain Purposes During Periods of Acute
Shortage Thereof in the Borough of Waldwick, and Providing Penalties for
the Violation of Such Regulations and Bans," enacted on June 27, 1957.
§ 93-7. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon adoption and publication as required
by law.
Chapter 94
WATER SUPPLY
§ 94-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
SERVICE LINE CONNECTION — A line used to supply a single unit or
dwelling.
MAIN — A line used to supply water to more than a single unit or dwelling.
§ 94-2. Water agent: appointment; term of office.
The Chief Financial Officer of the Borough shall be the water agent.
§ 94-3. Service connection in general.
A. Application procedure.
(1) All applications for the use of water or for a service connection
shall be on forms to be provided at the office of the Department and
made by the owner of the premises or by his duly authorized agent,
the fee for which shall be payable in advance. Tapping connection
is to be made by the applicant and inspected by the Water
Department prior to backfilling. Failure to call for the inspection as
required in section 94-3B may require the applicant to reopen the
excavation at their expense for the inspection to be made.
(2) Two (2) or more dwelling units, or non-residential establishments
shall not be supplied from a single service line without the
capability of the Borough being able to shut off the water at a curb
stop for each individual unit or establishment If more than one unit
or establishment is to be serviced by one service line connection to
the main the Borough will require the owner of the property to
supply a certification from a licensed engineer that the diameter of
the service line is adequate to supply the intended use.
§ 93-6 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 94-3
1:336
(3) If it is found that two or more dwelling units or non-residential
establishments are supplied from one single service line and the
Borough cannot effectuate a shut off to one without impacting
others, the property owner will be required to come into
compliance with section 94-3A(2) at anytime a certificate of
occupancy or certificate of continued occupancy is issued.
B. Installation.
(1) No person or persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations,
shall connect into the water supply and distribution facilities of the
Borough of Waldwick except after having made application in
accordance with the provisions of section 94-3A of this ordinance.
No person, other than a duly authorized agent of the Waldwick
Water Department, is permitted to turn water on or off at the curb
stop.
(2) No connection of the service line shall be made with the
distribution system, nor shall any alteration, addition or extension
be made in or to any service line nor any device for drawing water
be attached thereto, except in the manner approved by the
Department. The completed line shall remain open until inspected
and approved by the Water Department. At least twenty-four (24)
hours' notice should be given the Water Department for the
purpose of inspecting and approving the work.
(3) Installation of the service line from the curb stop, or repair work
thereon, shall be performed by a licensed plumber at the expense
of the applicant. All service connection pipe shall be installed at
least four (4) feet below the surface and three (3) feet from any
sewer or gas facility.
(4) A building connection must be supplied by the owner and shall be
in copper tubing not lighter than Class "K" and in proper condition
to withstand at any time the pressure put upon the main when all
waterways are closed and not in use.
(5) The owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the service
line from the curb to the meter or interior of the building, and shall
keep the same in good repair and protected from damage due to
frost or other causes. All leaks in the service line shall be reported
promptly to the Water Department and repaired by the owner. The
owner shall be liable for water escaping from such leaks at a
charge to be estimated by the Water Department based upon the
estimated quantity of water escaping. If repairs are not so made,
the Water Department may shut off the water and may refuse to
turn it on again until the line is put in serviceable condition.
(6) The Department shall not permit any cross connections between
private water supplies and the Waldwick public water system.
§ 94-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-4
1:337
§ 94-4. Service.
A. The Borough Council may by resolution, whenever in its judgment
necessity shall exist, restrict the use of water to certain hours, days or
areas of the Borough and upon the passing of such resolution and
notice thereof, it shall be unlawful to use any water in such areas for the
restricted purposes except during such periods. In the event of any
emergency, the power to restrict the use of water may be exercised by
the Mayor subject to confirmation at the next regular meeting of the
Borough Council.
B. Water service may be discontinued upon such notice as shall be
reasonable or practicable for any of the following reasons:
1. For the use of water for any properties or purposes other than
those permitted in this ordinance or described in the application.
2. For the willful waste of water through improper, defective or
imperfect pipes, fixtures or otherwise.
3. For failure to maintain, in good order, connections, service lines or
fixtures owned by the consumer.
4. For molesting or tampering with any service pipe, meter, curb stop
or seal, or any other appliance of the Water Department.
5. Refusal of access at reasonable hours for purposes of inspecting or
installing, reading, maintaining fixtures, pipes and meters.
6. For nonpayment of bills, rents, charges or fees or for penalties
imposed or for any other reason causing or tending to cause a loss
to the Water Department.
7. For misrepresentation in the application for water service
respecting the property to be served or the fixtures to be supplied
or the use to be made of the water.
8. At the discretion of the Water Department when the premises
become vacant.
C. Service shall be renewed under a proper application after payment of a
turn-on charge when the conditions under which service was
discontinued are corrected, and upon the payment of all charges owed
to the Department.
D. The Water Department shall have the right to shut off water service
without notice, in the case of technical defects or for other unavoidable
causes or for the purpose of making necessary repairs, connections or
other alterations to the water distribution system.
E. Neither the Water Department nor the Borough of Waldwick shall be
held liable for any damage which may be claimed due to the failure of
§ 94-4 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 94-4
1:338
§ 94-5. Meters.
any restriction of the water supplied or from low or high pressure or
damage due to water quality.
F. When requested by the owner or his agent, the Water Department shall
discontinue service to a property either temporarily or permanently. A
turn-on charge shall be levied when service is restored but in no event
shall water be turned on until all water charges have been paid.
G. When turning on the water supply as requested and the house or
property is vacant, the Water Department shall not be required to
accomplish the same unless in the presence of the occupant or owner. If
such is found to be the case, the water will be left shut off at the curb
stop. The Water Department's responsibility ends at the curb stop and
the Water Department will in no case be liable for damages occasioned
by water running from open or faulty fixtures or from broken or
damaged pipes beyond the Water Department's curb stop.
H. Where connections are abandoned the property owner of the premises
or applicant shall pay for having the same shut off and plugged at the
curb stop or corporation stop or at the option of the Water Department
before a new connection will be installed to said premises.
I. All repairs from the main to and including the curb stop shall be made
by and at the expense of the Department, unless such repair is due to
the action of the property owner or his agent, servant or employee, in
which case it will be made at the expense of the property owner.
J. All pipes, meters and fixtures shall be subject at reasonable hours to
inspection by employees of the Department, property identified. No
water fixture shall be considered cut off until it is disconnected so that
it cannot be used again or until sealed in a manner satisfactory to the
Department.
K. If a service call is requested by a property owner or his agent during
other than normal working hours a charge shall be leveled against the
property owner for the service call, except where the Department finds
that there is an actual defect in facilities maintained by the Water
Department resulting in a condition requiring immediate attention.
L. No property owner or user shall use or consume more than one million
three hundred thousand (1,300,000) gallons of water from the
Waldwick public water supply system during any monthly period unless
the Borough Council shall consent to such additional consumption by a
resolution after determining that such use will not adversely affect the
public welfare by impairing the continuance of adequate water supply,
pressure, maintenance, etc. Such consent, if given, may be revoked at
any time when, in the opinion of the Borough Council, it is necessary to
do so to protect the public welfare.
§ 94-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-5
1:339
A. All permanent connections hereinafter made shall be metered, except
connections used exclusively for fire-protection purposes, and the use
of water without a meter makes the property owner liable for an
amount of water consumed as estimated by the Department in addition
to any penalties imposed under this ordinance.
B. The Department shall furnish each customer supplied with water on a
measured scale with an up to one-inch meter and with the appropriate
couplings and shall keep the same in repair. If the meter is misused or
damaged by frost, hot water or external causes, the expense of repair
must be borne by the customer. If larger than a one-inch meter is
required, the applicant will furnish the larger meter at their own cost.
The meter is to meet Water Department specification. The Water
Department reserves the right to inspect and test these meters for
accuracy and working order, the cost of such measurement to be borne
by customer. If repairs are necessary, they must be made within thirty
(30) days by the customer. [Amended 5-28-13 by Ord. No. 8-13]
C. The location provided by a property owner for a water meter shall be as
near as possible to the point of entrance of the service and shall be
reasonably accessible for reading and maintenance purposes and shall
be such as to offer adequate protection against damage to the meter. All
meters shall be installed in the cellars of buildings, and if no cellars are
under said building, then an accessible location on the first floor. Stop
and drain valves shall be provided by the property owner on each side
of and directly adjacent to the meter yoke. No fixture of any kind from
which water might be drawn shall be placed on the street side of the
meter. The meter shall not be installed unless the location and facilities
provided for said meter meet the approval of the Department.
D. All current customers shall be required to have a radio read metering
device. The type and location of any such device shall meet the approval
of the Water Department before being installed and the property owner
is subject to the fees contained in Chapter 48:94-7 for the installation of
said device.
E. New customers are required to have a radio read metering device. The
type and location of any such device shall meet the approval of the
Water Department before being installed and the property owner is
subject to the fees contained in Chapter 48:94-7 for the installation of
said device.
F. No person, except an employee of the Department, shall connect,
disconnect, repair, adjust or tamper in any way with a water meter.
G. Failure of a meter to register properly shall be reported immediately in
writing to the Water Department. Charges for water during the period
of failure shall be computed on the basis of an average consumption
over a reasonable period prior to the failure.
§ 94-5 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 94-5
1:340
§ 94-6. Billing.
H. Upon request of a customer, the Department will make a test of the
accuracy of the meter. If it is found to register more than one hundred
three percent (103%) of the water passed or less than ninety-seven
percent (97%) of full capacity, there shall be no charge for removing,
repairing and resetting the meter. If, however, a request for a test is
made more often than once a year and the meter is found to be accurate
within the above-stated limit, a charge of forty dollars ($40) shall be
made for the removal, testing and resetting. The Water Department
shall have the right to make periodical tests of any or all meters at no
cost to the customer.
I. Upon the request of a customer to discontinue service and have the
account established with a new customer, the Water Department shall
determine whether a radio read meter has been installed, and a new
service account shall not be opened until a radio read meter device is
installed.
J. A customer may opt out of having a radio read meter installed on their
property provided: [Amended 08-27-13 by Ord. No. 12-13]
1. That the structure has a meter that is able to be read from the
exterior of that structure; and
2. That the Borough Water Department has a written request from the
customer acknowledging that by opting out of having the radio
read meter installed that they accept that they will be charged the
prevailing opt-out fee as determined by Borough ordinance.
A. Bills for service and water shall be rendered quarterly.
B. Estimated bills rendered under this clause shall indicate the fact that
the same are estimated. The Water Agent may also use this procedure
of billing on alternative quarters as may be determined by the Water
Agent.
C. Property owners shall be held responsible for all charges accruing for
water service until written notice has been given to the Water Agent to
discontinue the service.
D. If a bill remains unpaid for a period of over sixty (60) days after mailing
or presentation, notice shall be served on or mailed to the customer
that unless the bill is paid within seven (7) days from the date of such
notice the water supply shall be discontinued. When the water is turned
off under such conditions, it shall remain off until the amount owing is
paid in full, or until arrangements for payment, satisfactory to the
Water Agent, have been made.
E. The owner or owners of any store, house, building, buildings or
premises shall be and are liable for the payment of the water supply,
service charges and interest charges. The failure to pay for such water
§ 94-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-6
1:341
§ 94-7. Fees for service connection.
See Chapter 48:94-7.
§ 94-8. Metered rates.
See Chapter 48:94-8.
§ 94-9. Service connections: construction.
§ 94-10. Fees: construction.
See Chapter 48:94-10.
§ 94-11. Water-rates: construction.
See Chapter 48:94-11.
§ 94-12. Fire service.
supply, service charge and interest charge shall constitute and become
a lien upon such store, house, building, buildings or premises until such
charges have been paid and satisfied.
F. All complaints with regard to the service furnished or the reading of the
meters or of the bills rendered shall be made to the Water Agent, in
writing.
A. Application for water to be used for building construction or other
special purposes, except on a lot or premises already supplied with
water by meter, shall be made by the property owner or his authorized
agent on blanks furnished for that purpose.
B. Water will be furnished for construction purposes, and charges shall be
made at the option of the Water Department on a flat rate or a metered
rate basis.
A. No person, unless authorized by the Department, shall take water from
any public fire hydrant or hose plug except for fire purposes or for the
use of the Fire Department, and no public fire hydrant shall be used for
sprinkling the streets, flushing sewers or gutters or for any other
purpose than fire purposes without a permit from the Department.
B. Upon application to the Department, authorization may be secured for
the purpose of filling a swimming pool from a fire hydrant, the fee for
which shall be payable in advance.
C. No person, firm or corporation shall fill in around any fire hydrant,
allow any accumulation around the same or in any other manner
interfere with the proper and immediate access to the same for fire
protection purposes.
§ 94-6 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 94-12
1:342
§ 94-13. Fees and rates: fire service.
See Chapter 48:94-13.
§ 94-14. Extensions.
§ 94-15. Local improvements.
Nothing in the above ordinance shall preclude improvements, repair or
extensions of the public water system to be assessed in whole or part as
local improvements in accordance with the applicable state statutes.
§ 94-16. Special conditions.
When not contrary to the public interests and when, owing to special
conditions or by reason of other extraordinary and exceptional situation,
strict application of the provisions of this ordinance shall result in peculiar
D. The Chief or Chiefs of the fire company and their assistant officers are
authorized to use the public fire hydrants for the purpose of
extinguishing fires and also with due care after notice to the Water
Dept., to a reasonable extent to use water for the purpose of drills and
tests, and washing fire equipment, but all such uses shall be under the
supervision and direction of the Chief or Chiefs or their assistant
officers and in no event shall an inexperienced or incompetent person
be permitted to manipulate or control in any way any fire hydrant.
A. All extensions to the mains of the Borough of Waldwick are to be made
in accordance with the site plan approved by either the Waldwick
Planning Board or Waldwick Board of Adjustment. The developer will be
required to extend the mains, install the service connections, curb
boxes and lateral connections and any other appurtenances to their
development at their cost.
B. The Water Supervisor shall approve the type, size and location of all
mains, hydrants, booster stations, pressure tanks, service lines, curb
stops, curb boxes and valves.
C. The entire extension is subject to inspection and approval by the Water
Dept. and is to be tested under the Water Dept.'s supervision before
back filling.
D. Prior to any acceptance, it shall be necessary for the applicant
extending said water system as herein provided, to submit to the Water
Dept. a detailed map indicating the location of the extended facilities
including all surface controls as well as depth of subsurface lines and
controls by acceptable engineering detailed drawings.
E. When within streets or public property such extensions meet with the
approval of the Water Department and are accepted by the Borough
Council, the ownership thereof shall be transferred to the Borough of
Waldwick.
§ 94-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-16
1:343
and exceptional difficulties or exceptional and undue hardship, the Borough
Council may by resolution grant a variance from such strict application so
as to relieve such difficulties or hardship.
§ 94-17. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 95
WEEDS, NOXIOUS
§ 95-1. Noxious growths deemed nuisance.
The growth, existence or presence of brush weeds or debris injurious to
the public health or presenting a fire hazard on any plot of land, lot,
street, highway, right-of-way or any other public or private place is hereby
determined to be a nuisance and detrimental to public health, safety and
welfare.
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms "brush weeds and debris" shall
include ragweed, poison ivy and other noxious weeds, dead and dying trees,
stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage and trash.
§ 95-2. Causing or permitting brush weeds or debris to collect.
No owner, tenant or occupant of any plot of land, lot, street, highway, rightof-
way or any other public or private place shall cause, allow or permit
brush weeds or debris injurious to the public health or presenting a fire
hazard to grow, collect or exist thereon.
§ 95-3. Removal of brush weeds or debris required upon notice.
It shall be the duty of such owner, tenant or occupant of any such plot of
land, lot, street, highway, right-of-way or any other public or private place
in the Borough of Waldwick to remove, destroy or cause to be removed
and destroyed all such brush, weeds and debris injurious to the public
health, within ten (10) days after receiving notice to do so from either the
Zoning Officer, Health Officer, Fire Inspector or Building Inspector of the
Borough of Waldwick. Notice may be effected by personal service or by
leaving a copy of the notice at the owner, tenant, or occupant's address with
A. See Chapter 1:14.1.
B. If any section, term or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not
affect the remaining terms and provisions thereof.
C. Where two (2) or more customers are supplied through a single service
line, any violation of the rules of the Water Department with reference
to either or any of said customers, as the case may be, shall be deemed
a violation as to all, and the Water Department shall take such action as
could be taken if it were used by a single customer.
§ 94-16 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 95-3
1:344
a member of the family above the age of fourteen (14) years; or by certified
mail, return receipt requested, directed, in case of any owner, to the address
of such owner as the same appears on the last tax duplicate of the Borough
of Waldwick, and, in the case of a tenant or occupant, to the address of the
lands in question. If the certified mail is not claimed, notice shall be sent by
regular mail.
§ 95-4. Noncompliance procedure; collection of costs incurred by
Borough.
Should the owner, tenant or occupant upon whom such notice is served
fail, neglect or refuse to remove and destroy, or cause to be removed
or destroyed, such brush, weeds or debris injurious to the public health,
safety and welfare, within ten (10) days after the service of such notice,
the Borough of Waldwick may cause such brush, weeds or debris to be
removed or otherwise destroyed, and the actual cost of such removal shall
be certified by the Borough Administrator to the Mayor and Council, who
shall examine such certificate and, if the same be found to be correct, shall
cause the same to be charged against the lands from which such brush,
weeds or debris shall have been removed, and the amount so charged shall
forthwith become and be a lien on the property on which such brush, weeds
or debris were located, and shall be added to and form a part of the taxes
next to be assessed on said lot or tract of land and shall be collected and
enforced by the same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 95-5. Violations and penalties.
Any owner, tenant or occupant who shall neglect to remove or otherwise
destroy such brush, weeds or debris injurious to the public health as
directed by this ordinance, or who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply
with the provisions of any notice herein provided for, of who shall resist or
obstruct the Borough of Waldwick or its servants, agents and/or employees
in the removal or destruction of the brush, weeds or debris injurious to
the public health, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500) or be imprisoned for a term not
exceeding ninety (90) days, or both, for each and every offense, and each
day upon which a violation of this ordinance continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 95-6. Costs to be additional to penalties.
The imposition and collection of the fine imposed by this ordinance shall
not constitute any bar to the right of the Borough of Waldwick to collect
the costs of removing or otherwise destroying such brush, weeds or debris
injurious to the public health in the manner herein authorized.
§ 95-7. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication as required by law.
§ 95-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-7
1:345
Chapter 95A
(RESERVED)
Chapter 95B
WILDLIFE FEEDING
§ 95B-1. Purpose.
An ordinance to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife in any public
park or on any other property owned or operated by the Borough of
Waldwick, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 95B-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 95B-3. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by the Borough of Waldwick, any wildlife, excluding confined
wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation
centers, or unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 95B-4. Enforcement.
This ordinance shall be enforced by the Police Department and Health
Official of the Borough of Waldwick.
Any person found to be in violation of this ordinance shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
§ 95-7 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 95B-5
1:346
§ 95B-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is guilty of feeding wildlife on public property, in the
Borough of Waldwick shall be punished by a fine of ten dollars ($10) and
two hours of community service for the first offense, and twenty-five dollars
($25) and five hours of community service for the second and subsequent
offenses.
§ 95B-6. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this ordinance is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this ordinance to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this ordinance.
§ 95B-7. Effective date.
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption
and any publication as may be required by law.
Chapter 96
YARD/GARAGE SALES
§ 96-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GOODS — Includes any goods, warehouse merchandise or any other
property capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
PERSON — Any corporation, business entity or an individual and members
of his or her household.
YARD/GARAGE SALE — Includes all sales entitled "yard sale," "garage
sale," "lawn sale," "rummage sale," "flea market sale" or any similar casual
sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any means
whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of such sale.
§ 96-2. Permit required.
No person shall conduct a yard/garage sale in the Borough of Waldwick
without first filing with the Office of the Borough Clerk the information
hereinafter specified and obtaining from said office a permit which shall be
known as a "yard/garage sale permit."
§ 96-3. Fees.
Fees shall be indicated in Chapter 48 under section 48:96-3.
§ 95B-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-4
1:347
§ 96-4. Issuance of permits; display.
§ 96-5. Hours of sale.
All yard/garage sales shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m.
§ 96-6. Signs. [Ord. No. 17-2017]
§ 96-7. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Chapter 97
ZONING
A. The permit shall be issued to any one (1) address two (2) times only
within any twelve-month period and no such permit shall be issued for
more than three (3) consecutive calendar days. Non-profit charitable,
religious or civic organizations may be allowed more than three (3) days
with the approval of the Mayor and Council.
B. Each permit issued under the provisions of this section shall be
prominently displayed on the premises upon which the yard/garage sale
is conducted throughout the entire period of the licensed sale.
A. Four (4) temporary signs shall be permitted to be posted for the period
of the sale, forty-eight (48) hours prior to the sale and twenty-four (24)
hours thereafter. Planning Board approval will not be needed.
B. The signs shall have a space allotted thereon upon which the person
holding the sale shall place the name and address of the person running
the sale; and the permit number. No sign shall be posted, located or
displayed without this information.
A. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Police
Department of the Borough of Waldwick. It shall be their duty to
investigate any violation of this Chapter. If a violation is found to exist,
they shall prosecute a complaint before the local Municipal Court
pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
B. Any permit issued under this Chapter may be revoked or suspended
without a public hearing by the Chief of Police and/or Construction
Official when, in his opinion, it is reasonably necessary to do so for the
public safety of this community.
C. The penalty for this violation shall be a fine of not less than fifteen
dollars ($15) and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.).
§ 96-4 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 96-7
1:348
ARTICLE I
Title, Purpose and Scope
§ 97-1. Title.
This ordinance shall be known as the "Zoning, Land Use and Development
Code" of the Borough of Waldwick.
§ 97-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to establish a pattern for the use of
the land based upon a Comprehensive Development Plan for the Borough
of Waldwick. The provisions of this ordinance shall be held as minimum
requirements enacted in order to promote and to protect the public health,
safety, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants
of the Borough of Waldwick. This ordinance is intended to regulate the
use of land within zoning districts; promote orderly development; regulate
the intensity of use and the location of buildings; establish standards of
development; provide adequate provision for circulation, utilities and
services; provide adequate light and air; prevent overcrowding of land;
limit congestion in the streets; secure safety from fire and floods and
against other hazards; prevent the unregulated and uncontrolled relocation,
filling, excavation and removal of soil by developers and excavators which
may result in unsuitable soil conditions that may cause unsafe conditions
resulting from soil erosion, and inadequate and improper surface water
drainage; prohibit incompatible uses and regulate the alteration of existing
buildings, with a view to conserving the value of property and encouraging
the most appropriate use of land throughout the Borough of Waldwick.
Where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction than is imposed or
required by any other provisions of law or by any other rules or regulations
or resolutions, the provisions of this ordinance shall control.
§ 97-3. Scope.
The scope of this chapter as it relates to other laws, ordinances, regulations,
rules or other restrictions are as follows:
A. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances,
except those repealed expressly or by necessary implication hereby, or
to affect any private restrictions placed upon property by covenant,
deed or other private agreement unless repugnant hereto.
B. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of
buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings or coverage by
above-grade structures or improvements or requires greater lot area or
longer yards or other open spaces than are imposed or required by such
rules, regulations or permits or by such private restrictions, the
provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 97-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-3
1:349

ARTICLE II
Planning Board
§ 97-4. Establishment; composition. [Added 8-22-00 by Ord. No.
14-00]
There is hereby established pursuant to C. 291 P.L. 1975, in the Borough of
Waldwick a Planning Board of nine (9) members consisting of the following
four (4) classes. All members and alternate members of the Planning Board,
except for Class II members set forth below, shall be municipal residents.
§ 97-5. Terms. [Amended 8-22-00 by Ord. No. 14-00]
The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his/her
official tenure or if the member is the Mayor's designee in the absence of
the Mayor, the designee shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor during
the Mayor's tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II and
Class III shall be for one (1) year or terminate at the completion of their
respective terms of office, whichever occurs first. The term of a Class IV
member who is also a member of the Board of Adjustment or the Board of
Education shall terminate whenever he/she is no longer a member of such
other body or at the completion of his/her Class IV term, whichever occurs
first. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
ordinance shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent the
expiration of such term shall be evenly distributed over the first four (4)
years after their appointment, as determined by resolution of the governing
body; provided, however, that no term of any member shall exceed four (4)
years and further provided that nothing herein shall affect the term of any
present member of the Planning Board, all of whom shall continue in office
until the completion of the term which they were appointed. Thereafter,
all Class IV members shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years except
as otherwise herein provided. All terms shall run from January 1 of the
year in which the appointment was made. If a vacancy of any class shall
occur, otherwise than by expiration of the term, a vacancy shall be filled by
appointment as provided in this Article.
A. Class I: Mayor or the Mayor's designee in the absence of the Mayor.
B. Class II: one (1) of the officials of the Borough of Waldwick other than a
member of the governing body, to be appointed by the Mayor.
C. Class III: a member of the governing body, to be appointed by it.
D. Class IV: six (6) other citizens of the Borough of Waldwick, to be
appointed by the Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other
municipal office, except that one (1) member may be a member of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment and one (1) may be a member of the Board
of Education.
§ 97-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-6
1:351
§ 97-6. Vacancies. [Amended 8-22-00 by Ord. No. 14-00]
Alternate Members.
§ 97-7. Removal.
Any member of the Planning Board other than the Class I member may be
removed by the governing body for cause. Any member so removed shall be
entitled to a public hearing if requested by said member.
§ 97-8. Organization. [Amended 8-22-00 by Ord. No. 14-00]
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV and select a Secretary, who may be either a member of
the Planning Board or a municipal employee designated by it. An alternate
member shall not serve as chairman or vice-chairman of the Planning
Board.
§ 97-9. Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of Planning Board Attorney. The Planning
Board may annually appoint and fix the compensation of or agree upon
the rate of compensation of the Planning Board Attorney, who shall be an
attorney other than the Municipal Attorney.
§ 97-10. Experts and staff.
The Planning Board may also employ or contract for the services of experts
and other staff and services, as it may deem necessary. The Board shall not,
however, exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by
the governing body for its use.
(A) The Planning Board, in addition to its nine (9) regular members, shall
also consist of two alternate members. The alternate members shall be
appointed by the Mayor. Said alternate shall be appointed for Class IV
members and shall meet the qualifications of IV membership. The terms
of the alternate members shall be for two (2) years, except that the
terms of the alternate members shall be such that the term of not more
than one alternate member shall expire in any one year.
Alternate members of any class may participate in all matters before
the Planning Board but may not vote, except in absence or
disqualification of a regular member. Participation of alternate
members shall not be deemed an increase in the size of the Planning
Board or change in the quorum requirements. A vote of the Planning
Board shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote
in place of an alternate member. Should there be a choice as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
§ 97-6 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-11
1:352
§ 97-11. Powers and duties generally.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this ordinance. In the
issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply. It shall also have the following powers and
duties:
A. To make and adopt and, from time to time, amend a Master Plan for the
physical development of the Borough of Waldwick, including any areas
outside its boundaries which in the Board's judgment bear essential
relation to the Planning Board of the Borough of Waldwick, in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
B. To administer the provisions of the Zoning, Land Use and Development
Code of the municipality in accordance with the provisions of said
ordinance and the Municipal Land Use Law, c. 291, P.L. 1975. [N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.]
C. To approve conditional use applications in accordance with the
provisions of the Zoning, Land Use and Development Code pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
D. To exercise its power on the capital improvement program pursuant to
article 4 of the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law.
E. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by State or federal law or regulations.
F. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
G. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47, to waive notice on public hearing for
applications for development if said application conforms to the
definition of "minor subdivision" as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-5.
H. To consider and make report to the governing body within thirty-five
(35) days after referral as to any proposed development regulation
submitted to it pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a.
I. To consider and make report to the governing body relative to the
adoption of any Official Map or any amendment thereto, pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a.
J. Whenever the proposed development requires approval pursuant to
this act of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use (but not a variance
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d), the Planning Board shall have the
power to grant, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions
as the Board of Adjustment, variances, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.
Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, notice of a
hearing on the application for development shall include a reference to
the request for a variance or direction for issuance of a permit, as the
§ 97-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-11
1:353
§ 97-12. Time limits.
case may be. The developer may elect to submit a separate application
requesting approval of the variance or direction of the issuance of a
permit and a subsequent application for any required approval of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The separate approval of the
variance or direction of the issuance of a permit shall be conditioned
upon grant of all required subsequent approvals by the Planning Board.
No such subsequent approval shall be granted unless the approval
can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and
without substantial impairment of the intent and purpose of the zone
plan and Land Use and Development Code [Amended 2-12-85 by Ord.
No. 2-85]
K. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the governing body for the aid and assistance of the
governing body or other agencies or officials, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-26b.
A. Minor subdivisions. Minor subdivision approvals shall be granted or
denied within forty-five (45) days of the date of submission of a
complete application to the Planning Board or within such further time
as may be consented to by the applicant. Approval of a minor
subdivision shall expire one hundred ninety (190) days from the date of
Planning Board approval unless within such period a plat in conformity
with such approval and the provisions of the Map Filing Law or a deed
clearly describing the approved minor subdivision is filed by the
developer with the County recording officer, the Municipal Engineer
and the Municipal Tax Assessor. Any such plat or deed must be signed
by the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board before it will be
accepted for filing by the County recording officer.
B. Preliminary approval of major subdivisions. Upon submission of a
complete application for a subdivision of ten (10) or fewer lots, the
Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within fortyfive
(45) days of the date of such submission or within such further time
as may be consented to by the developer. Upon submission of a
complete application for a subdivision of more than ten (10) lots, the
Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within ninetyfive
(95) days of the date of such submission or within such further time
as may be consented to by the developer. Otherwise, the Planning
Board shall be deemed to have granted preliminary approval for the
subdivision.
C. Ancillary powers. Whenever the Planning Board is called upon to
exercise its ancillary powers before the granting of a variance as set
forth in § 97-11 of this ordinance, the Planning Board shall grant or
deny approval of the application within one hundred and twenty (120)
days after submission by the developer of a complete application or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
§ 97-11 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-12
1:354
§ 97-13. Procedure for filing applications.
Applications for development within the jurisdiction of the Planning Board
pursuant to the provisions of c. 291, P.L. 1975, shall be filed with the
Borough Clerk. The applicant shall file, at least fourteen (14) days before
the date of the monthly meeting of the Board, nine (9) copies of a sketch
plat, nine (9) copies of an application for minor subdivision approval, nine
(9) copies of an application for major subdivision approval or nine (9) copies
of an application for site plan review, conditional use approval or planned
development. At the time of filing the application, but in no event less than
ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing, the applicant shall also file all
plot plans, maps or other papers required by virtue of any provision of this
ordinance or any rule of the Planning Board. The applicant shall obtain all
necessary forms from the Borough Clerk. The Borough Clerk shall inform
the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate applications and of the
regular meeting dates of the Board.
§ 97-14. Citizens' Advisory Committee.
The Mayor may appoint one (1) or more persons as a Citizens' Advisory
Committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties, but
such person or persons shall have no power to vote or take other action
required of the Board. Such person or persons shall serve at the pleasure of
the Mayor.
constitute approval of the application and a certificate of the
administrative officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall
be issued on request of the applicant.
D. Final approval.
1. Application for final subdivision approval shall be granted or
denied within forty-five (45) days of submission of a complete
application or within such further time as may be consented to by
the applicant.
2. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire ninety-five (95)
days from the date of signing of the plat unless within such period
the plat shall have been duly filed by the developer with the County
recording officer. The Planning Board may, for good cause shown,
extend the period for recording for an additional period not to
exceed one hundred ninety (190) days from the date of signing of
the plat.
§ 97-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-14
1:355

ARTICLE III
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 97-15. Establishment; composition.
§ 97-16. Alternate members. [Added 1-25-83 by Ord. No. 1-83]
A. A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69 et seq., consisting of seven (7) residents of the Borough of
Waldwick appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the
Council, to serve for terms of four (4) years from January 1 of the year of
their appointment. The terms of the members first appointed shall be so
determined that to the greatest practicable extent the expiration of
such terms shall be distributed evenly over the first four (4) years after
their appointment, provided that the initial term of no member shall
exceed four (4) years. Thereafter, the term of each member shall be for
four (4) years. Nothing in this ordinance shall, however, be construed to
affect the terms of any present members of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, all of whom shall continue in office until the completion of
the terms for which they were appointed.
B. No member or alternate member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
may hold any elective office or position under the municipality. This
shall not be deemed to prohibit appointed officials of the municipality or
elected officials of another corporate entity such as the Board of
Education from serving as a member or alternate member. [Amended
8-22-00 by Ord. No. 14-00]
C. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
for the unexpired term only, in the manner hereinabove set forth for
appointment of members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
D. All members and alternate members shall be municipal residents.
[Added 8-22-00 by Ord. No. 14-00]
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment, in addition to its seven (7) regular
members, shall also consist of two (2) alternate members. The alternate
members shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council in the same
manner as the Mayor and Council appoints regular members.
B. The terms of office of the alternate members shall be for two years. The
initial appointment shall be made so that the term of not more than one
alternate member shall expire in any one year. [Amended 8-22-00 by
Ord. No. 14-00]
C. Alternate members may participate in all matters but may not vote,
except in absence or disqualification of a regular member. Participation
of alternate members shall not be deemed an increase in the size of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment. A vote of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote in place of
an alternate member. Should there be a choice as to which alternate
§ 97-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-16
1:357
§ 97-17. Officers. [Amended 8-22-00 by Ord. No. 14-00]
The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from its
regular members and shall also select a Secretary, who may or may not be
a Board member or municipal employee.
§ 97-18. Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of Attorney to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may annually appoint and fix
the compensation of or agree upon the rate of compensation of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment Attorney, who shall be an attorney other than the
Borough Attorney.
§ 97-19. Experts and staff.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ or contract for and fix
the compensation of such experts and other staff and services as it may
deem necessary. The Board shall not authorize expenditures which exceed,
exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the governing body
for its use.
§ 97-20. Rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this ordinance. In the
issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 97-21. Powers.
member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote. [Amended 8-22-00 by
Ord. No. 14-00]
A. The powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq. and amendments and supplements
thereto and with the provisions of this ordinance.
B. It is further the intent of this ordinance to confer upon the Zoning Board
of Adjustment as full and complete powers as may be lawfully conferred
upon such Board, including, but not by way of limitation, the authority,
in connection with any case, action or proceeding before the Board, to
interpret and construe the provisions of this ordinance or any term,
clause, sentence or word hereof and the Zoning Map, in accordance
with the general rules of construction applicable to legislative
enactments.
C. The Board may, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards, grant variances from the terms of this
ordinance in accordance with the general or specific rules contained
§ 97-16 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-21
1:358
§ 97-22. Appeals and applications.
herein and with the general rules hereby laid down that equity shall
be done in cases where the strict construction of the provisions of
this ordinance would work undue hardship. The powers and duties of
the Board having been delegated to and imposed upon it by statute,
the Board shall, in all cases, follow the provisions applicable to it
in said c. 291, P.L. 1975, or subsequent statutes in such case made
and provided, and it shall, from time to time, furnish to any person
requesting the same a copy of its rules and information as to how
appeals or applications may properly be filed with the Board for its
decision thereon.
A. Applications for building permits shall be made to the Building
Inspector, who shall approve or deny such applications. Appeals to the
Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested party. Each appeal
shall be taken within twenty (20) days, as prescribed by the statute, by
filing a notice of appeal with the officer from whom the appeal was
taken, together with ten (10) copies of said notice with the Secretary of
the Board of Adjustment. Said notice of appeal shall specify the grounds
for said appeal. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall
forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record
upon which the action appealed from was taken. [Amended 8-22-00
by Ord. No. 14-00]
B. A developer may file an application for development with the Board of
Adjustment for action under any of its powers without prior application
to the Building Inspector. All applications addressed to the original
jurisdiction of the Board of Adjustment without prior application for a
building permit from the Building Inspector shall be filed with the
Secretary of the Board of Adjustment. Three (3) copies of the
application shall be filed. At the time of filing the appeal or application,
but in no event less than ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing,
the applicant shall also file all plot plans, maps or other papers required
by virtue of any provision of this ordinance or any rule of the Board of
Adjustment. The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms from the
Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Secretary of the
Board shall inform the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate
proceedings and of the regular meeting dates of the Board.
C. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect
of which the decision appealed from was made, unless the officer from
whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the
notice of appeal shall have been filed with him/her that by reason of
facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his/her opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not
be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted
by the Superior Court of New Jersey on application and notice to the
officer from which the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
[Amended 8-22-00 by Ord. No. 14-00]
§ 97-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-23
1:359
§ 97-23. Power to reverse or modify decisions.
In exercising the above-mentioned power, the Board of Adjustment may, in
conformity with the provisions of c. 291, P.L. 1975, or amendments thereto
or subsequent statutes applying, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from
and make such other requirement, decision or determination as ought to be
made, and to that end have all the powers of the administrative officer from
whom the appeal was taken.
§ 97-24. Expiration of variance.
Any variance from the terms of this ordinance hereafter granted by the
Board of Adjustment permitting the erection or alteration of any structure
or structures or permitting a specified use of any premises shall expire by
limitation unless such construction or alteration shall have been actually
commenced on each and every structure permitted by said variance, or
unless such permitted use has actually been commenced, within one (1)
year from the date of publication of the notice of the judgment or
determination of the Board of Adjustment; except, however, that the
running of the period of limitation herein provided shall be tolled from the
date of filing an appeal from the decision of the Board of Adjustment to the
governing body or to a court of competent jurisdiction until the termination
in any manner of such appeal or proceeding.
§ 97-25. Powers granted by law.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall have such powers as are granted by law
to:
1. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that
there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made
by an administrative official or agency based on or made in the
enforcement of the Zoning, Land Use and Development Code.
2. Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
Zoning, Land Use and Development Code, or for decisions upon
other special questions upon which such Board is authorized by the
Land Use and Development Code to pass.
3. Appeal due to hardship. [Amended 2-12-85 by Ord. No. 2-85]
a. Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or
shape of a specific piece of property, or by reason of
exceptional topographic conditions or physical features unique
affecting a specific piece of property, or by reason of an
extraordinary and exceptional situation uniquely affecting a
specific piece of property or the structures lawfully existing
thereon, the strict application of any regulation in the Zoning,
Land Use and Development Code of Waldwick would result in
peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, exceptional
§ 97-23 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-25
1:360
and undue hardship upon the developer of such property,
grant, upon an application or an appeal relating to such
property, a variance from such strict application of such
regulation so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship.
b. Where, in an application or appeal relating to a specific piece
of property, the purposes of the Municipal Land Use Law would
be advanced by a deviation from the Land Use and
Development Code requirements and the benefits of the
deviation would substantially outweigh any detriment, grant a
variance to allow departure from regulations in the Zoning,
Land Use and Development Code of the Borough of Waldwick;
provided, however, that the fact that a proposed use is an
inherently beneficial use shall not be dispositive of a decision
on a variance under this subsection and provided, that no
variance from those departures enumerated in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d shall be granted under this subsection, and
provided further that the proposed development does not
require approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site
plan or conditional use in conjunction with which the Planning
Board has the power to review a request for a variance
pursuant to § 97-11 of this Ordinance. [Amended 8-22-00 by
Ord. No. 14-00]
4. In particular cases and for special reasons, grant a variance to
allow departure from the Zoning, Land Use and Development Code
of the Borough of Waldwick to permit a use or principal structure in
a district restricted against such use or principal structure; an
expansion of a nonconforming use; deviation from a specification or
standard pertaining solely to a conditional use; an increase in the
permitted floor area ratio as defined by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4; an
increase in the permitted density, as defined by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4,
except that with respect to an application for a variance from the
density requirements for a detached one or two-dwelling unit
building on an isolated undersized lot, or on a lot resulting from a
minor subdivision, such application shall be made pursuant to §
97-25A(3); or a height of a principal structure which exceeds by ten
(10) feet or ten percent (10%) the maximum height permitted in the
district for a principal structure at least five (5) members of the full
authorized membership of the Board. [Amended 2-12-85 by Ord.
No. 2-85; 8-22-00 by Ord. No. 14-00]
B. No variance or other relief may be granted under the provisions of this
section including a variance or other relief involving an inherently
beneficial use, without showing that such variance or other relief can be
granted without substantial detriment to the public good and will not
substantially impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and Zoning,
Land Use and Development Code. Any application under any subsection
of this section may be referred to any appropriate person or agency,
including the Planning Board, for its report, provided that such
§ 97-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-25
1:361
§ 97-26. Additional powers.
§ 97-27. Time limit for decision. [Amended 2-12-85 by Ord. No.
2-85]
The Board of Adjustment shall render its decision not later than one
hundred twenty (120) days after the date an appeal is taken from the
decision of an administrative officer, or one hundred twenty (120) days
after the submission of a complete application (as defined in § 97-47)
for development to the Board, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-72b. Failure of the Board to render a decision within such one
hundred twenty (120) day period or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant shall constitute a decision favorable to the
applicant.
reference shall not extend the period of time within which the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall act. [Amended 8-22-00 by Ord. No. 14-00]
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, in addition to the powers
specified in § 97-21 of this Article, have power given by law to:
1. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved on the
Official Map.
2. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a
building or structure not related to a street.
B. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76b, the Board of Adjustment shall have the
power to grant, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions
as the Planning Board, subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to
Article 6 of Chapter 291, P.L. 1975, or conditional use approval
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67, whenever the Board is reviewing an
application for approval of a use variance pursuant to § 97-25A(4), of
this ordinance.
§ 97-25 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-27
1:362
ARTICLE IV
Provisions Applicable to Both Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment
§ 97-28. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act
on any matter in which he/she has either directly or indirectly any personal
or financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself
from acting on a particular matter, he/she shall not continue to sit with the
Board on the hearing of such matter nor participate in any discussion or
decision relating thereto.
§ 97-29. Meetings.
§ 97-30. Minutes.
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and of
the persons appearing by attorney; the action taken by the Board; and
the findings, if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall
thereafter be made available for public inspection during normal business
hours at the office of the Borough Clerk. Any interested party shall have the
right to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal
proceeding concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested
party may be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes for his/her use
as provided for in the rules of the Board or, if no rules govern, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 47:1A-2.
§ 97-31. Fees.
See §48:56A-27 of the Code of the Borough of Waldwick.
A. The Planning Board and the Zoning Board of Adjustment each shall
schedule meetings no less often than once a month, and any meeting so
scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of
applications for development to process.
B. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on
the request of any two (2) Board members, which meetings shall be
held on notice to the Board's members and the public in accordance
with all applicable legal requirements.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
D. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum, except as
otherwise required by any provision of c. 291, P.L. 1975.
E. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law c. 231, P.L. 1975.
§ 97-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-32
1:363
§ 97-32. Hearings.
§ 97-33. Notice requirements for hearings. [Amended 8-22-00 by
Ord. No. 14-00]
Whenever notice is required under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12 of the Municipal Land
Use Law of the State of New Jersey, such notice shall be provided by the
applicant. The notice shall comply with the requirements of the New Jersey
Municipal Land Use Law. In addition, an applicant shall provide notice for
the following:
A. Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall make
rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies, which rules
shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
or of this ordinance.
B. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he/she
may designated shall have power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties,
and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law, c.
38, P.L. 1953 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.), shall apply.
C. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer and the right of cross examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
D. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
E. Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographic or mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof on request to any interested party at his/her expense.
F. On appeals to the governing body pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17, the
appealing party shall bear the cost of providing transcripts of the
record before the Board of Adjustment to the governing body.
A. Conventional site plan review pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46;
B. Minor subdivision approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47, unless
waived by the Board per § 97-11G;
C. Final approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:D-50;
D. Details from determination of administrative officer pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(a);
§ 97-32 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-33
1:364
§ 97-34. List of property owners furnished. [Amended 8-22-00 by
Ord. No. 14-00]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, the Assessor of the
Borough of Waldwick designated as the administrative officer under this
Ordinance, shall, within seven (7) days after receipt of a written request
therefor, and upon receipt of payment of a fee of ten dollars ($10), make
and certify a list from the current tax duplicate of names and addresses
of owners to whom the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to
Article IV, § 97-33 of this Ordinance. In addition, the Assessor shall include
on the list the names, addresses and positions of those utilities or cable
television companies who, not less than seven (7) days prior to the date
on which the applicant requested a list, have registered to receive notice
pursuant to subsection h pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12h.
The applicant shall be entitled to rely upon the information contained in
such list, and failure to give notice to any owner or to any public utility,
television company, cable or local utility not on the list shall not invalidate
any hearing or proceeding. The Assessor shall not be required to furnish
names and addresses of those to whom the applicant must give notice
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12 d, e, f or g.
§ 97-35. Decisions.
E. An application involving the exercise of the ancillary powers of the
Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76.
A. The municipal agency shall include findings of fact and conclusions
based thereon in each decision on any application for development and
shall reduce the decision to writing. The municipal agency shall provide
the findings and conclusions through:
1. A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period
provided in the act for action by a municipal agency on the
application for development; or
2. A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held not later
than forty-five (45) days after the date of the meeting at which the
municipal agency voted to grant or deny approval. Only the
members of the municipal agency who voted for the action taken
may vote on the memorializing resolution, and the vote of a
majority of such members present at the meeting at which the
resolution is presented for adoption shall be sufficient to adopt the
resolution. If only one member who voted for the action attends the
meeting at which the resolution is presented for adoption, the
resolution may be adopted upon vote of that member. The failure of
a motion to approve an application shall be memorialized by
resolution, as provided above, with those members voting against
the motion for approval being the members eligible to vote on the
memorializing resolution. The vote of any such resolution shall be
§ 97-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-35
1:365
§ 97-36. Publication of decisions.
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the Borough of Waldwick. Such publication shall be arranged
by the Secretary to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
the case may be. Said notice shall be sent to the official newspaper for
publication within ten (10) days of the date of any such decision.
§ 97-37. Payment of taxes.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-65, every
application for development submitted to the Planning Board or to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the property
which is the subject of such application; or, if it is shown that taxes or
assessments are delinquent on said property, any approvals or other relief
granted by either Board shall be conditioned upon either the prompt
payment of such taxes or assessments or the making or adequate provision
for the payment thereof in such manner that the municipality will be
adequately protected.
deemed to be a memorialization of the action of the municipal
agency and not to be an action of the municipal agency; however,
the date of the adoption of the resolution shall constitute the date
of the decision for purposes of the mailing, filing and publications
required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10. If the municipal agency fails to
adopt a resolution or memorializing resolution as hereinabove
specified, any interested party may apply to the Superior Court in
a summary manner for an order compelling the municipal agency
to reduce its findings and conclusions to writing within a stated
time, and the cost of the application, including attorney's fees, shall
be assessed against the municipality. [Amended 8-22-00 by Ord.
No. 14-00]
§ 97-35 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-37
1:366
ARTICLE V
Appeals
§ 97-38. Appeals to Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Amended 2-12-85
by Ord. No. 2-85]
An appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by any
interested party affected by a decision of the administrative officer of the
Borough of Waldwick based on or made in the enforcement of the Land
Use and Development Code or Official Map. Such appeal shall be taken
within twenty (20) days by filing a notice of appeal in the manner set
forth in Article III, § 97-22A, of this ordinance, and in accordance with the
provisions of Article 9 of the Municipal Land Use Law of 1975.
§ 97-39. Appeals from Zoning Board of Adjustment to Governing
Body.
See § 97-128.9.
§ 97-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-39
1:367

ARTICLE VI
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 97-40. Definitions.
§ 97-41. (Reserved)
§ 97-42. Provisions continued.
Pursuant to the provisions of c. 291, P.L. 1975, Section 81, the substantive
provisions of the existing Land Use and Development Code of the Borough
of Waldwick and the development regulations set forth therein shall
continue in full force and effect and shall be read in pari materia with this
ordinance.
§ 97-43. Pending applications.
All applications for development filed prior to the effective date of this
ordinance may be continued, but any appeals arising out of decisions made
on any such application shall be governed by the provisions of Article V of
this ordinance.
§ 97-44. (Reserved)
§ 97-45. Filing of copies.
Immediately upon adoption of this ordinance, the Borough Clerk shall file a
copy of this ordinance with the County Planning Board as required by law.
The Clerk shall also file with said County Planning Board copies of all other
ordinances of the Borough of Waldwick relating to land use.
§ 97-46. (Reserved)
A. Whenever a term is used in this ordinance which is defined in C. 291,
P.L. 1975, as amended, such term is intended to have the meaning set
forth in the definition of such term found in said Statute, unless a
contrary intention is clearly expressed from the context of Chapter 97
of the Borough of Waldwick Land Use and Development Code.
B. Whenever in Chapter 97 of the municipal code of the Borough of
Waldwick, the term Planning Board is used in a manner which under C.
291, P.L. 1975 as amended grants the Planning Board the privilege of
exercising the powers of the Zoning Board, the term Zoning Board shall
be interchangeable with the term Planning Board. Whenever the term
Zoning Board is used in the above listed chapter in a manner which
under C. 291, P.L. 1975 as amended grants the Zoning Board the
privilege of exercising the powers of the Planning Board, the term
Planning Board shall be interchangeable with the term Zoning Board.
[Amended 3-23-93 by Ord. No. 3-93]
§ 97-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-47
1:369
§ 97-47. Completed applications; time limits. [Added 2-12-85 by
Ord. No. 2-85]
§ 97-48. Checklists for development applications.
A. An application for development shall be complete for purposes of
commencing the applicable time period for action by a municipal
agency when so certified by the municipal agency or its authorized
committee or designee. In the event that the agency, committee or
designee does not certify the application to be complete within fortyfive
(45) days of the date of its submission, the application shall be
deemed complete upon the expiration of the forty-five (45) day period
for purposes of commencing the applicable time period unless:
1. The application lacks information indicated on a checklist adopted
by ordinance and provided to the applicant.
2. The municipal agency or its authorized committee or designee has
notified the applicant, in writing, of the deficiencies in the
application within forty-five (45) days of submission of the
application. The applicant may request that one (1) or more of the
submission requirements be waived, in which event the agency or
its authorized committee shall grant or deny the request within
forty-five (45) days.
B. Nothing herein shall be construed as diminishing the applicant's
obligation to prove in the application process that he/she is entitled to
approval on the application.
C. The municipal agency may subsequently require correction of any
information not specified in the ordinance or any revisions in the
accompanying documents, as are reasonably necessary to make an
informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for
approval of the application for development have been met. The
application shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of any such
additional information or any revisions in the accompanying documents
so required by the municipal agency.
A. The following checklists for land use development are hereby adopted
by reference:
(1) Checklist for site plan approval.
(2) Checklist for subdivision approval.
(3) Checklist for variance approval.
(4) Checklist for conditional use approval.
B. One (1) set of each of these checklists shall be kept on file in the office
of the Borough Clerk with the date of their adoption by ordinance listed
thereon. The checklists shall be distributed by the Secretary of the
§ 97-47 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-48
1:370
§ 97-49. Environmental Impact Statement.
In accordance with the requirements of Chapter 19 of the Municipal Code,
an environmental impact statement shall be submitted on all applications
for preliminary major site plan approval, preliminary major subdivision
approval and for soil permit applications.
§ 97-50. Recycling plan element.
All development proposals for the construction of 50 or more units of singlefamily
residential housing or 25 or more units of multi-family residential
housing or any commercial or industrial development proposal utilizing
1,000 square feet or more of land shall include a recycling plan element
which incorporates the requirements of the recycling ordinance of the
Borough of Waldwick. Such development proposals shall provide for the
collection, disposition and recycling of recyclable materials designated in
the recycling ordinance of the Borough.
Zoning Board of Adjustment and Secretary of the Planning Board for
use in accordance with § 97-48. [Added 2-12-85 by Ord. No. 2-85]
§ 97-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-50
1:371

ARTICLE VII
Development Fees
§ 97-51. Purpose.
§ 97-52. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this article, shall have the following
meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — Means a development
included in the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but
is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal construction
project or a 100 percent affordable development.
COAH or THE COUNCIL — Means the New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing established under the Act which has primary jurisdiction for the
administration of housing obligations in accordance with sound regional
planning consideration in the State.
a) In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (the
Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to
the Council on Affordable Housing's adoption of rules.
b) Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46 section 8 (C. 52:27D-329.2) and the
Statewide Non-Residential Development Fee Act (C. 40:55D-8.1
through 8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and promulgate regulations
necessary for the establishment, implementation, review, monitoring
and enforcement of municipal affordable housing trust funds and
corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are under the
jurisdiction of the Council or court of competent jurisdiction and have a
COAH-approved spending plan may retain fees collected from nonresidential
development.
c) This ordinance establishes standards for the collection, maintenance,
and expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's regulations
and in accordance with P.L. 2008, c. 46, Sections 8 and 32-38. Fees
collected pursuant to this ordinance shall be used for the sole purpose
of providing low and moderate-income housing. This ordinance shall be
interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules on development fees,
codified at N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.
3. Basic requirements.
a) This ordinance shall not be effective until approved by COAH
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.1.
b) The Borough of Waldwick shall not spend development fees
until COAH has approved a plan for spending such fees in
conformance with N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.10 and N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.3.
§ 97-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-52
1:373
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Means money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
DEVELOPER — Means the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or
of any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — Means the assessed value of a property
divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for the
municipality in which the property is situated, as determined in accordance
with sections 1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (C. 54:1-35a through C.
54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Means those strategies that minimize
the impact of development on the environment, and enhance the health,
safety and well-being of residents by producing durable, low-maintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of existing
infrastructure and community services.
§ 97-53. Residential development fees.
a) Imposed fees.
i. Within all zoning districts, residential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted
below, shall pay a fee of one and a half percent of the equalized
assessed value for residential development provided no increased
density is permitted.
ii. When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of six percent
of the equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be
realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the
two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application,
the base density for the purposes of calculating the bonus
development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right
during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application.
Example: If an approval allows four units to be constructed on a
site that was zoned for two units, the fees could equal one percent
of the equalized assessed value on the first two units, and the
specified higher percentage up to six percent of the equalized
assessed value for the two additional units, provided zoning on
the site has not changed during the two-year period preceding the
filing of such a variance application.
b) Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential
development
§ 97-52 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-53
1:374
§ 97-54. Non-residential development fees.
i. Affordable housing developments and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
ii. Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a site
plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building permit shall
be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for this
purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date that the
building permit is issued.
iii. Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure undergoes a change to a more intense use, is demolished
and replaced, or is expanded, if the expansion is not otherwise
exempt from the development fee requirement. The development
fee shall be calculated on the increase in the equalized assessed
value of the improved structure.
iv. Developers of all residential housing demolished and replaced as a
result of a natural disaster or fire, shall be exempt from paying a
development fee.
a) Imposed fees.
i. Within all zoning districts, non-residential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted, shall
pay a fee equal to two and one half (2.5) percent of the equalized
assessed value of the land and improvements, for all new nonresidential
construction on an unimproved lot or lots.
ii. Non-residential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to
two and one half (2.5) percent of the increase in equalized assessed
value resulting from any additions to existing structures to be used
for non-residential purposes.
iii. Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fees of two
and a half percent (2.5%) shall be calculated on the difference
between the equalized assessed value of the newly improved
structure, i.e. land and improvement, at the time final certificate of
occupancy is issued. If the calculation required under this section
results in a negative number, the non-residential development fee
shall be zero.
b) Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for nonresidential
development
§ 97-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-54
1:375
§ 97-55. Collection procedures.
i. The non-residential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market
rate development shall be subject to the two and a half (2.5%).
ii. The 2.5 percent fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized
assessed value resulting from alterations, change in use within
existing footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
iii. Non-residential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
non-residential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as specified in the
Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-Residential Development
Certification/Exemption Form". Any exemption claimed by a
developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
iv. A developer of a non-residential development exempted from the
non-residential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46 shall
be subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer
applies, and shall make the payment of the non-residential
development fee, in that event, within three years after that event
or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy of the nonresidential
development, whichever is later.
v. If a property which was exempted from the collection of a nonresidential
development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt from
property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the fees
required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the termination
of the property tax exemption. Unpaid non-residential development
fees under these circumstances may be enforceable by the Borough
of Waldwick as a lien against the real property of the owner.
a) Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval
for a development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its
staff to notify the construction official responsible for the issuance of a
building permit.
b) For non-residential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/Exemption" to be completed as
per the instructions provided. The Developer of a non-residential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The construction official shall verify the information
submitted by the non-residential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
c) The construction official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first
§ 97-54 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-55
1:376
§ 97-56. Appeal of development fees.
building permit for a development which is subject to a development
fee.
d) Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the municipal Tax Assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
e) The construction official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which is
subject to a development fee.
f) Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the municipal assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development, calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
g) Should the Borough of Waldwick fail to determine or notify the
developer of the amount of the development fee within 10 business days
of the request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the
amount due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute
process set forth in subsection b of section 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46 (C.
40:55D-8.6).
h) Fifty percent of the development fee shall be collected at the time of
issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion shall be
collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The developer
shall be responsible for paying the difference between the fee
calculated at building permit and that determined at issuance of
certificate of occupancy.
1) A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed by
filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a review
and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be placed in an
interest bearing escrow account by the Borough of Waldwick. Appeals
from a determination of the Board may be made to the tax court in
accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure
Law, R.S. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after the date of such
determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited
to the prevailing party.
2) A developer may challenge non-residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of Taxation.
Pending a review and determination by the Director, which shall be
made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest bearing escrow account by the Borough of
Waldwick. Appeals from a determination of the Director may be made to
the tax court in accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform
§ 97-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-56
1:377
§ 97-57. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
§ 97-58. Use of funds.
Procedure Law, R.S. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after the date
of such determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be
credited to the prevailing party.
a) There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust fund
to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer for the purpose of
depositing development fees collected from residential and nonresidential
developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls.
b) The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
1. Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
2. Developer contributed funds to make ten percent (10%) of the
adaptable entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
3. Rental income from municipally operated units;
4. From affordable housing program loans;
5. Recapture funds;
6. Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
7. Any other funds collected in connection with the Borough of
Waldwick's affordable housing program.
c) Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account, the
Borough of Waldwick shall provide COAH with written authorization, in
the form of a three-party escrow agreement between the municipality,
in the official bank of the Borough, and COAH to permit COAH to direct
the disbursement of the funds as provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.13(b).
a) The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by COAH. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may be used for
any activity approved by COAH to address the Borough of Waldwick's
fair share obligation and may be set up as a grant or revolving loan
program. Such activities include, but are not limited to: preservation or
purchase of housing for the purpose of maintaining or implementing
affordability controls, rehabilitation, new construction of affordable
housing units and related costs, accessory apartment, market to
affordable, or regional housing partnership programs, conversion of
existing non-residential buildings to create new affordable units, green
building strategies designed to be cost saving and in accordance with
accepted national or state standards, purchase of land for affordable
§ 97-56 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-58
1:378
housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable housing,
extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to affordable
housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase affordability,
administration necessary for implementation of the Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as permitted pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7 through 8.9 and specified in the approved spending
plan.
b) Funds shall not be expended to reimburse Borough of Waldwick for past
housing activities.
c) At least 30 percent of all development fees collected and interest
earned shall be used to provide affordability assistance to low and
moderate income households in affordable units included in the
municipal Fair Share Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance
portion of development fees collected shall be used to provide
affordability assistance to those households earning 30 percent or less
of median income by region.
i. Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs.
ii. Affordability assistance to households earning 30 percent or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low or
moderate income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30 percent or less of median
income. The use of development fees in this manner shall entitle
the Borough of Waldwick to bonus credits pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:97-3.7.
iii. Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
d) The Borough of Waldwick may contract with a private or public entity to
administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
including the requirement for affordability assistance, in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.
e) No more than 20 percent of all revenues collected from development
fees may be expended on administration, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, a
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing
program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no more than 20
percent of the revenues collected from development fees shall be
expended for such administrative expenses. Administrative funds may
be used for income qualification of households, monitoring the turnover
of sale and rental units, and compliance with COAH's monitoring
§ 97-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-58
1:379
§ 97-59. Monitoring.
§ 97-60. Ongoing collection of fees.
§ 97-61. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage and publication as required
by law and upon receiving approval of the Council on Affordable Housing.
requirements. Legal or other fees related to litigation opposing
affordable housing sites or objecting to the Council's regulations and/or
action are not eligible uses of the affordable housing trust fund.
a) The Borough of Waldwick shall complete and return to COAH all
monitoring forms included in monitoring requirements related to the
collection of development fees from residential and non-residential
developers, payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site,
funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls, barrier free
escrow funds, rental income, repayments from affordable housing
program loans, and any other funds collected in connection with the
Borough of Waldwick's housing program, as well as to the expenditure
of revenues and implementation of the plan certified by COAH. All
monitoring reports shall be completed on forms designed by COAH.
a) The ability for the Borough of Waldwick to impose, collect and expend
development fees shall expire with its substantive certification unless
the Borough of Waldwick has filed an adopted Housing Element and
Fair Share Plan with COAH, has petitioned for substantive certification,
and has received COAH's approval of its development fee ordinance. If
the Borough of Waldwick fails to renew its ability to impose and collect
development fees prior to the expiration of substantive certification, it
may be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining within its
municipal trust fund. Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited into the
"New Jersey Affordable Housing Trust Fund" established pursuant to
section 20 of P.L. 1985, c. 222 (C. 52:27D-320). The Borough of
Waldwick shall not impose a residential development fee on a
development that receives preliminary or final site plan approval after
the expiration of its substantive certification or judgment of
compliance, nor shall the Borough of Waldwick retroactively impose a
development fee on such a development. The Borough of Waldwick shall
not expend development fees after the expiration of its substantive
certification or judgment of compliance.
§ 97-58 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-61
1:380
ARTICLE VIII
Subdivision of Land
§ 97-62. Administrative Agency.
The provisions of Article VIII shall be administered by the Waldwick
Planning Board with R.S. 40:55-1.14 (Section 14 of Chapter 433 of the Laws
of 1953), as amended and supplemented.
§ 97-63. Words and Phrases.
§ 97-63.1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, certain terms are herewith defined:
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation of
storm-water sewers or drainage ditches, or required along a natural stream
or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of
water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage in accordance
with Chapter 1 of Title 58 of the Revised Statutes.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the "subdivision" which
is presented to the Planning Board for final approval in accordance with
these regulations, and which, if approved, shall be filed with the Clerk of
the County of Bergen for recording in accordance with law.
LOT — A parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or portions
by description as on a subdivision or record-of-survey map or by metes and
bounds for purposes of sale, lease or separate use.[Amended 3-24-55 by
Ord. No. 3-55]
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — All "subdivisions" not classified as "minor
subdivisions."
MASTER PLAN — A composite of the mapped and written proposals
recommending the physical development of the Borough, heretofore
adopted or as the same may hereafter be amended or supplemented.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Means a subdivision of land for the creation of no
more than three lots; provided that such subdivision does not involve (1)
a planned development, (2) any new street or (3) the extension of any offtract
improvement, the cost of which is to be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-42.
OFFICIAL MAP — Means a map adopted by ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-32 to 36. Such a map shall be deemed to be conclusive with respect
to the location and width of the "streets," public parks and playgrounds and
"drainage right-of-way" shown thereon.
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership or
corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be
subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same
under this ordinance.
§ 97-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-63.1
1:381
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted in lieu
of a requirement that certain improvements be made before the Planning
Board or other approving body approves a "plat," including performance
bonds, escrow agreements and other similar collateral or surety
agreements.
PLAT — Means the map of a "subdivision".
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map indicating the proposed layout
of the "subdivision" which is submitted to the Borough Clerk for Planning
Board consideration and tentative approval and meeting the requirements
of § 97-65 of this ordinance.
SKETCH PLAT — The sketch map of a "subdivision" of sufficient accuracy
to be used for the purpose of discussion outlined in sections 97-64.1 and/or
97-64.2 and meeting the requirements of Article VIII of this ordinance.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, land parkway, viaduct,
crescent, alley or other way which is an existing State, County or municipal
roadway, or a street or way shown upon a "plat" heretofore approved
pursuant to law or approved by official action, or a street or way on a "plat"
duly filed and recorded in the office of the Clerk of the County of Bergen
prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to such Board of
the power to review "plats", and includes the land between the street lines,
whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders,
gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines or
present right-of-way.
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under
this ordinance to effect a "subdivision" of land thereunder for himself or
another.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a "lot", tract or parcel of land into two
(2) or more "lots", sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of sale or building development; except that the
following divisions shall not be considered "subdivisions", provided,
however, that no new "streets" or roads are involved; divisions of land
for agricultural purposes where the resulting parcels are five (5) acres or
larger in size; divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions,
division of property by court order, including but not limited to judgments
of foreclosure; consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded
instrument; and the conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or
parcels of land, owned by the same person or persons and all of which
are found and certified by the administrative officer to conform to the
requirements of the municipal development regulations and are shown and
designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the tax map or atlas
of the municipality. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term
"resubdivision", and where appropriate to the context, relates to the
process of subdividing or to the lands or territory divided.
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — A committee of at least three (3) Planning
Board members appointed by the Chairman of the Board for the purpose
§ 97-63.1 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-63.1
1:382
of classifying "subdivisions" in accordance with the provisions of this
ordinance, and such other duties relating to the land "subdivision" which
may be conferred on this Committee by the Board.
§ 97-64. Procedures.
§ 97-64.1. Concept plans for minor and major subdivisions.
§ 97-64.2. Preliminary plats of major subdivisions.
All applications for preliminary major subdivision approval shall comply
with the requirements of the relevant checklists for development
applications and the regulations of Article 6 of New Jersey Municipal Land
Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 through 58.
§ 97-64.3. Improvements or guaranties required prior to final
approval, proof of nondelinquency of taxes for local improvements.
[Amended 9-11-73 by Ord. No. 17-73]
A. Any applicant may be placed on the agenda of a regular meeting of the
Planning Board for discussion on an informally prepared plat. The
purpose will be to review concepts to assist the applicant in the
preparation of subsequent plans. Other than classification, no decisions
will be made, no hearings held, and no formal action taken on an
informal plat.
B. The developer shall file with the administrative officer at least fourteen
(14) days prior to the meeting of the Planning Board, fourteen (14)
copies of the informal plat, a narrative description of the proposal by
the developer, and the applicable fee and escrow amounts. In
accordance with the Municipal Land Use Law, the fee charged for
informal review shall be credited toward the fee for preliminary review
at the time of preliminary submission.
C. The Planning Board shall hear the application at a public meeting and,
if appropriate, shall determine whether the application is to be
classified as a major or minor development and shall render such
additional advice as to the approvals or variances required as a part of
the review process. Discussion on the substantive aspects of the
application shall not be binding on either the applicant or the approving
authority.
A. Before consideration of a final subdivision plat, the subdivider will have
installed the improvements required by this ordinance or the Planning
Board shall require the posting of an adequate performance guaranty,
of which ten (10) percent shall be cash unless waived by the Planning
Board, to assure the installation of the required improvements.
[Amended 3-23-93 by Ord. No. 3- 93]
B. No building permits shall be issued until final approval by the Planning
Board.
§ 97-63.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-64.3
1:383
§ 97-64.4. Final plats of major subdivisions.
§ 97-64.5. Schedule of fees and deposits. [Amended 5-23-96 by Ord.
No. 5-96]
See § 48:56A-27.
§ 97-65. Plat Details.
§ 97-65.1. Concept plan for minor subdivisions.
The sketch plat for concept plan review shall be based on tax map
information or some other similarly accurate base, at a scale (not less than
fifty (50) feet to the inch) to enable the entire tract to be shown on one (1)
sheet, and shall show or include the following information:
C. As a condition for local Planning Board approval of any subdivision
within the municipality, the applicant for such subdivision must submit
proof that no taxes or assessments are due or delinquent on property
for which any such sub-division application is made.
A. All applications for final major subdivision approval shall comply with
the requirements of the relevant checklists for development
applications and the regulations of Article 6 of New Jersey Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 through 58.
B. The final plat shall be accompanied by a statement by the Borough
Engineer that he is in receipt of a map showing all utilities in exact
location and elevation, identifying those portions already installed and
those to be installed, and that the subdivider has complied with one (1)
or more of the following:
1. All improvements have been installed in accordance with the
requirements of these regulations.
2. A performance guaranty has been posted with the Borough Clerk in
sufficient amount as determined by the Borough Engineer to assure
the completion of all required improvements.
3. A contract shall be entered into between the developer or
subdivider and the Borough of Waldwick. Said contract shall detail
specifically all items of public improvements to be performed, the
amount of bonds to be furnished and all other items as agreed and
stipulated between the developer and sub-divider and the Planning
Board of the Borough of Waldwick. Said contract shall be prepared
by the Planning Board Attorney and reviewed and signed off by the
Borough Attorney. [Added 3-24-55 by Ord. No. 3-55]
A. The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to the
entire tract.
B. All existing structures and wooded areas on the plat.
§ 97-64.3 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-65.1
1:384
§ 97-65.2. Concept plan for major subdivisions.
The sketch plat for concept plan review shall be based on tax map
information or some other similarly accurate base, at a scale (not less than
one hundred (100) feet to the inch) to enable the entire tract to be shown
on one (1) sheet, and shall show or include the following information:
§ 97-65.3. Preliminary subdivision plats.
The plat shall be designed in compliance with the provisions of § 97-67
of this ordinance and shall show or be accompanied by the following
information:
C. The name of the owner of all adjoining property as disclosed by the
most recent tax records.
D. The tax map sheet, block and lot numbers.
E. Name, license number, signature, seal and address of the land surveyor
or engineer who prepared the plat.
A. The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to the
entire tract.
B. All existing structures within the portion to be subdivided and within
two hundred (200) feet thereof.
C. The name of the owners and of all adjoining property owners as
disclosed by the most recent tax records.
D. The tax map sheet, block and lot numbers.
A. Scale. The plat plan shall be drawn accurately to scale. The minimum
scale shall be not less than one hundred (100) feet to the inch.
B. Data. The tract name, tax map sheet, block and lot number, date,
reference meridian, graphic scale and the following names and
addresses:
1. Name and address of record owner or owners.
2. Name and address of the subdivider.
3. Name and address of person who prepared the map.
C. Acreage. Acreage of tract to be subdivided to the nearest tenth of an
acre.
D. Contours and profiles. Contours to be shown at two-foot intervals for
the entire property, based on mean sea level (U.S.G.S.) and not on
assumed datum, together with sufficient additional data on elevations
at low points and along watercourses. In areas where surface slopes
exceed eight percent (8%) contours at five-foot intervals may be
acceptable for the preliminary plat. Contours shall be provided to
§ 97-65.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-65.3
1:385
§ 97-65.4. Final subdivision plats.
The final subdivision plat shall be drafted at a scale of not less than one (1)
inch equals one hundred (100) feet and in compliance with all the provisions
of Article 6 of New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37
through 58. The final plat shall show or be accompanied by the following:
determine the general slope and natural drainage of the land and the
high and low points and tentative cross sections and centerline profiles
for all proposed new streets.
E. Property lines. The location of existing and proposed property lines,
streets, buildings, railroads, bridges, culverts, drainpipes, physical
features such as watercourses, brooks, drains, dry runs, springs, water
holes, poorly drained or swampy areas and rock outcrops on the tract or
on adjacent land, and also outlines of wooded areas.
F. Utilities. Plans of proposed utility layouts (sewers, storm drains, water,
gas and electricity), showing feasible connections to existing or any
proposed utility system. When an individual water supply or sewerage
disposal system is proposed, the plan for such system must be approved
by the appropriate local, County or State agency. When a public sewer
disposal system is not available, the developer shall have percolation
tests or test holes for every one thousand (1,000) square feet and
submit the results with the preliminary plat. Any subdivision or part
thereof which does not meet the established requirements shall not be
approved. Any remedy proposed to overcome such a situation shall first
be approved by the appropriate local, County or State health agency.
G. Deed restrictions. A copy of any existing or proposed protective
covenants or deed restrictions applying to the land being subdivided
shall be submitted with the preliminary plat.
H. Development plan. A map indicating the use of the lots within the
subdivision.
I. Lot areas. A map showing individual lot areas, including:
1. Total lot area.
2. Area that may be measured in accordance with Article XI, Zoning.
A. Data. Date, name and location of the subdivision, name of the owner
and the subdivider; graphic scale and reference meridian.
B. Property lines. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street
names, easements and other rights-of-way; land to be reserved or
dedicated to public use, all lot lines and other site lines; with accurate
dimensions, bearings or deflections, angles, and radii, arcs and central
angles of all curves.
§ 97-65.3 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-65.4
1:386
§ 97-66. Improvements.
§ 97-66.1. General provisions.
C. Use of land. The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated
to public use shall be designated, and the proposed use of sites other
than residential shall be noted.
D. Block and lot numbers. Each block shall be numbered in conformance
with the Tax Map of the Borough of Waldwick, and the lots within each
block shall be numbered as approved by the Assessment Authority or
Borough Engineer of the Borough of Waldwick.
E. Setback lines. Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites
indicating the resulting building envelope.
F. Monuments. Location and description of all monuments.
G. Adjoining property ownership. Names and addresses of owners of
adjoining land.
H. Engineer's certification. Certification by engineer or surveyor as to
accuracy of details of plat.
I. Owner's certification. Certification that the applicant is agent or owner
of the land or that the owner has given consent under an option
agreement.
J. Certification of other approvals. When approval of a plat is required by
any officer or body of such a municipality, County or State, approval
shall be certified on the plat.
K. Street profiles. Cross sections and profiles of streets, approved by the
Borough Engineer, shall be required to accompany the final plat.
L. Grading plan. Grading plan showing existing and final contours at twofoot
intervals for the entire property, based on mean sea level (U.S.G.S.)
and not on assumed datum, together with sufficient additional data on
elevations at low points and along watercourses. In areas where surface
slopes exceed eight percent (8%), contours at five-foot intervals may be
acceptable.
M. Water and sewer profiles. Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary
sewers and water mains.
A. Inspection. All of the following listed improvements shall be subject to
inspection and approval by the Borough Engineer, who shall be notified
by the developer at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to the start of
construction. No underground installation shall be covered until
inspected and approved. A deposit to cover the cost of inspection shall
be filed as required in § 97-64.6 prior to the start of construction.
B. Installation or performance guaranty.
§ 97-65.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-66.1
1:387
§ 97-66.2. Required improvements for all major subdivisions.
[Amended 3-24-55 by Ord. No. 3-55]
Prior to the granting of final approval of all major subdivisions within the
Borough of Waldwick, the subdivider shall have installed or shall have
furnished performance guaranties for the ultimate installation of the
following:
(1) No final plat shall be approved by the Planning Board until the
completion of all such required improvements has been certified to
the Planning Board by the Borough Engineer, unless the
subdivision owner shall have filed with the Borough a performance
guaranty sufficient in amount to cover the cost of all such
improvements or uncompleted portions thereof, not to exceed onehundred
twenty percent (120%) of the cost of improvements as
certified by the Borough Engineer, and assuring the installation of
such incomplete improvements on or before an agreed date.
(2) The performance guaranty shall be approved by the Borough
Attorney as to form, sufficiency and execution. Such performance
guaranty shall run for a period to be fixed by the Planning Board,
but in no case for a term of more than two (2) years. However, with
the consent of the owner and the surety, if there be one, the
Borough Council may, by resolution, extend the term of such
performance guaranty for an additional period not to exceed two
(2) years. The amount of the performance guaranty may be reduced
by the Borough Council, by resolution, when portions of the
required improvements have been installed.
(3) If the required improvements have not been installed in accordance
with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety shall be
liable thereon to the Borough for the reasonable cost of the
improvements not installed, and upon receipt of the proceeds
thereof the Borough shall install such improvements.
C. Maintenance bond. On completion of the improvements, the subdivider
is to file with the Borough Clerk a maintenance bond, valid for a period
of two (2) years, issued by a corporation surety in an amount to be
established by the Borough Engineer, to indemnify the Borough against
any loss occasioned by defective workmanship or materials used in
construction of said work.
A. Pavement. The subdivider shall construct streets and pavement per the
regulations of the Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS).
B. Water. The subdivider shall make a supply of municipal water available
to each lot within the subdivision. The subdivider shall provide for the
installation and maintenance and operation of fire hydrants in locations
approved by the Borough. Mains shall be laid according to Chapter 94,
Water Supply and all specifications of the New Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS).
§ 97-66.1 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-66.2
1:388
C. Drainage. Adequate provision shall be made for water mains, culverts,
storm sewers and sanitary sewers, and all such installations shall be
properly connected with an approved system and shall be adequate to
handle all present and probable future development in accordance with
municipal regulations. All stormwater drainage shall meet the
requirements of the State of New Jersey Stormwater Management
Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:8) and the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement
Standards (RSIS).
D. Shade trees.
(1) The subdivider shall provide street trees a minimum of three (3)
feet from the sidewalk, the same not closer than fifty (50) feet from
trunk to trunk, but at least two (2) such shade trees to be located
within the frontage of each lot hereafter platted. The type of trees
shall be recommended from the following:
white oak
black oak
scarlet oak
pin oak
red oak
sweet gum
sour gum
honey locust
London plane
(2) Small or large-leaf lindens, poplar, elm, ash, soft maple or sycamore
trees are not recommended.
E. Streetlighting. The subdivider shall provide streetlighting facilities at
its expense, including the costs of poles, fixtures and other
improvements, unless waived by the Planning Board, and the standards
for such lighting shall be approved by the Planning Board.
F. Topsoil protection. No topsoil shall be used as spoil. Topsoil moved
during the course of construction shall be redistributed so as to provide
at least six (6) inches of cover to all areas of the subdivision and shall be
stabilized by seeding or planting.
G. Sidewalks. The subdivider shall construct all sidewalks to meet the
regulations of the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards
(RSIS).
§ 97-66.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-66.2
1:389
§ 97-67. General Provisions.
§ 97-67.1. Master Plan.
All subdivisions shall conform whenever possible to the proposals and
conditions of the Master Plan where adopted.
§ 97-67.2. Streets.
All streets shall conform in widths, directions and alignments with the
Official Map and Master Plan, and shall connect with streets shown thereon
with the minimum of jogs and sharp angles. All streets shall comply with the
requirements of the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards
(RSIS).
§ 97-67.3. Reserve strips.
No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to street shall be
approved.
§ 97-67.4. Street grades.
All street grades shall comply with the requirements of the New Jersey
Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS).
§ 97-67.5. Monuments.
To be of the size and shape required by Section 4 of Chapter 358 of the Laws
of 1953, and shall be placed in accordance with said statute.
§ 97-67.6. Acute-angle intersections.
Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible. All
street intersections shall comply with the requirements of the New Jersey
Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS).
§ 97-67.7. Street jogs.
Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five
(125) feet shall be prohibited.
§ 97-67.8. Reverse curves.
All reverse curves shall comply with the requirements of the New Jersey
Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS).
H. Curbs. The subdivider shall construct concrete curbs on each side of
the required pavement strip. Said curbs shall meet the specifications of
the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS).
§ 97-66.2 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-67.9
1:390
§ 97-67.9. Dead-end streets. [Amended 3-24-55 by Ord. No. 3-55]
Dead-end streets should not exceed nine hundred (900) feet in length. There
should be a turnaround roadway with a minimum outside radius of fifty (50)
feet at the closed end.
§ 97-67.10. Street names.
No name applied to any street shall duplicate or so nearly resemble the
name of any existing street within the Borough as to cause confusion. In the
case of a direct extension of an existing street, the same name shall be used
unless the Board shall otherwise direct. The Borough shall have the right of
first refusal for any proposed street name.
§ 97-67.11. Block length.
No block should exceed one thousand (1,000) feet in length.
§ 97-67.12. Suitability. [Amended 3-24-55 by Ord. No. 3-55]
Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood conditions or
similar circumstances, the Planning Board may, after adequate
investigation, withhold approval of such lots.
§ 97-67.13. Lots.
§ 97-67.14. Sale or conveyance of land in unapproved subdivision.
No owner or agent of the owner shall sell, transfer or convey any lot or
parcel of land which forms part of a subdivision by reference to, exhibition
of or by use of a plan, chart or plat before the same has been approved
and filed of record in the manner prescribed herein. The description of
such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of sale, transfer
or conveyance shall not exempt the transaction from the provisions of this
ordinance.
§ 97-67.15. Revision of plat after approval.
No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made in any plat
after approval has been given by the Planning Board and endorsed in
A. Area. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the minimum lot
size and area requirements of Chapter 97, the Borough of Waldwick
Zoning, Land Use and Development Code.
B. Lines. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to
straight streets and radial to curved streets.
C. Street width. Each lot must front upon an approved street designed to
the specifications of the New Jersey Residential Site Improvements
Standards (RSIS).
§ 97-67.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-67.15
1:391
writing thereon, unless said plat is first resubmitted to the Planning Board
for approval.
§ 97-67.16. Business and industrial subdivisions. [Amended 3-24-55
by Ord. No. 3-55]
Where land is to be subdivided and used for a use permitted in a business
or industrial zone, the subdivider shall meet the requirements of § 97-66.2A
through H.
§ 97-67.17. Department of Environmental Protection approval.
Evidence must be furnished by subdivider that the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection has given its approval on any structures or
work to be done on any stream under its jurisdiction.
§ 97-67.18. Easement agreements.
Easement agreements shall be submitted to the Board covering all surface
or subsurface structures for storm or sanitary sewers and other utilities
through adjacent lands and off-site roads or other highways.
§ 97-67.19. Specifications and standards.
All construction on, in or under streets which it is proposed to dedicate to
the Borough offices who may be appointed for that purpose, and shall be in
accordance with Borough specifications and standards.
§ 97-67.20. Multifamily recycling area. [Added 3-22-94 as Ord. No.
4-94]
There shall be included in any new multifamily housing development that
requires subdivision approval an indoor or outdoor recycling area for the
collection and storage of residential-generated recyclable materials. The
dimensions of the recycling area shall be sufficient to accommodate
recycling bins or containers which are of adequate size and number, and
which are consistent with anticipated usage and with current methods
of collection in the area in which the project is located. The dimensions
of the recycling area and the bins or containers shall be determined in
consultation with the municipal recycling coordinator, and shall be
consistent with the district recycling plan adopted pursuant to section 3 of
P.L. 1987, c. 102 (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13) and any applicable requirements of
the municipal master plan, adopted pursuant to section 26 of P.L. 1987, c.
102.
A. As used in this article:
1. "Multifamily housing development" means a building containing
three or more dwelling units occupied or intended to be occupied
by persons living independently of each other, or a group of such
buildings;
§ 97-67.15 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-67.20
1:392
§ 97-68. Enforcement.
§ 97-68.1. Violations and penalties; civil actions.
2. "Recycling area" means space allocated for collection and storage
of source separated recyclable materials.
B. The recycling area shall be conveniently located for the residential
disposition of source separated recyclable materials, preferably near,
but clearly separated from, a refuse dumpster.
C. The recycling area shall be well lit, and shall be safely and easily
accessible by recycling personnel and vehicles. Collection vehicles shall
be able to access the recycling area without interference from parked
cars or other obstacles. Reasonable measures shall be taken to protect
the recycling area, and the bins or containers placed therein, against
theft of recyclable materials, bins or containers.
D. The recycling area or the bins or containers placed therein shall be
designed so as to provide protection against adverse environmental
conditions which might render the collected materials unmarketable.
Any bins or containers which are used for the collection of recyclable
paper or cardboard, and which are located in an outdoor recycling area,
shall be equipped with a lid, or otherwise covered, so as to keep the
paper or cardboard dry.
E. Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials accepted
therein shall be posted adjacent to all points or access to the recycling
area. Individual bins or containers shall be equipped with signs
indicating the materials to be placed therein.
F. Landscaping and/or fencing shall be provided around any outdoor
recycling area.
A. If, before final approval has been obtained, any person transfers or sells
or agrees to sell, as owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a
subdivision on which, by ordinance, the Planning Board is required to
act, such person shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two hundred
dollars ($200) or to imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days,
and each parcel, plot or lot so disposed of shall be deemed a separate
violation.
B. In addition to the foregoing, if the streets in the subdivisions are not
such that a structure on said land in the subdivision would meet
requirements for a building permit under Section 3 of the Official Map
and Building Permit Act (1953), the municipality may institute and
maintain a civil action:
(1) For injunctive relief.
(2) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such
contract or sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued in
§ 97-67.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-68.1
1:393
§ 97-69. Administration.
§ 97-69.1. Application or provisions; variances.
These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the minimum
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of the Borough of Waldwick. Any action taken by the Planning
Board under the terms of this ordinance shall give primary consideration to
the above mentioned matters and to the welfare of the entire community.
However, if the subdivider or his/her agent can clearly demonstrate that by
reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece
of property, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or physical
features uniquely affecting a specific piece of property, or by reason of an
extraordinary and exceptional situation uniquely affecting a specific piece
of property, the strict application would result in peculiar and exceptional
practical difficulties to, or exceptional undue hardship upon the developer
of such property; and where in an application or appeal relating to a specific
piece of property the purposes of this act would be advanced by deviation
from the land use and development code requirements and the benefits
of the deviation would substantially outweigh any detriment, the Planning
Board may permit such variance or variances as may be reasonable and
within the general purpose and intent of the rules, regulations and
standards established by this ordinance. In making its findings, as required
hereinbelow, the Planning Board shall take into account the nature of the
proposed use or the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of
persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable
effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No
variance shall be granted unless the Planning Board finds that:
accordance with Section 24 of Chapter 433 of the Laws of 1953,
but only if the municipality has a Planning Board or a committee
thereof with power to act and which:
(a) Meets regularly on a monthly or more frequent basis, and
(b) Whose governing body has adopted standards and procedures
in accordance with Section 20 of Chapter 433 of the Laws of
1953.
A. There are special circumstances or conditions affecting said property
such that the strict application of the provisions of this ordinance would
deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his/her land.
B. The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the applicant.
C. The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare and quality of life or injurious to property in the area in which
said property is situated.
§ 97-68.1 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-69.2
1:394
§ 97-69.2. Withholding of business permits and certificates of
occupancy.
A. Wherever connections to public water supply mains and to a public
sewer system are not available on any lot shown on an approved plat, no
building permit for any structure involving or intending to involve
human occupancy shall be issued unless and until the Board of Health
has certified that proper sanitary facilities can be constructed and
maintained, and further that no certificate of occupancy indicating
conformity with the Land Use and Development Code and other
municipal ordinances shall be issued except where actual connections
to a public water main and public sanitary sewer are installed and ready
for use, until the local Board of Health has certified that the individual
sewage disposal system and private source of water supply has been
constructed in a proper manner, is adequate in capacity for the purpose
and is ready for service. A penalty for failure to conform should be
provided.
B. Supervision required. The Planning Board or the Board of Health,
either or both, shall require that before acceptance of the final plat or
final site plan for any major subdivision, the applicant and his/her
assigns agree in writing to furnish at his/her own expense acceptable
qualified supervision to insure completion of the project in accordance
with the plans in respect to all facilities, grading elevations, house
locations, location and installation of individual sewage disposal
facilities as location construction and elevations and any private
sources of water supply, or that said owner or his/her agents agree to
pay on the basis of a monthly bill the cost of supervision by an engineer
or other qualified person approved by the Planning Board and the
Board of Health and not in the employ of the said owner.
C. The Planning Board reserves the right to require the construction of
sanitary sewers, manholes and house connections even though at the
time it may not be feasible to connect to any trunk sewers, in which
case individual sewage disposal facilities conforming to the
requirements of the Board of Health shall also be installed.
D. Conformity with site plan. Wherever a site plan is filed with the
Planning Board prior to approval of a final plat, the applicant, for
himself and his/her assigns, must agree in writing to follow that plan in
all details unless all bodies or agencies who has approved the original
plan will approve in writing an amended plan.
§ 97-69.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-69.2
1:395

ARTICLE IX
Site Plan Review
§ 97-70. Site plan approval required. [Amended 7-6-93 by Ord. No.
14-93]
Except as provided in §§ 97-71 and 97-72 below, no person shall construct
a new building, add to an existing building or make any alteration to any
building or part thereof, or permit or participate in a change in occupancy
of an existing building or part thereof, or alter, increase or reduce parking
facilities or vehicular or pedestrian ways or areas or landscaping, or make
any other change in the layout, design or plan of any premises, not shall
any building permit or certificate of occupancy therefor be issued until a
site plan therefor shall first have been approved by the Planning Board, or,
where applicable, the Board of Adjustment.
§ 97-71. Site plan approval not required. [Amended 4-8-97 by Ord.
No. 9-97]
§ 97-72. Waiver of requirements. [Amended 7-6-93 by Ord. No.
14-93]
The Planning Board may waive some or all of the procedural requirements
for site plan approval required for a change of occupancy, by expressly
making specific findings that the proposed change of occupancy;
A. Site plan approval shall not be required for construction or alteration of
a detached lawful single one-family or two-family dwelling unit or any
lawful accessory use thereto, provided that the same are not part of an
attached housing, multiple-dwelling, planned unit development or
development involving the construction of more than one single family
or more than one two-family dwelling unit.
B. Site plan approval shall not be required for any interior construction or
interior alteration of any building provided that it:
1. Does not involve the construction of a new building or the
extension of an existing building, or an increase in the total square
footage of the building.
2. Does not require additional parking.
3. Does not affect existing parking facilities, vehicular or pedestrian
circulation, drainage, relationship of buildings to each other,
buffering, landscaping, or lighting.
A. Does not involve the construction of a new building or the extension of
an existing building;
B. Does not require additional parking;
§ 97-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-72
1:397
§ 97-73. Compliance with other laws and ordinances.
Any proposed structure or development shall comply with all of the
ordinances of the Borough of Waldwick as well as the applicable laws and
regulations of any other governmental agencies having jurisdiction thereof.
Site plan approval of the Planning Board under the provisions of this section
shall not be deemed to be a waiver of the requirements of any other
ordinances, laws or regulations.
§ 97-74. Guaranties.
As a condition of final site plan approval, the Planning Board may require,
in accordance with Section 41 of the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53), the furnishing of guaranties for the purpose of ensuring the
installation and maintenance of improvements upon which such approval
is conditioned. A contract may be entered into between the developer and
the Borough of Waldwick. Said contract shall detail specifically all items of
public improvements to be performed, the amount of bonds to be furnished
and all other items as agreed and stipulated between the developer and the
Planning Board of the Borough of Waldwick. Said contract shall be prepared
by the Planning Board Attorney and reviewed and signed off by the Borough
Attorney.
§ 97-75. Referral to other agencies.
In addition to any referral required by law, the Planning Board may refer
site plan proposals to other local, county, state, federal, private or
semipublic agencies for review and advice in their particular fields of
expertise.
§ 97-76. Approval duration.
Unless a building permit is obtained within twenty-four (24) months of the
date of final site plan approval, said approval shall become void.
§ 97-77. Temporary certificate of occupancy.
The Planning Board may recommend the issuance of a temporary certificate
of occupancy, for a period not to exceed a maximum of one hundred eighty
(180) days, if, in its opinion, the delay in meeting the requirements of site
plan approval is in the best interest of the community, or the delay was
caused by factors beyond the control of the developer, or if the delay will
impose a severe hardship on the developer. Authorization of the issuance
of a temporary certificate of occupancy may be conditioned upon the
furnishing of guaranties in accordance with § 97-74 above.
C. Does not affect existing parking facilities, vehicular or pedestrian
circulation, drainage, relationship of buildings to each other, buffering,
landscaping, or lighting.
§ 97-72 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-78
1:398
§ 97-78. Compliance with conditions.
Prior to the issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy or the release
of any guaranties furnished by the developer, the developer shall certify
that the development has been completed in strict accordance with the
approved site plan; or, in lieu of certification in such form, when conditions
have been encountered during actual construction which have necessitated
minor deviation from the site plan as approved, and which deviations do not
substantially alter the character of the development and are not of the type
which would require approval of an amended site plan, the developer shall
furnish an as-built plan.
§ 97-79. Revocation of permit.
In the event of failure to comply or to continue compliance with any
condition of site plan approval, the Building Inspector shall revoke the
building permit or certificate of occupancy, as the case may be, and seek to
enjoin the violation or shall take such steps looking to the enforcement of
any condition as may be lawful.
§ 97-80. Procedures for review.
The procedures for site plan review concerning the application, notices,
conduct of hearings, decisions, appeals, etc. shall be as set forth in the
Municipal Land Use Law of the State of New Jersey as supplemented by
the Land Use and Development Code of the Borough of Waldwick and rules
and regulations of the Waldwick Planning Board adopted in accordance
therewith.
§ 97-81. Fees and deposits.
(See § 48:56A-27.)
§ 97-82. Improvements required.
As a condition to approving a site plan, the Planning Board may require
construction or installation of improvements as are reasonably calculated to
promote the purposes of this ordinance in accordance with the performance
and design standards set forth herein and with due regard to the interest
of the public as well as the rights of the developer. In accordance with
the provisions of Section 30 of the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-42), the Planning Board may require a developer to pay a pro rata
share of the cost of providing reasonable and necessary off-tract street
improvements and water and drainage facilities and easements therefore,
which improvements are necessitated by the proposed development.
§ 97-83. Contents of site plan.
The site plan shall be prepared with a scale of not less than one (1) inch
equals fifty (50) feet and shall show or have annexed thereto the following:
§ 97-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-83
1:399
A. A key map showing the entire site development and its relationship to
the surrounding area.
B. The name of the development, tax lot and block numbers for the site as
well as adjacent properties, date, north arrow and scale.
C. The name and address of the applicant and the owner, and the name,
address, title, license number and seal of the person preparing the plan,
maps and accompanying data.
D. The zone district in which the site is located, including zone boundary
lines within two hundred (200) feet of the site
E. The existing property lines and building setback lines; all existing and
proposed buildings and structures and their uses, with an indication of
whether the existing structures will be retained or removed; and fences
or other buffer areas with proposed landscaping details.
F. All existing and proposed streets or roads within or abutting the
proposed site development with the right-of-way widths clearly
indicated and the distance to the nearest street intersection.
G. Topography showing existing and propose contours at five-foot
intervals for slopes averaging five percent (5%) or greater and at two
foot intervals for land of lesser slope. A reference bench mark shall be
clearly designated.
H. All existing and proposed curbs, sidewalks, driveways, parking areas
and loading areas on the site in question and within one hundred (100)
feet of said site when they relate directly to the proposed development.
The total number and size of parking spaces shall be noted as well as
specifications for surfacing materials.
I. All existing and proposed signs and their size, nature of construction
and location; and all existing and proposed exterior lighting, including
size, nature of construction, location, height, area and direction of
illumination and lumen power.
J. The location, size and type of all existing and proposed rights-of-way,
easements, street encumbrance lines and other encumbrances which
may affect the site in question, and the location and description of any
lands to be dedicated for public use.
K. Any contiguous lots owned by the applicant or in which the applicant
has a direct or indirect interest.
L. All existing physical features, including streams, watercourses, existing
trees greater than four (4) inches in caliper measured six (6) feet above
the ground level, and significant soil conditions such as swamp or rock.
M. Details of all existing and proposed sanitary sewerage facilities, storm
drain systems, and public gas, electric, water, and other utilities above
§ 97-83 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-83
1:400
§ 97-84. Building elevation.
§ 97-85. Performance standards.
In reviewing any site plan, the Planning Board shall consider the following:
or below the ground, including but not limited to storage tanks, wells,
and septic systems.
N. Any other information as may be necessary to determine compliance
with the provisions of all applicable ordinances.
O. An appropriate place for approval signature of the Chairman of the
Waldwick Planning Board and other necessary signatures of Borough
officials.
P. A written description of the proposed use of the building(s), including
the number of employees or members of nonresidential buildings; the
proposed number of shifts to be worked and the maximum number of
employees on each shift; the anticipated demands on municipal
services; the expected truck and tractor trailer traffic; emission of
noise, odors, glare and air and water pollution; safety hazards; and
anticipated expansion plans incorporated in the building design. Such
data shall be sufficient to establish conformity with industrial
performance standards as set forth in the Land Use and Development
Code.
A. Any applicant for site plan approval in which the construction of
principal and/or accessory structure(s) are proposed shall submit a
building elevation prepared by a New Jersey licensed architect at a
scale no greater than 1/8 inch equals one foot. Said elevation shall be
provided for all four sides of the proposed structure(s). The applicant
may also provide a rendering of the proposed structure(s) or by request
of the Planning Board.
A. Pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement within and adjacent to the
site, with particular emphasis on the provision and layout of parking
areas; off-street loading and unloading; and movement of people,
goods, and vehicles from access roads within the site and between
buildings and vehicles.
B. The Planning Board shall ensure that all parking spaces are usable and
are safely and conveniently arranged. Access to the site from adjacent
roads shall be designed so as to interfere as little as possible with traffic
flow on these roads and to permit vehicles a rapid and safe ingress and
egress to and from the site.
C. The design and layout of buildings and parking areas shall be reviewed
so as to provide an aesthetically pleasing design and efficient
arrangement. Particular attention shall be given to safety and fire
protection impact on surrounding development and contiguous and
adjacent buildings and lands.
§ 97-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-85
1:401
§ 97-86. Design standards.
D. Adequate lighting shall be provided to ensure safe movement of
persons and vehicles and for security purposes. Lighting standards
shall be a type approved by the Planning Board. Directional lights shall
be arranged so as to minimize glare and reflection on adjacent
properties.
E. Buffering shall be located around the perimeter of the site to minimize
headlight glare from vehicles, noise, light from structures and the
movement of people and vehicles, and to shield activities from adjacent
properties when necessary. Buffering may consist of fencing,
evergreens, shrubs, bushes, deciduous trees or combinations thereof to
achieve the stated objectives.
F. Landscaping shall be provided as part of the overall site plan design
and integrated into building arrangements, topography and parking
and buffering requirements. Landscaping shall include trees, bushes,
shrubs, ground cover, perennials, annuals, plants, sculpture, art and the
use of building and paving material in an imaginative manner.
G. Signs shall be designed so as to be aesthetically pleasing and
harmonious with other signs on the site, and located so as to achieve
their purposes without constituting hazards to vehicles and
pedestrians.
H. Storm drainage, sanitary waste disposal, water supply and garbage
disposal shall be reviewed and considered. Particular emphasis shall be
given to the adequacy of existing systems and the need for
improvements, both on-site and off-site, to adequately carry runoff and
sewage and to maintain an adequate supply of water at sufficient
pressure.
I. Garbage disposal shall be reviewed to ensure frequent collection,
vermin and rodent protection, and aesthetic considerations. All systems
shall meet municipal specifications as to installation and construction.
J. Environmental elements relating to soil erosion, preservation of trees,
protection of watercourses and resources, noise, topography, soil and
animal life shall be reviewed, and the design of the plan shall minimize
any adverse impact on these elements.
A. The requirements contained in the Land Use and Development Code as
they relate to circulation, parking, performance standards, location of
structures, setbacks, yards, bulk, height and coverage shall apply to
site plan approval.
B. The design criteria established in Article VIII, Subdivision of Land, shall
apply, where appropriate, to site plan approval.
§ 97-85 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-87
1:402
§ 97-87. Multifamily recycling area. [Added 3-22-94 by Ord. No.
4-94]
There shall be included in any new multifamily housing development that
requires site plan approval an indoor or outdoor recycling area for the
collection and storage of residential-generated recyclable materials. This
area shall comply with the regulations in § 97-67.20.
§ 97-88. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy Statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural best management practices
(BMPs). Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive site
design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on
the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source control plans
should be developed based upon physical site conditions and the origin,
nature, and the anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants.
Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to achieve
the established performance standards for water quality, quantity, and
groundwater recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development," as defined in § 97-89.
C. Applicability.
1. This ordinance shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions
for the following major developments that require preliminary or
final site plan or subdivision review:
a. Non-residential major developments; and aspects of residential
major developments that are not preempted by the Residential
Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21.
2. This ordinance shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Borough of Waldwick.
D. Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this ordinance are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This
ordinance is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
§ 97-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-88
1:403
§ 97-89. Definitions.
that, where any provision of this ordinance imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation,
or other provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher
standards shall control.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable
application. The definitions below are the same as or based on the
corresponding definitions in the Stormwater Management Rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT — Means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale. Such
uses do not include the development of land for the processing or sale
of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally related products.
COMPACTION — Means the increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — Means a pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic
uses serving the surrounding municipality, generally including housing
and access to public transportation.
DESIGNATED CENTER — Means a State Development and
Redevelopment Plan Center as designated by the State Planning
Commission such as urban, regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — Means a person professionally qualified and
duly licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may
include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project
requirements, creation and development of project design and
preparation of drawings and specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — Means the division of a parcel of land into two or
more parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any
mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of
any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land,
by any person, for which permission is required under the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case of development
of agricultural lands, development means: any activity that requires a
State permit; any activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Board
(CAB) and the State Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and
municipal review of any activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act,
N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — Means a geographic area within which
stormwater, sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular
receiving waterbody or to a particular point along a receiving
waterbody.
§ 97-88 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-89
1:404
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — Means an area or feature
which is of significant environmental value, including but not limited to:
stream corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered
or threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland
forest; steep slopes; and well head protection and groundwater
recharge areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are
identified using the Department's Landscape Project as approved by the
Department's Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — Means a neighborhood
designated by the Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and
conjunction with" the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
EROSION — Means the detachment and movement of soil or rock
fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Means a surface that has been covered with
a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — Is the process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Means any "development" that provides for
ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the
purpose of this rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure
and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Means any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — Means an area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities, which are not organized in a
compact form.
NUTRIENT — Means a chemical element or compound, such as
nitrogen or phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the
development of organisms.
PERSON — Means any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, Borough of Waldwick or political subdivision of this
State subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land
Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator
residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage
sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical
wastes, radioactive substance (except those regulated under the Atomic
Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), thermal
waste, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt,
industrial, municipal, agricultural, and construction waste or runoff,
or other residue discharged directly or indirectly to the land, ground
waters or surface waters of the State, or to a domestic treatment works.
"Pollutant" includes both hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
§ 97-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-89
1:405
RECHARGE — Means the amount of water from precipitation that
infiltrates into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
REVIEW AGENCY — Means an agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management
plans and implementing ordinance(s). The review agency may either
be:
SEDIMENT — Means solid material, mineral or organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of
origin by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — Means the lot or lots upon which a major development is to
occur or has occurred.
SOIL — Means all unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any
origin.
SOLID AND FLOATABLE MATERIALS — Means sediment, debris, trash
and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
SOURCE MATERIALS — Means any material(s) or machinery, located
at an industrial facility, that is directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which could be a source
of pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to groundwater.
Source materials include, but are not limited to, raw materials;
intermediate products; final products; waste materials; by-products;
industrial machinery and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other industrial activities
that are exposed to stormwater.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
METROPOLITAN PLANNING AREA (PA1) — Means an area delineated
on the State Plan Policy Map and adopted by the State Planning
Commission that is intended to be the focus for much of the state's
future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — Is defined as the geographic application
of the State Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and
statewide policies, and the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Means water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or
drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Means water flow on the surface of the
ground or in storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
1. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances.
2.
§ 97-89 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-89
1:406
§ 97-90. General standards.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — Means an excavation or
embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A
stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a
detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool
(a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Means any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater
recharge of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal non-stormwater
discharges into stormwater conveyances.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Means a flood hazard area, which
may be influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is
primarily caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT
NEIGHBORHOOD — Means a neighborhood given priority access to
State resources through the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — Means a zone designated by the New
Jersey Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban
Enterprise Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Is defined as previously developed
portions of areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — Means the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground water,
whether natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New
Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — Means an area that is inundated or
saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does
support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the
Metropolitan Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or
Nodes;
1.
2. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
3. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
4.
A. Design and Performance Standards for Stormwater Management
Measures.
§ 97-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-90
1:407
§ 97-91. Stormwater management requirements for major
development.
1. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in § 97-91. To the maximum extent practicable, these
standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies into the design. If these strategies alone
are not sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater
management measures necessary to meet these standards shall be
incorporated into the design.
The standards in this ordinance apply only to new major
development and are intended to minimize the impact of
stormwater runoff on water quality and water quantity in receiving
water bodies and maintain groundwater recharge. The standards
do not apply to new major development to the extent that
alternative design and performance standards are applicable under
a regional stormwater management plan or Water Quality
Management Plan adopted in accordance with Department rules.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 97-97.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department' Landscape Project or Natural Heritage
Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through 15.150,
particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of Sections 97-91F and 97-91G:
1. The construction of an underground utility line provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
2. The construction of an aboveground utility line provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
3. The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Sections 97-91F and 97-91G may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
§ 97-90 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-91
1:408
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
1. The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
2. The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Sections 97-91F and 97-91G to
the maximum extent practicable;
3. The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of Sections 97-91F and 97-91G, existing structures currently in use,
such as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
4. The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under D3 above within the
upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would provide
additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of Sections
97-91F and 97-91G that were not achievable on-site.
E. Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies.
1. To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in § 97-91F and
G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth at § 97-91E to the design. The
applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures incorporated
into the design of the project. If the applicant contends that it is not
feasible for engineering, environmental, or safety reasons to
incorporate any nonstructural stormwater management strategies
identified in § 97-91E2 below into the design of a particular project,
the applicant shall identify the strategy considered and provide a
basis for the contention.
2. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
a. Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
b. Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
c. Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
d. Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from preconstruction
to post construction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
§ 97-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-91
1:409
e. Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
f. Minimize soil compaction;
g. Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
h. Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
i. Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
(1) Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy § 97-91E3 below;
(2) Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
(3) Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
(4) When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
3. Site design features identified under § 97-91E2i(2) above shall
comply with the following standard to control passage of solid and
floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For exemptions to
this standard see § 97-91E3c below.
a. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven (7.0) square
inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest
dimension.
§ 97-91 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-91
1:410
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
b. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven (7.0) square inches, or be no
greater than two (2.0) inches across the smallest dimension.
c. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
(2) Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in § 97-91G1 are conveyed through any device
(e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment
device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed, at a
minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
(a) A rectangular space four and five-eighths inches long
and one and one-half inches wide (this option does not
apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch (1") spacing between the bars,
to the elevation of the water quality design storm as
specified in § 97-91G1; or
(4) Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
4. Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Sections 97-91F
and 97-91G shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected
to a conservation restriction filed with the Bergen County Clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
§ 97-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-91
1:411
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
5. Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 97-94A, or found on the Department's
website at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion Control, Groundwater Recharge and Runoff Quantity
Standards.
1. This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
a. The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and
implementing rules.
b. The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
c. The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors
for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge calculations
at § 97-92, either:
(a) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that the site and its stormwater management measures
maintain 100 percent of the average annual preconstruction
groundwater recharge volume for the site; or
(b) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that the increase of stormwater runoff volume from preconstruction
to post-construction for the 2-year storm is
infiltrated.
2. This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to projects
within the "urban redevelopment area," or to projects subject to (3)
below.
3. The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
a. Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and commercial
developments where solvents and/or petroleum products are
loaded/unloaded, stored, or applied, areas where pesticides
are loaded/unloaded or stored; areas where hazardous
materials are expected to be present in greater than
"reportable quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; areas
§ 97-91 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-91
1:412
where recharge would be inconsistent with Department
approved remedial action work plan or landfill closure plan and
areas with high risks for spills of toxic materials, such as gas
stations and vehicle maintenance facilities; and
b. Industrial stormwater exposed to "source material."
4. The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on the
groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid adverse
hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic impacts include, but
are not limited to, exacerbating a naturally or seasonally high
water table so as to cause surficial ponding, flooding of basements,
or interference with the proper operation of subsurface sewage
disposal systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
a. In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 97-92, complete one of the
following:
(1) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction
runoff hydrographs for the two, 10, and 100-year storm
events do not exceed, at any point in time, the preconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
(2) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the preconstruction
condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two, 10, and 100-year
storm events and that the increased volume or change in
timing of stormwater runoff will not increase flood damage
at or downstream of the site. This analysis shall include the
analysis of impacts of existing land uses and projected
land uses assuming full development under existing zoning
and land use ordinances in the drainage area;
(3) Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the 2, 10 and 100
year storm events are 50, 75 and 80 percent, respectively,
of the pre-construction peak runoff rates. The percentages
apply only to the post-construction stormwater runoff that
is attributable to the portion of the site on which the
proposed development or project is to be constructed. The
percentages shall not be applied to post-construction
stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard areas if the
increased volume of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damages below the point of discharge; or
§ 97-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-91
1:413
(4) In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with (1), (2) and (3) above shall only
be applied if the increased volume of stormwater runoff
could increase flood damages below the point of
discharge.
(5) Any application for a new "agricultural development" that
meets the definition of major development at § 97-89 shall
be submitted to the appropriate Soil Conservation District
for review and approval in accordance with the
requirements of this section and any applicable Soil
Conservation District guidelines for stormwater runoff
quantity and erosion control.
G. Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards. Stormwater management
measures shall be designed to reduce the post-construction load of total
suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater runoff by 80 percent of the
anticipated load from the developed site, expressed as an annual
average. Stormwater management measures shall only be required for
water quality control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is
being proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS
does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under
a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey
Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A,
or in a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in
two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into account the
distribution of rain from the water quality design storm, as reflected in
Table
1. The calculation of the volume of runoff may take into account the
implementation of non-structural and structural stormwater
management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
§ 97-91 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-91
1:414
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
2. For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 97-94, or found on the Department's website
at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources of
technical guidance are listed in § 97-94. TSS reduction shall be
calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2
below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, PO Box 418 Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0418.
3. If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
80 percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the
following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B — (AXB)/100
Where
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both BMPs,
and
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention Systems 90
Constructed Stormwater
Wetland
90
§ 97-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-91
1:415
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Extended Detention Basin 40-60
Infiltration Structure 80
Manufactured Treatment
Device
See Section 6C
Sand Filter 80
Vegetative Filter Strip 60-80
Wet Pond 50-90
4. If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the 80 percent TSS
removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff
from the subareas converge on site in which case the removal rate
can be demonstrated through a calculation using a weighted
average.
5. Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Sections 97-91F and
97-91G.
6. Additional information and examples of stormwater quality BMPs
are contained in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, which may be obtained from the address
identified in § 97-94.
7. In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
8. Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
§ 97-91 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-91
1:416
a. The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
(1) A 300-foot special water resource protection area shall be
provided on each side of the waterway, measured
perpendicular to the waterway from the top of the bank
outwards or from the centerline of the waterway where the
bank is not defined, consisting of existing vegetation or
vegetation allowed to follow natural succession is
provided. (2) Encroachment within the designated special
water resource protection area under Subsection (1)
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or
centerline of the waterway where the bank is undefined.
All encroachments proposed under this subparagraph
shall be subject to review and approval by the Department.
b. All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards For
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
c. If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard For Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance
with the requirements of the above standards may be placed
within the special water resource protection area, provided
that:
(1) Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
(2) Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a 95 percent TSS post-construction
removal rate;
§ 97-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-91
1:417
§ 97-92. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
(3) Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
(4) The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
(5) A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
(6) All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
d. A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to § 97-91G8 has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to § 97-91G8
shall maintain or enhance the current functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection area
as defined in § 97-91G8a(1) above. In no case shall a stream
corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the Special
Water Resource Protection Area to less than 150 feet as
measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
e. Section 97-91G8 does not apply to the construction of one
individual single family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
1. The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
a. The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
§ 97-91 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-92
1:418
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 — Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds
or superseding document; or
b. The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
2. For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the pre-construction
condition of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Section 5A1a and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at Section 5A1b. A runoff coefficient or
a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may
be used on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer verifies
that the hydrologic condition has existed on the site or portion of
the site for at least five years without interruption prior to the time
of application. If more than one land cover have existed on the site
during the five years immediately prior to the time of application,
the land cover with the lowest runoff potential shall be used for the
computations. In addition, there is the presumption that the site is
in good hydrologic condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn,
or park), with good cover (if the land use type is woods), or with
good hydrologic condition and conservation treatment (if the land
use type is cultivation).
3. In computing pre-construction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, that may reduce pre-construction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
4. In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
5. If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
1. The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
§ 97-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-92
1:419
§ 97-93. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427 Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
1. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
2. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch (1") spacing between the bars to the elevation of
the water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the
water quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure
shall be spaced no greater than one-third (1/3) the width of the
diameter of the orifice or one-third (1/3) the width of the weir, with
a minimum spacing between bars of one-inch and a maximum
spacing between bars of six inches. In addition, the design of trash
racks must comply with the requirements of § 97-95.
3. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
4. At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of two and one-half inches in
diameter.
5. Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at §
97-95.
6. Where tailwater will affect the hydraulic performance of a
stormwater management measure, the design engineer shall
include such effects in the measure's design.
§ 97-92 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-93
1:420
§ 97-94. Sources for technical guidance.
§ 97-95. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized provided the design
engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its design will
accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater recharge and
water quality design and performance standards established by § 97-91
of this ordinance.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 97-91G of this ordinance, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at 1 and 2 below, which are available from
Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
1. Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
2. The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
1. The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
2. The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306; and
3. The Bergen County Soil Conservation District, 700 Kinderkamack
Road, Suite 106, Oradell, NJ 07649; (201) 261-4407.
§ 97-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-95
1:421
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
B. Requirements for Trash Racks, Overflow Grates and Escape Provisions.
1. A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
a. The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six
inch spacing between the bars.
b. The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
c. The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
d. The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs/ft sq.
2. An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
a. The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
b. The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
c. The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft sq.
3. For purposes of this paragraph 3, escape provisions means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
a. If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in §
97-95C a free-standing outlet structure may be exempted from
this requirement.
§ 97-95 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-95
1:422
§ 97-96. Requirements for a Site Development Stormwater Plan.
b. Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than two and one-half feet. Such safety ledges
shall be comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six
feet in width. One step shall be located approximately two and
one-half feet below the permanent water surface, and the
second step shall be located one to one and one-half feet above
the permanent water surface. See § 97-95D for an illustration
of safety ledges in a stormwater management basin.
c. In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.
C. Variance or Exemption from Safety Standards
1. A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by
the appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, county or
Department) that the variance or exemption will not constitute a
threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of Safety Ledges in a New Stormwater Management Basin.
A. Submission of Site Development Stormwater Plan.
1. Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this ordinance, the applicant shall submit all of the
required components of the Checklist for the Site Development
Stormwater Plan at § 97-96C below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
2. The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this ordinance.
§ 97-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-96
1:423
3. The applicant shall submit 20 copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
§ 97-96C of this ordinance.
B. Site Development Stormwater Plan Approval. The applicant's Site
Development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in
this ordinance.
C. Checklist Requirements. The following information shall be required:
1. Topographic Base Map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of 1"=200' or greater,
showing 2-foot contour intervals. The map as appropriate may
indicate the following: existing surface water drainage, shorelines,
steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or intermittent streams
that drain into or upstream of the Category One waters, wetlands
and flood plains along with their appropriate buffer strips,
marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or vegetative surfaces,
existing man-made structures, roads, bearing and distances of
property lines, and significant natural and man-made features not
otherwise shown.
2. Environmental Site Analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
3. Project Description and Site Plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high ground
water elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
4. Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of Sections 97-90
§ 97-96 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-96
1:424
§ 97-97. Maintenance and repair.
through 97-93 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective
of controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
5. Stormwater Management Facilities Map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
a. Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
b. Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
6. Calculations.
a. Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the pre-development and post-development conditions for
the design storms specified in § 97-91 of this ordinance.
b. When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
7. Maintenance and Repair Plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 97-97.
8. Waiver from Submission Requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this ordinance may, in
consultation with the municipal engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Sections 97-96C1 through 97-96C6 of this
ordinance when it can be demonstrated that the information
requested is impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on
the applicant to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the
review process.
§ 97-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-97
1:425
A. Applicability.
1. Projects subject to review as in § 97-88C of this ordinance shall
comply with the requirements of Sections 97-97B and 97-97C.
B. General Maintenance.
1. The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
2. The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
3. Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
4. If the person responsible for maintenance identified under §
97-97B2 above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan and
any future revisions based on § 97-97B7 below shall be recorded
upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
5. Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
6. The person responsible for maintenance identified under § 97-97B2
above shall maintain a detailed log of all preventative and
corrective maintenance for the structural stormwater management
measures incorporated into the design of the development,
including a record of all inspections and copies of all maintenancerelated
work orders.
§ 97-97 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-97
1:426
§ 97-98. Penalties.
See § 1:14-1 of the Code of the Borough of Waldwick.
§ 97-99. Enforcement.
7. The person responsible for maintenance identified under § 97-97B2
above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the maintenance plan at
least once per year and adjust the plan and the deed as needed.
8. The person responsible for maintenance identified under § 97-97B2
above shall retain and make available, upon request by any public
entity with administrative, health, environmental, or safety
authority over the site, the maintenance plan and the
documentation required by Sections 97-97B6 and 97-97B7 above.
9. The requirements of Sections 97-97B3 and 97-97B4 do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
10. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have fourteen (14) days to effect
maintenance and repair of the facility in a manner that is approved
by the municipal engineer or his/her designee. The municipality, in
its discretion, may extend the time allowed for effecting
maintenance and repair for good cause. If the responsible person
fails or refuses to perform such maintenance and repair, the
municipality or County may immediately proceed to do so and shall
bill the cost thereof to the responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
A. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer of the Borough of Waldwick to
administer and enforce§§ 97-70 through 97-82 and § 97-87. In no case
shall a permit be granted for the construction or alteration of any
building where the proposed construction, alteration or use would be in
violation of any provision of this ordinance. It shall be the duty of the
Zoning Officer to cause any new buildings, plans or premises to be
inspected or examined and to order in writing to the owner that any
condition be remedied, which is found to exist in violation of any
provisions of this Ordinance. He shall have the right to enter any
building or premises during the daytime in the course of his/her duties.
B. It shall be the duty of the Borough Engineer to administer and enforce
sections 97-83 through 97-86 and sections 97-88 through 97-97.
§ 97-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-99
1:427
§ 97-100. through § 97-101. (Reserved)
a. In case any building or structure is or is intended to be erected,
constructed or reconstructed, altered or converted, or any building
or structure is or is intended to be used in violation of or contrary to
the provisions of this Ordinance, the Borough Attorney shall, after
authorization by the Governing Body and in addition to other
remedies set forth in the statutes of the State of New Jersey and in
this Ordinance, institute an action to enjoin, or any other
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion or use.
§ 97-99 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-100
1:428
ARTICLE X
Soil Movement
§ 97-102. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEVELOPER — Any person who, either directly or through an agent or
independent contractor, engages or intends to engage in land subdivision
or in the construction of two (2) or more dwelling houses, business or
industrial buildings in any subdivision for the purpose of sale to or
occupancy by another person or persons.
EXCAVATOR — Any person who moves soil.
LOT — Any parcel of land or portion thereof, the boundary lines of which
can be ascertained by reference to the maps and records, of the Borough
Tax Assessor
MAJOR SOIL PERMIT — Any soil permit other than ministerial for the
moving of soil within any period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
MINISTERIAL PERMIT — A permit for the moving of soil, as required
by § 97-105, between ten (10) and two hundred (200) cubic yards of soil
within any period of twelve (12) consecutive months. If two (2) or more
applications in any twelve-consecutive-month period require the movement
of soil in excess of two hundred (200) cubic yards in the aggregate, said
application shall be classified as a major soil-moving application and shall
be required to comply with § 97-106 of this chapter.[Amended 11-14-00
by Ord. No. 19-00]
MOVE — To dig; excavate, remove; deposit; place; fill; grade; regrade; level
or otherwise alter or change the location of contour; or transport; or supply.
This term shall not be construed to include plowing, spading, cultivating,
harrowing or discing of soil or any other operation usually and ordinarily
associated with the tilling of soil for agricultural or horticultural purposes,
landscaping and gardening by homeowners or agents of homeowners,
provided that it does not substantially alter existing drainage patterns.
OWNER — Any person seized in fee simple of any lot or having such other
interest or estate therein as will permit exercise of effective possession
thereof or dominion thereover.
SOIL — Any earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus, rock or dirt, without
regard to the presence or absence therein of organic matter, including any
synthetic substance used as a substitute or in conjunction with soil.
SUITABLE FILL — The Borough Engineer shall determine whether the fill
is suitable or unsuitable to the particular location. Suitable materials shall
include but not be limited to materials such as earth, clay, gravel, stone,
dirt, etc.
§ 97-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-102
1:429
TOPSOIL — Soil that, in its natural state, constitutes the top layer of earth,
and is composed of two percent (2%) or more, by weight, of organic matter
and has the ability to support vegetation.
UNSUITABLE FILL — The Borough Engineer shall determine whether the
fill is suitable or unsuitable to the particular location. The unsuitable
materials are materials such as peat moss, organic material, vegetation,
leaves, tree stumps, wood chips, sawdust, chemical waste, tires, wooden
logs, etc.
§ 97-103. Soil-moving permit required.
No developer and no excavator shall move or cause, allow, permit or suffer
to be moved more than ten (10) cubic yards of soil in or upon any lot in
the Borough in a twelve (12) consecutive month period unless and until a
soil-moving permit therefor shall first have been issued in accordance with
the provisions of this article. Permits shall not be required for plowing,
spading, cultivating, harrowing or discing of soil or any other operation
usually and ordinarily associated with the tilling of soil for agricultural
or horticultural purposes, landscaping and gardening by homeowners or
agents of homeowners, provided that it does not substantially alter existing
drainage patterns.
§ 97-104. Soil-moving permit applications.
All applications for soil-moving permits shall be made through the office of
the Zoning Officer.
§ 97-105. Ministerial soil-moving permit applications.
The procedure for applying for and issuance of a ministerial soil-moving
permit shall be as follows:
A. Applications for ministerial soil permits shall be filed with the Borough
Engineer and shall be accompanied by the fee prescribed in § 97-107.
(1) Applications shall be made in triplicate on forms prescribed by the
Borough and supplied by the Borough Engineer. In addition to any
other requirements which the Borough, acting through the
Borough Engineer, may require on data pertinent to the
application, the application shall show the following:
1.1 The identity and location of the applicant.
1.2 The lot and block number of the lot or lots involved.
1.3 The identity and location of the owner of the lands.
1.4 The purpose or reason for the moving of the soil.
1.5 The estimated quantity in cubic yards of soil to be moved.
§ 97-102 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-105
1:430
§ 97-106. Major soil-moving permit applications.
The procedure for applying for the issuance of a major soil-moving permit
shall be as follows:
1.6 A statement as to how the moving of the soil will affect all trees
with a diameter of six (6) inches or more.
1.7 The proposed date of completion of the work.
1.8 A certification as to the source of the fill material. At the
discretion of the Borough Engineer the applicant can be required
to have said fill tested to assure that it does not contain hazardous
waste substance as regulated by the State of New Jersey.
(2) The Borough Engineer shall require the applicant to submit an
existing topographical map and a proposed grading and drainage
plan and notification by certified mail to the abutting property
owners about the soil-moving operation if the Borough Engineer
deems it necessary due to the existence of substantial drainage or
erosion of soil problems and to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the people and property.
B. The Borough Engineer, upon receipt of the application, shall make a
field investigation and shall issue the permit or deny it, giving his/her
reasons for denial. The Borough Engineer will forward a copy of the
permit to the Building Department and one (1) to the applicant and
shall retain one (1) copy on file. The Borough Engineer shall classify any
ministerial soil application as a major soil application if he/she finds the
application will present unusual drainage or erosion of soil problems or
adversely affect the development of the abutting lot or lots.
A. On forms prescribed and supplied by the Planning Board, the applicant
shall set forth, in duplicate, to the Planning Board, with a carbon copy
to the Borough Engineer and Building Department:
1) The identity and location of the applicant.
2) The description of the lands in question, including lot and block
number of the lot or lots involved.
3) The name and address of the owner of the lands.
4) The purpose or reason for moving the soil and whether it will be
done in connection with a proposed subdivision; if so, the date of
filing the application for subdivision.
5) A detailed statement of the method or process to be employed for
the excavation and the proposed time period for removal.
6) The kind and quantity in cubic yards of the soil to be removed.
§ 97-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-106
1:431
7) In case of removal or replacement of soil, the place to which the soil
is to be removed, and the place and quantity of soil to be removed
in fill and excavation and the transportation route to be used in the
Borough.
8) The proposed date of the completion of the work.
9) A certificate that he/she has placed or caused to be placed stakes at
each corner of the lot or lots from which soil is to be removed and
further, that he/she has placed or caused to be placed grade stakes
at the existing elevation points designated on the topographical
map pursuant to the provisions of this article, clearly marked to
indicate the soil cuts or fill.
10) A statement as to how the moving of the soil will affect all trees
with a diameter of six (6) inches or more.
11) A certification as to the source of the fill material. At the discretion
of the Borough Engineer the applicant can be required to have said
fill tested to assure that it does not contain hazardous waste
substance as regulated by the State of New Jersey.
B. Signatures. Said application shall bear the signature of the applicant
and the endorsement of the owner or owners of said lands signifying
approval of the application, consent to the applicant to perform the
proposed work and consent to the Borough, in the event of failure of the
applicant to do so, to cause the proposed work to be completed or
otherwise terminated in keeping with the purposes and objectives of
this article.
C. Topographical map. Accompanying the application shall be eight (8)
prints of a topographical map of the lot upon which the proposed soilmoving
operations are to be conducted and of all surrounding lands
within one hundred (100) feet of the perimeter of said lot, but not
beyond the far side of an abutting street right-of-way, prepared and
certified by a licensed professional engineer or land surveyor of the
State of New Jersey, on a scale of not less than one (1) inch to one
hundred (100) feet, and referred to United States Coast and Geodetic
Survey data, showing, both as to the lot and as to all of said surrounding
lands:
1) The dimensions of the lot, including distance and bearings and the
lot and block number of the lot and of each lot in the surrounding
lands as shown on a tax assessment map of the Borough.
2) The existing elevations of all lands on a one-hundred-foot grid
layout.
3) The existing elevations of all buildings, structures, streets, streams,
bodies of water and watercourses, natural or artificial.
§ 97-106 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-106
1:432
4) All existing surface and subsurface water drainage conditions and
provisions therefor.
5) All wooded areas and all trees having a diameter of six (6) inches or
more at the base.
6) The limits of the area or areas within the lot or lots in question
within which the soil-moving operations are to be conducted, and
the existing elevations of said limits at intervals of not more than
one hundred (100) feet.
7) The proposed final elevations at each point where existing
elevations shown on said map are to be changed as a result of
completion of the proposed work.
8) Proposed slopes and lateral supports at the limits of the area upon
completion of the soil-moving operations.
9) Proposed provisions and facilities for surface water drainage and,
where applicable, channels of any streams, bodies of water and
watercourses, natural or artificial, including detailed cross sections
showing proposed channel widths, bank slopes, grade and method
of erosion control.
10) Accurate cross sections showing the locations and quantities in
cubic yards of soil to be moved.
11) All proposed elevations in enclosed rectangular boxes; and all
existing elevations to be indicated without any kind of enclosure.
12) Such other pertinent data as the Planning Board may, by resolution
require.
13) All easements and restrictions of record which may affect the
subject lot or lots.
14) If said moving application is in conjunction with a site plan or
subdivision plan, the developer shall submit a complete site plan or
preliminary subdivision plan according to this ordinance.
D. Inspection of site.
(1) The Borough Engineer shall make an inspection of the site from
which soil is to be moved and shall make such engineering studies
as may be required to determine the effect of the removal of soil
from the location as it relates to:
(a) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(b) Surface and subsurface water drainage.
(c) Soil fertility.
(d) Lateral support of abutting streets and lands.
§ 97-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-106
1:433
(e) Public health and safety.
(f) Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the
coordinated, adjusted and harmonious physical development of
the Borough.
(2) The Borough Engineer shall also inspect the aforesaid site to
determine whether stakes have been placed on each corner thereof
and whether grade stakes have been placed at the existing points
designated on the topographical map pursuant to the provisions of
97-106C hereof.
E. Hearing. The Planning Board shall, within sixty (60) days after receipt
of the application, fix a date for a hearing for the purpose of considering
the application and shall give to the applicant, either personally or by
certified mail, notice of the time and place of said hearing. The
applicant shall, at least five (5) days prior to the date appointed for said
hearing, serve written notice, either in person or by registered mail,
upon such persons as are shown on the municipal tax records to be the
owners of such lots within two hundred (200) feet of the property in
question. The applicant shall at the hearing present to the Planning
Board satisfactory proof in affidavit form of the service of said notices.
F. Factors to be considered in determining application. In considering the
application, the Planning Board shall be guided by the general purpose
of municipal planning and shall take into consideration the following
factors:
1) Soil erosion by water and wind.
2) Surface and subsurface water drainage.
3) Soil fertility and soil-bearing capacity.
4) Lateral support of abutting streets and lands.
5) Public health and safety.
6) Land value and uses.
7) Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious development of the Borough.
8) Proposed complete site or preliminary subdivision plan.
G. Decision. The Planning Board shall review and consider the application
which must be complete, including all of the requirements of the
provisions of this article and the material factors brought up at the
public hearing and the reports of other reviewing authorities of the
Borough, and shall either grant or deny the issuance of said soil permit.
If the Planning Board denies the permit, the reason for the denial shall
be stated. The Planning Board also can issue a permit with stipulations
and conditions. The Planning Board shall act within sixty (60) days of
§ 97-106 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-106
1:434
§ 97-107. Fees.
(See Ch. 48:80-7.)
§ 97-108. Performance bond.
the filing of a complete application. The Planning Board shall act only
upon the filing and receipt of a complete application to either deny
or grant the permit within said sixty (60) days and the failure by the
Planning Board to act upon the application within said period shall be
considered an automatic approval of the issuance of said permit unless
the Planning Board extends the time limit for a period not to exceed an
additional sixty (60) days.
H. Appeal. In the event of refusal, the applicant may, not later than thirty
(30) days after the date of such refusal, appeal to the Borough Council.
The Borough Council may by a majority vote of the members present
sustain or by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of its entire membership overrule
the Planning Board recommendations.
I. When an application is considered by the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
then all powers granted to the Planning Board with regard to the
receipt, review and determination of applications for major soil removal
permits under this article are hereby granted and conferred upon the
Board of Adjustment in full. [Amended 11-14-00 by Ord. No. 19-00]
A. In the event that the Planning board recommends approval of the soil
removal permit application, the Secretary of the Planning Board shall
forthwith give notice to the applicant of the action of the Planning
Board, and further, the amount of the performance bond required as
hereinafter set forth in this section. In the event that the applicant fails
to post the required performance bond within sixty (60) days of this
notice, then the recommendation of the Planning Board shall be
automatically rescinded.
B. No soil permit shall be issued unless the applicant therefore shall have
posted with the borough a performance bond in form and with surety
acceptable to the Borough in such amount as the Planning Board shall
determine, conditioned upon full and faithful performance by the
principal within the time specified in the application of all the proposed
work in accordance with the provisions of this article and of the soilmoving
permit issued pursuant hereto.
C. The amount of said bond shall be determined at the rate of not less than
ten cents ($0.10) per cubic yard and not in excess of fifty cents ($0.50)
per cubic yard of the amount of soil to be moved; provided, however,
that in no event shall said bond be less that the principal amount of two
thousand dollars ($2,000). The Planning Board may request additional
bonds for improvements shown on the soil-moving application or plan,
such as but not limited to the following: retaining walls, planting,
drainage erosion, control damages to haul route, etc. In ascertaining
§ 97-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-108
1:435
§ 97-109. Form of permit; contents; expiration.
§ 97-110. Unlawful acts.
No person to whom a soil removal permit has been issued shall:
the rate upon which to compute the amount of the bond, the Planning
Board shall take into consideration such factors as may bear upon the
facility with which the proposed work may be performed, including
but not limited to the type and character of soil, the extent of the
area over which the soil-moving operations are to be conducted, the
extent and depth of the various cuts and fills, the extent to which the
area of operations is wooded, the proximity of the proposed operations
to streets, buildings, structures, natural or artificial streams or
watercourses and general drainage conditions.
D. Before the holder of any soil removal permit shall proceed before the
Planning Board with any application for any amendment or alteration of
the terms and conditions of any outstanding soil removal permit, there
shall be submitted to the Planning Board the written consent of the
surety on said bond approving said application for amendment or
alteration and consenting to extension of the bond coverage thereto.
E. Applications for the release of any bonds posted in accordance with the
terms of this article or the resolutions of the Planning Board shall be
accompanied by an affidavit stating that the soil-moving operation has
been completed in accordance with the application and all plans, maps,
and other date filed therewith and in accordance with all resolutions
and conditions therein adopted by the Planning Board. Said affidavit
shall be executed by a licensed professional or civil engineer or land
surveyor of the State of New Jersey.
A. The soil removal permit shall be in such form as may be prescribed by
the Planning Board. It shall be signed by the Secretary and the
Chairman of the Planning Board, and it shall contain any special
conditions set forth in the recommendation.
B. The soil removal permit shall be dated as of the date it is actually
issued, and the term of said permit shall not exceed one (1) year.
C. All permits shall automatically expire on the termination date unless
application for renewal has been made and approved, in writing,
extending such permit.
A. Conduct or maintain on the premises any sand, gravel or similar kind or
pit, any sand or gravel washing or screening machinery or equipment,
any business or industry not permitted in the district in which said
premises are located, or any endeavor or enterprise other that the
grading or regrading of said premises in accordance with the provisions
of said permit and, where applicable, the necessary disposal of soil
incidental to said grading or regrading.
§ 97-108 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-110
1:436
§ 97-111. Movement and storage of topsoil.
§ 97-112. Excavating below final grades restricted.
No developer or excavator shall, at any time in the course of the work, dig or
excavate more the six (6) inches below the proposed final grades as shown
on the topographical map unless:
B. Conduct or maintain any soil-moving operations without having first
made adequate provisions by means of road oil or otherwise for the
laying of dust incidental to the use of vehicles, machinery and
equipment on the lands described in the soil permit.
C. Neglect to dispose of on or before the completion date stated in the
application any partially or wholly excavated boulders or other
incombustible debris resulting from the soil-moving operations by
burial or removal and any partially or wholly excavated stumps, felled
or uprooted trees or other combustible debris resulting from the soilmoving
operations must be removed from the site.
D. Conduct any soil-moving operations beyond the expiration date as set
forth in the soil removal permit or extended expiration date as may duly
be granted by the Planning Board.
A. Whenever any developer or excavator shall move topsoil in or upon any
lot, provision shall be made for the storage of said topsoil within the
boundary lines of said lot.
B. Except as hereinafter provided, all of the topsoil so stored shall be
uniformly replaced over the entire area or surface of the lot on or
before the completion date set forth in the soil permit so that the final
grade or grades of said replaced topsoil shall be in accordance with the
proposed final grades shown on the topographical map.
C. No developer or excavator shall remove to any point beyond the
boundary lines of the lot any topsoil whatsoever unless and until topsoil
not inferior in quality to that to be removed shall first have been
replaced uniformly to a depth of not less than six (6) inches, measured
from the proposed final grades as shown on the topographical map,
over the entire surface or area of the lot, excepting only such portions
thereof as shall be or shall have become, since the date of filing of said
topographical map, permanently covered by a building or structure,
street pavement, curb, sidewalk, driveway or the paved area or by any
body of water or waterway. In no event shall the developer or excavator
remove from the lot more topsoil than that comprising the surplus or
excess remaining after the replacement of the topsoil as aforesaid.
A. The soil removal permit specifies otherwise and the performance bond,
hereinbefore referred to, makes specific provisions for replacement on
or before the completion date set forth in the soil removal permit of soil
§ 97-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-112
1:437
§ 97-113. Final grades.
No developer or excavator shall deposit soil upon, fill in or raise the grade
of any lot without first making provision for:
§ 97-114. Inspections.
For the purpose of administering and enforcing this article, any member of
the Planning Board or duly authorized agent of the Building Department
of the Borough or the Borough Engineer shall have the right to enter into
and upon any lands in or upon which soil-moving operations are being
conducted, to examine and inspect such lands.
§ 97-115. Violations and penalties.
See § 1:14.1 of the Code of the Borough of Waldwick.
of sufficient quantity and kind to restore the final grades to those shown
on the topographical map; and
B. After issuance of the soil removal permit, the developer or excavator,
before digging or excavating below said minimum level, shall apply to
the Planning Board and be granted an amendment of the application
and topographical map then in effect, which amendment may be
granted upon such terms as the Planning Board may deem necessary to
assure adherence to the purpose and objectives of this article.
A. The use in said work of soil or such other materials as will not result in
deviation from the proposed final grades or the uniformity thereof by
reason of abnormal shrinkage or settlement.
B. The collection and storage upon the lot of the original topsoil to the end
that said topsoil shall not be buried beneath soil other material of
inferior quality and the uniform replacement of the topsoil so stored
over the entire area or surface of the fill soil or other material so that
the final grade or grades of said replaced topsoil shall be in accordance
with the proposed final grades shown on the topographical map. In the
event that such provision is not practicable, provision shall be made for
the uniform placement over the entire area or surface of the fill soil or
other material, excepting only such portions thereof as shall be or shall
have become permanently covered by a building or structure, street
pavement, curb, sidewalk, driveway or other paved area or by any body
of water or waterway, of a layer of topsoil not inferior in quality to that
of the original topsoil, to a depth of not less than six (6) inches
measured from the proposed final grades as shown on the
topographical map.
§ 97-112 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-115
1:438
ARTICLE XI
Zoning
§ 97-116. Prohibited uses.
Article XI of the Borough of Waldwick Zoning, Land Use and Development
Code shall be viewed as permissive. In no instance after the adoption of
this article shall any use be permitted in the Borough which is not listed
as a permitted, accessory or conditional use as specified herein. Any uses
not permitted or specified shall be prohibited. All permitted uses shall not
be noxious or injurious to adjacent properties by reason of the production
or emission of smoke, refuse matter, odor, gas fumes, noise, vibration or
unsightly conditions.
A. Uses specifically prohibited. Uses prohibited in all districts include but
are not limited to the following:
1. Trailer or tourist camps.
2. Any unenclosed business, such as used car lots, unless an
accessory use.
3. Restaurants which sell or permit the consumption of food or
beverages on any portion of their premises not within a fully
enclosed building. This prohibition shall not apply to a restaurant
that has obtained an outdoor cafe permit from the Borough of
Waldwick. [Amended 8-22-00 by Ord. No. 12-00]
4. Junkyards.
5. Automated Car Washes [Amended 05-27-14 by Ord. No. 12-14]
6. Auction establishments.
7. Storage trailers and movable enclosures whether on wheels or
otherwise.
8. Roller skating rinks.
9. Any unattended vending machines.
10. Tattoo parlors.
11. Retail sale of tobacco, tobacco products, electronic smoking
devices and products, and accessories where such sale is the
primary business of the establishment. [Added 4-10-2018 by Ord.
No. 09-2018]
12. The sale, production, or distribution of marijuana, marijuana
derivatives, marijuana products, including but not limited to
edibles, and marijuana paraphernalia including but not limited to
equipment and/or devices associated with marijuana use, except
medical marijuana as lawfully prescribed by a physician and
§ 97-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-116
1:439
§ 97-117. Zoning Districts and Zoning Map.
§ 97-117.1. Zoning districts established.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the Borough of Waldwick is hereby
divided into the classes of districts listed below:
Symbol Name
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
R-2 Single-Family Residential District
R-3 Village Residential District
R-4 Senior Citizen Residential District
C-1 Village Commercial District
C-2 Turnpike Commercial District
C-3 Neighborhood Commercial District
I Limited Manufacturing-Industrial District
VC-2 Village Center District
VC-3 Village Center District
AH Affordable Housing District
AH-1 Affordable Housing District [Added 5-13-97 by Ord.
No. 11-97]
CAH Commercial Affordable Housing District
§ 97-117.2. Zoning Map and Schedule. [Amended 11-26-96 by Ord.
No. 22-96; 9-27-05 by Ord. No. 11-05]
The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the
map entitled "Zoning Map-Borough of Waldwick" dated June, 2002. The
Schedule of Requirements (Schedule A, B and C) summarizing the required
condition for each district above, is hereby made a part of this ordinance.
Copy of said map indicating the latest amendments shall be kept up to date
in the office of the Building Department/Construction Official and Borough
Clerk for the use and benefit of the public.
§ 97-117.3. Interpretation of boundaries.
In determining the boundaries of districts shown on the Zoning Map, the
following rules shall apply:
dispensed by a licensed pharmacist. [Added 10-9-2018 by Ord.
No. 17-2018]
A. Unless otherwise shown, the district boundaries shall be construed to
coincide with the center lines of streets, highways, waterways, railroad
rights-of-way or such lines extended.
§ 97-116 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-117.3
1:440
§ 97-117.4. Division of lots in single ownership.
Where a district boundary line divides a lot, other than by following a
stream or street, which lot is in single ownership at the time of adoption of
this ordinance or any district change, any use permitted in either district
may be extended not more than twenty percent (20%) of the existing
zone penetration into said lot, or one hundred (100) feet into the adjacent
district, or to the boundary line of the divided lot, whichever is the lesser. A
use permitted in the district so extended shall thereafter be a permitted use
in the extended area. A property owner, however, shall be permitted only
one (1) election, after which the lot use shall be governed by the regulations
of the district to which the portion of the lot shall have been annexed by
such extension.
§ 97-117.5. Vacation of streets or other public ways.
Where a vacated street is bounded on either side by different districts,
the former center line of the vacated right-of-way shall be considered the
district's boundary line.
§ 97-117.6. Effect of establishment of districts.
§ 97-118. Definitions and Word Usage.
B. Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot or
property lines as they exist at the time of enactment of this ordinance or
any district change, such lines shall be construed to be the boundaries
unless otherwise indicated by dimensions on the Zoning Map.
A. No building shall be erected, moved, altered, converted, rebuilt or
enlarged, nor shall any land or building be used, reduced, designed or
arranged to be used, for any purpose or in any manner except in
conformity with all regulations, requirements and restrictions specified
in this ordinance for the district in which such building or land is
located.
B. No permit for the erection of any building or structure shall be issued
unless the lot abuts an improved street in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-35.
C. No lot shall be formed from part of a lot already occupied by a building
unless such building, all yards and open spaces connected therewith
and the remaining lot comply with all requirements prescribed by this
ordinance for the district in which said lot is located. No permit shall be
issued for the erection of a building on any new lot thus created unless
such building and lot comply with all the provisions of this ordinance.
D. No yard or open space required in connection with any building or use
shall be considered as providing a required open space for any other
building on the same or any other lot.
§ 97-117.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-118.1
1:441
§ 97-118.1. Incorporation of statutory definitions by reference.
For the purpose of this ordinance, all terms or words defined in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. are made part of this ordinance unless a contrary intention
is clearly expressed herein.
§ 97-118.2. Word usage.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of this article, have the meanings herein indicated. Words used
in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the
plural and the plural, the singular; the word "person" includes a corporation
as well as an individual; the word "lot" includes the word "plot"; the word
"building" includes the word "structures"; the word "dwelling" includes the
word "residence". The term "occupied" or "used" as applied to any building
shall be construed as though followed by the words "or intended, arranged,
constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased or designed to be occupied
or used." The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
§ 97-118.3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY — A building, structure, or use clearly incidental or
subordinate to, and customarily in connection with, the principal building
or use on the same lot.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent within the means of a low or
moderate income household as defined by the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing.
ALTERATION — As applied to a building, structure or use, a change or
rearrangement in the structure's parts or in the existing facilities, or an
enlargement, whether by extension of a side or by an increase in height or
by a move from one location or position to another.
AMUSEMENT MACHINE — Any device, game or contrivance for which
payment is made for the privilege of playing or operating the device,
including, but not limited to video games, computer games, electronic
games, pin ball machines, air hockey, foosball, redemption games (game of
skill that rewards the user with prize tickets), merchandiser games (game
of skill where merchandise is won by playing the game), interactive player
participation games, and simulation games.
AMUSEMENT MACHINE ARCADE — A business or establishment wherein
a portion of the gross floor area of the premises is devoted to amusement
machines, billiard or pool tables, whether or not said amusement machines
constitute the principal or accessory use of the premises for the purpose
of being played, operated or used by the patrons on a prepaid basis or for
money or tokens deposited in the amusement machine.
§ 97-118.1 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-118.3
1:442
ANIMAL HOSPITALS — Any fixed or mobile establishment, or premises
wherein or whereon the practice of veterinary medicine or any part thereof
is conducted, which such profession is licensed and regulated under N.J.A.C.
13:44-1 et seq.[Added 05-27-14 by Ord. No. 12-14]
APARTMENT — A room or suite of connecting rooms, with private bath and
kitchen facilities, for occupancy as a single dwelling unit by one (1) family in
a building having three (3) or more such dwelling units in a larger building.
ARTERIAL STREET — A higher order regional level street designed for
greater vehicle speeds and traffic volumes than collector streets. Arterial
streets connect and distribute traffic to collector and neighborhood streets.
ATTIC — The space between the ceiling beams of the top story and the roof
rafters.
AUTOMATED CAR WASHES — Any structure or facility utilized for the
purpose of washing or cleaning the exterior or interior of any automobile,
truck, or other motorized vehicle by a method other than employee hand
washing. This shall include but not be limited to washing or cleaning via
mechanical brushes, brushless or touchless facilities, conveyor systems, or
self-service bay washes.[Added 05-27-14 by Ord. No. 12-14]
AVERAGE FINISHED GRADE — The final elevation of the average ground
level adjoining a building at all exterior walls after development.
AVERAGE FINISHED GRADE PLANE — A reference plane representing
the average finished ground level adjoining the building at exterior walls.
Where the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the
reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area
between the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than
6 feet from the building, between the building and a point 6 feet from the
building.
BASEMENT — The portion of a building that is partly or completely below
grade plane. A "basement" shall be considered as a story above grade plane
where the finished surface of the floor above the basement is more than six
(6) feet above grade plane, for more than fifty percent (50%) of the total
perimeter or more than twelve (12) feet above the finished ground level at
any point.
BERM — A mound of earth.
BOARDER/LODGER — A person who pays rent in return for exclusive
possession of a portion of a home or structure.[Added 3-23-93 by Ord. No.
3-93]
BOARDINGHOUSE — A house where lodging or meals, can be had for pay.
BREWERY/WINERY/DISTILLERY — A light industrial use where beer, wine,
liquor or other alcoholic beverage is manufactured, packaged and
distributed. A tasting room, restaurant, or food service establishment shall
be permitted as accessory to the same, subject to the rules and regulations
of the New Jersey Division of Alcohol Beverage Control.[Added 9-24-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-21]
§ 97-118.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-118.3
1:443
BUFFER STRIP — A continuous planting strip of trees and/or shrubs not
less than six (6) feet in height densely planted so as to restrict a clear view
beyond said strip.
BUILDING, COMMUNITY — A public building for the civic, social,
educational, cultural and/or recreational activities of a neighborhood,
apartment project or community not operated primarily for monetary gain.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The ratio of horizontal area by which a principal
building or structure occupies the land to total lot area (as measured at
the grade line around the foundation, using outside dimensions). Building
coverage shall include porches, decks, balconies and cantilevered parts of a
building at any level.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the elevation
of the proposed average finished grade plane to the highest point of the
building exclusive of chimneys and similar structures as identified in
97-122.1.
BUILDING LINE — A line formed by the vertical projection to the ground of
the exterior surface of the building on any side. In cases of a cantilevered
section of a building, or sun parlors and covered porches, whether enclosed
or unenclosed and not including the steps, the vertical projection will
coincide with the surface nearest the lot lines. All yard requirements are
measured to the "building line."
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building within which is conducted the major
or principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.
CARPORT — An attached or detached accessory building designed for the
storage of motor vehicles and constructed primarily as an open building
with only a roof and the necessary supporting columns, the area between
the columns not to exceed five hundred (500) square feet.
CELLAR — A story partly or completely underground having more than
one-half (1/2) of its clear height below the average finished grade at the
perimeter of the building.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A document certifying that a general
inspection of the visible parts of a building has been made, and that there
are no apparent violations of regulations. See 97-128.5.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued by the Building/
Construction Official upon the completion of construction, alteration or
change in occupancy of a building. The certificate shall acknowledge
compliance with all the requirements of this ordinance, such appeals
thereto granted by the Board of Adjustment and/or all other applicable
requirements.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A development design technique that
concentrates subdivided building lots or buildings within a portion of a
development tract such that remaining land area can be utilized for open
space or the preservation of environmentally sensitive features.
§ 97-118.3 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-118.3
1:444
COLLECTOR STREET — A street designed to collect and distribute traffic
from lower order local streets to higher order arterial streets.
CONDITIONAL USE — Authorization of the Planning Board, issued in
accordance with § 97-124 of this ordinance, which is required as a condition
precedent to the commencement of a use for the erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or
building for the conditional use as so designated in this ordinance.
CORNER LOT — A lot which has a frontage contiguous to more than one
(1) street or other public open space through which there is a permanent
access to the lot.[Added 4-23-96 by Ord. No. 6-96]
COURT — An open, unoccupied space, other than a yard on the same lot
with a building or group of buildings and which is bounded on two (2) or
more sides by such building or buildings.
DAY CARE, CHILD — Any facility which is maintained for the care,
development or supervision of six (6) or more children who attend the
facility for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, and which is licensed as
a child care center by the Department of Human Services. This term shall
not include any of those facilities or uses which are not included within
the definition of "child care center" contained in the "Child Care Center
Licensing Act" (N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 to 15).
DAY CARE, ADULT — A facility providing care for the elderly in a protective
setting for part of a 24-hour day.
DELICATESSEN — See restaurant, take-out.
DENSITY — The ratio of residential dwelling units to total lot area.
DECK — An accessory structure supported by pillars or posts, which is
either freestanding or attached to a principal structure and does not include
a permanent roof.
DECK, NON-CONFORMING — An existing or proposed deck located on
an undersized lot that, if constructed, deviates from the rear yard setback
requirements of the Land Use and Development Code of the Borough of
Waldwick as regulated per 97-123.11.
DISTRICT — Any part of the territory of the Borough of Waldwick defined on
the Zoning Map within which certain uniform regulations and requirements
of this ordinance apply. (See §§ 97-117 through 97-117.6.)
DWELLING — A building or portion thereof which is designed or used
exclusively as a living quarters for one (1) or more families.
DWELLING, DUPLEX — A two-family dwelling with one (1) dwelling unit
attached and located beside the other and separated therefrom by a party
or common wall, whether or not that wall is a fire wall.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A detached building containing three (3) or
more dwelling units and occupied or designed for occupancy by three (3) or
more families living independently of each other, each with its own sleeping,
cooking and sanitary facilities.
§ 97-118.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-118.3
1:445
DWELLING, ROW OR ATTACHED — A series of attached single-family
dwellings with two (2) common or party walls separating it from adjacent
units on both sides, or one (1) party wall in the case of a building at the end
of a group of attached buildings.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached building and dwelling unit
designed for or intended to be occupied exclusively for residence purposes
by one (1) family, individual or individuals living together as a family unit.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached building containing only two (2)
dwelling units; each building intended for residential occupancy by two
(2) families, each with its own separate sleeping, cooking and sanitary
facilities.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or entirely self-contained portion thereof
having cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities and providing complete
housekeeping facilities for only one (1) family individual or individuals living
together as a family unit. A house trailer, camper, a boarding or rooming
house, assisted living home, fraternity or sorority house, hotel, inn, lodging,
nursing or other similar home or other similar structure shall not be deemed
to constitute a "dwelling unit."
EFFICIENCY UNITS — A dwelling unit in an apartment house consisting
of one (1) large room with bath and cooking facilities separated from such
room by a permanent wall or folding or sliding doors.
FAMILY UNIT — A group of individuals not necessarily related by blood,
marriage, adoption or guardianship living together in a dwelling unit as a
single housekeeping unit. This definition shall not include any society, club,
fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, federation or like organizations, or
any group of individuals who are in a group living arrangement as a result of
criminal offenses. The number of individuals constituting a family unit shall
be consistent with the standards of the building, fire, housing and health
codes of the Borough of Waldwick.
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME — Any private residence approved by the
Division of Youth and Family Services or an organization with which the
Division contracts for family day care in which child care services are
regularly provided to no less than three and no more than five children
for no less than 15 hours per week. A Family Day Care Home shall comply
with the requirements of the "Family Day Care Provider Registration Act."
N.J.S.A. 30:58-16 et seq.[Added 3-23-93 by Ord. No. 3-93]
FENCE — An artificially constructed, freestanding barrier of solid or open
design, consisting of wood, manufactured material, or combination of
materials erected for the enclosure of yard areas.
FLAG LOT — A lot that does not have a continuous width from the street
to the building set back line at least equal to the minimum street frontage
required. For purposes of this definition, the portion of the lot abutting an
improved street shall not be declared to be a private road or private street
so as to defeat the intent and purpose of this chapter.[Added 4-23-96 by
Ord. No. 6-96]
§ 97-118.3 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-118.3
1:446
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The ratio of gross floor area to total lot area.
GARAGE, COMMERCIAL — A building used for the parking of trucks and
other motor vehicles used for delivery or other commercial purposes.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building or part thereof used as an accessory to
the main building, which provides for the storage of motor vehicles and in
which no occupation, business or service for profit is carried on.
GARAGE, LICENSED PUBLIC REPAIR — A building or part thereof, other
than a private garage, used for the sale, lease, maintenance, servicing,
repair, washing, painting, or storage of motor vehicles and automotive
accessories, including fuels and lubricants, for profit.
GASOLINE STATION — See Service Station, Automotive.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors
of the building on the lot measured from the exterior faces of the exterior
walls or from the center line of the party walls separating two (2) buildings,
excluding, however, attic and basement floors, open porches, breeze-ways
and garages.
HEIGHT — See Building Height.
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory use of business or service character
located in a residence, such as a professional occupation, subject to
97-123.14.
HOMEOWNER'S ASSOCIATION — An incorporated, non-profit organization
operating under recorded land agreements through which:
HORIZONTAL AXIS WIND TURBINE — A wind energy conservation system
(WECS) in which turbine rotor blades are secured on a horizontal axis.
HAWT are designed for tower mounted installation.
HOTEL — A facility offering transient overnight lodging accommodations to
the general public and which may include additional facilities and services,
such as restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment, personal services, and
recreational facilities.
IMPROVED LOT COVERAGE — That percentage of the plot or lot area
which is improved and covered with any principal or accessory building,
use, structure, or other improvement, including but not limited to parking
lots, patios, driveways, sidewalks, swimming pools, concrete pavers,
pervious pavers, and other paving. Improved lot coverage shall include
porches, decks, balconies and cantilevered parts of a building at any level.
IMPROVEMENT — A permanent building or structure that becomes part of,
or is affixed to a lot, parcel or principal or accessory building or structure.
A. Each resident lot owner and each tenant is automatically a member.
Each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share
of the expenses for the organization's activities, such as maintaining a
common property.
B.
§ 97-118.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-118.3
1:447
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A residential housing development in
which a percentage of the housing units is provided for a reasonable income
range of low and moderate income households. The term may also mean
housing developments comprised completely of low and moderate income
units.
INDOOR COMMERCIAL RECREATION FACILITY — A privately owned
commercial establishment designed and equipped for the conduct of leisure
activities and other recreational activities wholly within an enclosed
building. Examples of such uses include but are not limited to indoor play
areas, training studios for martial arts, gymnastics, and dance.
INSTITUTIONAL USES — Nonprofit institutions limited to churches, public
and private schools, libraries and other governmental uses.
JUNKYARD or SALVAGE YARD — Any area and/or structure used or
intended to be used for the selling, buying, storing or trading of used or
discarded metal, glass, paper, cordage, wood, rags, plastic, brush or any
used or disabled fixtures, vehicles, boats or equipment of any kind. The
premises on which the deposit or storage of any used, wrecked or otherwise
disabled vehicles, boats or other parts occurs for a period of one (1) month
or more shall be deemed to be a "junk-yard".
KENNEL — A commercial establishment where domesticated animals, dogs
and/or cats, are bred or boarded for an overnight time period.
LIVABLE FLOOR AREA — The floor area within a residential structure to
be used for habitation, excluding cellars, attics, utility (heating and cooling)
rooms, garages and open porches, and in multifamily housing, excluding
common hallways.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth, on the same lot with a
building or group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial
vehicle while loading or unloading material.
LOT AREA — The area contained in the lot lines of a lot, expressed in terms
of square feet or acres. Any portion of a lot included in a street right-of-way
shall not be included in calculating "lot area".
LOT, CORNER — See Corner Lot.
LOT DEPTH — The average horizontal distance between the front and rear
lot lines as measured from the midpoint of the front lot line, at right angles
or radially to the street line, to the rear lot line.
LOT FRONTAGE — A lotline or portion thereof which is coexistent with
a street line. In the case of a street of undefined width, the lot line shall
be assumed to be parallel with the center line of the street at a distance
twenty-five (25) feet therefrom. In the case of corner lots the smaller of
the two (2) lotlines coexisting with street lines shall be considered as the
frontage.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE — Any line forming a portion of the exterior boundary of a lot
according to maps and plots of record filed with the county recorder.
§ 97-118.3 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-118.3
1:448
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lotlines measured
at right angles to its lot depth at a point which constitutes the rear line of
the required front yard space.
LOW INCOME HOUSING — Housing subject to affordability controls and
defined as affordable according to the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development or other recognized standards for home ownership
and rental, and occupied or reserved for occupancy by households with a
gross household income equal to 50 percent or less of the median gross
household income for households of the same size within the housing region
in which the housing is located.
MANUFACTURING — Any process whereby the nature, size or shape of
articles or raw materials are changed or where articles are assembled or
packaged.
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT — A building or buildings that includes one or
more dwelling units above one or more non-residential uses on the ground
floor.
MODERATE INCOME HOUSING — Housing subject to affordability controls
and defined as affordable according to the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development or other recognized standards for home
ownership and rental, and occupied or reserved for occupancy by
households with a gross household income equal to or more than 50 percent
but less than 80 percent of the median gross household income for
households of the same size within the housing region in which the housing
is located.
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings providing guest rooms, where
each unit has direct access to a parking space for use by that unit's
occupant, a public lobby, one (1) or more public dining rooms and efficiency
units, where the total number of such efficiency units does not exceed
twenty percent (20%) of the total number of guest rooms. It may contain the
following uses incidental to its operation: meeting rooms, swimming pools,
cabanas, cocktail lounges and sales of newspapers, periodicals, souvenirs,
cigars and cigarettes.
NATURAL GRADE — The elevation of the ground level in its natural state,
before construction, filling, or excavation.
NUISANCE — Any practice which annoys, disturbs or interferes with one
in the possession and enjoyment of his/her property, rendering its use or
operation physically uncomfortable, e.g., excessive noise, noxious odors,
electronic radiation, vibrations, smoke discharge, glare, improper drainage,
etc.
NURSERY — A place where trees, shrubs, vines and other ornamental
horticultural products are grown and where incidental retail sales are
made.
NURSERY SCHOOL — A privately operated establishment where four (4) or
more children under six (6) years of age are kept during the daytime while
parents or guardians are at work or otherwise engaged.
§ 97-118.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-118.3
1:449
NURSING, REST OR CONVALESCENT HOME — A licensed health facility
where persons are housed and furnished with meals and continued nursing
care, in return for compensation, under the general supervision of a
licensed physician or registered nurse; or a structure designed and used
for the housing and care of persons afflicted by illness or infirmity, before
or following hospitalization, especially the care of elderly, infirm or
handicapped persons, in which surgical facilities are not provided. A home
for the sheltered care of adult persons as defined by N.J.S.A. 30:11A-1 shall
not be considered a "nursing, rest or convalescent home," nor shall it be
permitted under this ordinance.
OCCUPANCY — The specific purpose for which land or a building is used,
designed or maintained. A dwelling unit shall be construed to be occupied if
one (1) or more persons or a family customarily reside in said dwelling unit
overnight.
OPEN SPACE — The ratio of area unimproved with man-made buildings,
structures, uses, and paving to total lot area.
OUTDOOR CAFE — Shall mean a designated outdoor area that is located on
the property of an existing restaurant or on the public sidewalk or the right
of way immediately adjacent to the property of an existing restaurant where
food and beverages that are normally offered to the public for consumption
inside the restaurant are offered and served to the public for consumption
in the designated outdoor area.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space available for the parking of a motor
vehicle, either within a structure or in the open, exclusive of driveways or
access drives. Private driveways for one- and two-family dwellings may be
considered off-street parking areas, provided that no portion of such private
driveway is within the street right-of-way line and no home occupation is
conducted upon the lot. A non-residential parking space must have a means
of ingress and egress and tandem parking is not considered a valid parking
space for any non-residential use.
PATIO — The yard area adjacent to a principal structure covered by brick,
concrete or other material that is not covered by a permanent roof.
PERMITTED USES — Any use of land or buildings as permitted by this
ordinance.
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, corporation, association,
partnership, business entity or organization of any kind or nature.
PET DAY CARE — A commercial establishment where domesticated
animals, dogs and/or cats, are kept for a limited time period in which no
overnight boarding occurs.
PET GROOMING — A commercial establishment providing services for
domesticated animals, dogs and/or cats that may include bathing, cleaning,
clipping and grooming. No animals are boarded overnight.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — A minimum contiguous land
development project comprehensively planned as a single entity via a
unitary site plan which contains one (1) or more residential housing types
§ 97-118.3 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-118.3
1:450
designed in accordance with § 97-123.6 so as to provide ample usable open
space in proportion to the number of residents, which is laid out in a manner
that preserves significant natural features.[Added 3-26-85 by Ord. No.
3-85]
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The offices of a dentist, physician, attorney,
clergyman, accountant, consultant, engineer, architect, insurance or real
estate agent or other similar professionals. Where such office is part of
a structure in which said professionals reside, the restrictions as outlined
under "home occupation" shall apply.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES — A portable structure or wheelbased
structure built on a chassis, which is either self-propelled or designed to
be transported by traction, which is intended by its manufacturer to be
used as a temporary dwelling for travel, camping or vacation purposes.
"Recreational vehicles" shall include camping trailers, motorized homes,
travel trailers and boat and snowmobile trailers, which are defined as
follows:
RESTAURANT — An establishment where the principal use is the
preparation and sale of food to be served and consumed by patrons seated
within the establishment.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — An establishment where the principal use is the
preparation and sale of food, and drinks, for consumption primarily outside
the confines of the principal building, or in an automobile parked upon the
premises. In addition thereto, indoor or outdoor seating may be provided
for the patrons within or adjacent to the principal building.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH — See Restaurant, Take-Out.
RESTAURANT, TAKE-OUT — An establishment where the principal use is
the preparation and sale of food and drinks, to patrons for consumption
primarily outside the confines of the principal building, and where ordering
and pickup of food may also take place from an automobile drive-through. In
addition thereto, indoor or outdoor seating may be provided for the patrons
within or adjacent to the principal building.
CAMPING TRAILER — A type of trailer that is designed and
constructed with collapsible walls. The walls are collapsed while the
recreational vehicle is being towed and are raised or unfolded when the
vehicle becomes temporary living quarters and is not being moved.
A.
MOTORIZED HOME — A portable dwelling designed and constructed
as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
B.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A wheelbased vehicle built on a chassis designed
to be hauled by traction.
C.
BOAT AND SNOWMOBILE TRAILERS — A wheelbased vehicle on a
chassis designed to be hauled by traction, which is specifically designed
for transporting items including but not limited to boats, snowmobiles,
"ATVs", motorcycle dirtbikes, off-road vehicles and other conveyances
not intended for on-road use.
D.
§ 97-118.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-118.3
1:451
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The extent of the area occupied or intended to be
occupied for street purposes including the paved cartway, curbs, shoulders,
sidewalks, and areas for the placement of public utilities.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA — Any apparatus which is designed for the
purpose of receiving telephone, radio, microwave, satellite or similar
signals, with the exception of conventional television antennas.[Added
8-9-83 by Ord. No. 15-83]
SCREENING — A visual barrier of plant materials as described in the
definition of "buffer strip," or appropriate fencing or other material which
may be agreed to by the Planning Board.
SENIOR CITIZEN PROJECT — A residential building or group of buildings,
together with accessory structures and uses, having more than three (3)
dwelling units, designed for and intended to be occupied by persons who
are fifty-five (55) years of age or older, in a private communal setting,
except:
SENIOR COMMUNITY CENTER — A facility intended to provide
recreational, social, educational and cultural activities for adults fifty-five
years of age or older.
SERVICE STATION, AUTOMOTIVE — Land and building designed and used
for the sale of fuel, lubricants and automotive accessories, which provides
maintenance and minor repairs for motor vehicles, but not including body
repairs and under no circumstances including storage of inoperable or
wrecked vehicles. (See § 97-124.2.)
SETBACK LINE — A line drawn parallel to a street line or lot line and
drawn through the point of a building nearest to the street or lot line. The
term "required setback" means a line that is established as a minimum
distance from a street line or lot line and within which a building or part
of a building, patio, deck or pool is not permitted to extend towards the
street or lot line in order to provide the required yard. Setback lines shall be
measured to the nearest portion of any building on the premises.[Amended
3-23-93 by Ord. No. 3-93]
SHOPPING CENTER — One (1) or more buildings or parts thereof to be
occupied and used by more than one (1) enterprise for the conduct of
business as an integrated, comprehensively planned and managed area.
SIGN — Please see definitions included in § 97-123.9 of this chapter.
SNACK SHOP — An establishment similar to a restaurant, but limited to
the extent that no food is cooked on the premises other than heating by
a microwave oven, warming oven, or device that does not require fire
suppression or exhaust per the New Jersey Building Code. Additionally, no
A spouse, brother or sister of a person fifty five (55) years of age or
older and residing with such person.
A.
An adult whose presence is essential for the physical care or economic
support of a person fifty five (55) years of age or older.
B.
§ 97-118.3 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-118.3
1:452
drive-through windows exist on the premises, and seating for customers
does not exceed twelve (12).
SWIMMING POOL, PORTABLE — Portable pools shall not be subject to the
requirements of § 97-123.10 and are those pools which are not otherwise
permanently installed; do not require water filtration, circulation and
purification; do not exceed two (2) feet of water depth; do not exceed a
water surface area of one hundred twenty (120) square feet; and do not
require braces or supports.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — An accessory structure in or above the
ground, associated with a residential dwelling unit or units and located
on an individual residential lot, which is permanently established and
maintained upon the premises for the residents and the guests of their
household.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE CLUB — Include either outdoor
or indoor pools which are artificially constructed to provide recreational
facilities for swimming, bathing or wading.
TANDEM PARKING — A non-residential parking space in which automobiles
are stacked one behind another, so that one automobile must be moved for
full access and egress.
TAVERN — An establishment where the principal use of the building is
for the sale and on-site consumption of alcoholic beverages, which may
also offer use of certain amusement machine devices, and a limited menu
of prepared food items to be consumed by patrons seated within the
establishment.
TEMPORARY STORAGE UNIT — Any container, storage unit or portable
structure (commonly known as PODS®) designed to be used on a temporary
basis and without a foundation for the purpose of storing tangible property
and not for occupancy by persons.
TOWING SERVICE — A use permitted only as part of any approved
automobile service station (§ 97-124.2), which moves disabled vehicles. No
towing equipment shall be parked or stored outside overnight.
TOWNHOUSE — An attached single-family dwelling unit in a line of three
(3) or more connected dwellings, each separated by a fire wall and having
direct access to a private fenced-in outdoor living space in addition to either
private garages or common carports and auxiliary open areas. Each singlefamily
unit may have one (1) or two (2) stories, but nothing in this definition
shall be construed to allow one (1) dwelling unit over the other.
TRAILER, CONSTRUCTION — A temporary structure utilized on a
construction site as a field office or for the storage of materials to be
removed upon completion of a construction project.
TRAILER, TRAVEL — Any vehicles designed, equipped or used for sleeping
or living or eating and designed to be moved from place to place on wheels
and to be propelled on its own power or propelled by another vehicle.
§ 97-118.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-118.3
1:453
TRAILER, EQUIPMENT — Any vehicle designed to be moved from place
to place on wheels and to be propelled on its own power or propelled
by another vehicle, whose purpose is primarily for storage of equipment,
materials or machinery.
TURNING AREA — The area necessary in a parking lot for maneuvering
vehicles into and out of parking stalls and, in other areas, the space
provided for vehicles to turn around.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use which is customarily associated with and
subordinate to the principal use of the lot or a building and which is located
on the same lot therewith.
USED CAR LOT — Any place out of doors where two (2) or more used motor
vehicles are displayed, or offered for sale or lease.
VERTICAL AXIS WIND TURBINE (VAWT) — A wind energy conservation
system (WECS), also known as an "egg beater" style wind turbine, that
produces energy from a vertical axis. VAWT are capable of being secured as
a tower or roof mounted installation.
WIND ENERGY CONSERVATION SYSTEM — A horizontal axis wind turbine
(HAWT) or vertical axis wind turbine (VAWT) that converts wind energy
into electricity through use of a wind turbine generator and includes such
elements as a wind turbine generator hub, blade or rotor, tower and
transformer.
YARD, FRONT — An open, unoccupied space extending across the full width
of the lot and lying between the street line and building setback line. The
depth of the "front yard" shall be measured horizontally at right angles from
the street line, or radially on a curved street, to the building line.
YARD, REAR — An open, unoccupied space extending the full width of the
lot between the main building and the rear lot line. The depth of the "rear
yard" shall be measured horizontally from the nearest part of the main
building toward the nearest point of the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE — An open, unoccupied space extending from the front yard to
the rear yard between the main building and each side lot line. The width of
the required "side yard" shall be measured horizontally at right angles from
the nearest point on the side lot line toward the nearest part of the main
building.
§ 97-119. District Regulations.
§ 97-119.1. R-1 Single-Family Residential District.
Within the R-1 Single-Family Residential District the following standards
shall apply:
A. Permitted uses.
§ 97-118.3 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-119.1
1:454
§ 97-119.2. R-2 Single-Family Residential District.
Within the R-2 Single-Family Residential District the following standards
shall apply:
1. Single-family detached dwellings.
2. Cluster development (see § 97-123.2).
3. Agricultural uses other than the rearing or maintenance of farm
animals or fowl (see § 97-121.3).
4. Nursery.
5. Public parks, playgrounds, pools and recreation sites.
6. Public buildings essential to the health, safety and welfare of the
community.
B. Permitted accessory uses, buildings and structures.
1. Private garages.
2. Fences and walls (see § 97-123.3).
3. Greenhouses, tool sheds and customary accessory buildings to
farms and nurseries.
4. Private swimming pools (see § 97-123.10).
5. Off-street parking for a residence (see § 97-123.7).
6. Signs (see § 97-123.9).
7. Home occupations (see § 97-123.14).
8. Other customary accessory uses, buildings and structures which
are clearly incidental to the principal use and building.
C. Area and bulk requirements: as specified in § 97-117.2 and contained in
the zoning schedule located at the end of this chapter.
D. Conditional uses. The following uses are subject to the conditions
contained in § 97-124 of this ordinance:
1. Churches and places of worship and religious instruction.
2. Private preschools and public and private schools.
3. Public utilities.
A. Permitted uses: the same uses as permitted in the R-1 District, §
97-119.1A, except that cluster development shall not be permitted in
the R-2 District.
§ 97-119.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-119.2
1:455
§ 97-119.3. R-3 Village Residential District.
Within the R-3 Village Residential District the following standards shall
apply:
B. Permitted accessory uses, buildings and structures: the same accessory
uses, buildings and structures as permitted in the R-1 District, §
97-119.1B.
C. Area and bulk requirements: as specified in § 97-117.2 and contained in
the zoning schedule located at the end of this chapter.
D. Conditional uses. The following are subject to the conditions contained
in § 97-124 of this ordinance:
1. Churches and places of worship and religious instruction.
2. Private preschools and public and private schools.
3. Public utilities.
A. Permitted uses. [Amended 7-8-86 by Ord. # 16-86; 7-14-87 by Ord.
#10-87]
1. Single-family detached dwellings.
2. (Reserved)8
3. Public buildings, public parks, public schools and public recreation
sites.
4. Professional offices.
5. Assisted living residences and hospitals.
B. Permitted accessory uses, buildings and structures.
1. Private garages.
2. Private swimming pools (see § 97-123.10).
3. Off-street parking (see § 97-123.7).
4. Signs (see § 97-123.9).
5. Fences and walls (see § 97-123.3).
6. Home occupations (see § 97-123.14).
7. Other customary accessory uses, buildings and structures which
are clearly incidental to the principal use and building.
8. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A2, which permitted two-family dwellings, was repealed
10-9-2018 by Ord. No. 18-2018.
§ 97-119.2 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-119.3
1:456
§ 97-119.4. (Reserved)
§ 97-119.5. R-4 Senior Citizen Residential District.
Within the R-4 Senior Citizen Residential District the following standards
shall apply:
§ 97-119.6. (Reserved)
C. Area and bulk requirements: as specified in § 97-117.2 and contained in
the zoning schedule located at the end of this chapter.
D. Conditional uses. The following are subject to the conditions contained
in § 97-124 of this ordinance:
1. Churches and places of worship and religious instruction.
2. Philanthropic, charitable and eleemosynary uses.
3. Private preschools and private schools. [Amended 7-8-86 by Ord.
No. 16-86]
4. Public utilities.
A. Permitted uses.
1. Single-family detached dwellings.
2. Senior citizen projects at a density not to exceed ten (10) dwelling
units for each acre of land within the site.
3. Public parks, playgrounds and recreation sites.
4. Private clubs and recreation facilities.
5. Public buildings essential to the health, safety and welfare of the
community.
B. Permitted accessory uses, buildings and structures: the same accessory
uses, buildings and structures as permitted in the R-3 District, §
97-119.3B.
C. Area and bulk requirements: as specified in § 97-117.2 and contained in
the zoning schedule located at the end of this chapter.
D. Conditional uses. The following uses are subject to the conditions
contained in § 97-124 of this ordinance:
1. The same conditional uses as permitted in the R-2 District (§
97-119.2D).
E. Additional requirements: as specified in § 97-123.5.
§ 97-119.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-119.7
1:457
§ 97-119.7. VC-2 Village Center District. [Added 3-26-85 by Ord. No.
3-85]
Within the VC-2 Village Center District the following standards shall apply:
§ 97-119.8. VC-3 Village Center District. [Added 3-26-85 by Ord. No.
3-85]
Within the VC-3 Village Center District the following standards shall apply:
A. Permitted uses:
1. The same uses as permitted in the R-3 Village Residential District, §
97-119.3A.
2. Planned residential development (in accordance with § 97-123.6).
3. Brewery/winery/distillery. [Added 9-24-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-21]
B. Permitted accessory uses, buildings and structures:
1. The same accessory uses, buildings and structures permitted in the
R-3 District, § 97-119.3B.
C. Area and bulk requirements: as specified in § 97-117.2 and contained in
the zoning schedule located at the end of this chapter.
D. Conditional uses. The following uses are subject to the conditions
contained in § 97-124 of this ordinance:
1. The same conditional uses permitted in the R-3 District, §
97-119.3D.
2. Mixed-use developments.
E. Additional requirements:
1. Non-residential uses shall comply with § 97-119.9E.
A. Permitted uses:
1. The same uses as permitted in the C-1 Village Commercial District,
§ 97-119.9A.
2. Planned residential development (in accordance with § 97-123.6).
3. Brewery/winery/distillery. [Added 9-24-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-21]
B. Permitted accessory uses, buildings, and structures:
1. Fences and walls (see § 97-123.3).
2. Off-street parking (see § 97-123.7).
§ 97-119.7 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-119.8
1:458
§ 97-119.9. C-1 Village Commercial District.
Within the C-1 Village Commercial District the following standards shall
apply:
3. Private garages.
4. Private swimming pools (see § 97-123.10).
5. Signs (see § 97-123.9).
6. Other customary accessory uses, buildings, and structures which
are clearly incidental to the principal use and building.
C. Area and bulk requirements: as specified in § 97-117.2 and contained in
the zoning schedule at the end of this chapter.
D. Conditional uses. The following uses are subject to the conditions
contained in § 97-124 of this ordinance:
1. Churches and places of worship and religious instruction.
2. Restaurants and taverns, except for drive-in and drive-through
restaurants.
3. Private preschools and public and private schools.
4. Public utilities.
5. Mixed-use developments.
E. Additional requirements:
1. Non-residential uses shall comply with § 97-119.9E.
2. Planned residential uses shall comply with § 97-123.6.
A. Permitted uses.
1. Retail trade stores.
a. General merchandise, food, apparel, and accessories.
b. Furniture, home furnishings and appliances.
c. Liquor.
d. Hardware and paint.
e. Variety stores, drugstores, florists and other retail trade stores
but not including fuel oil.
2. Service uses.
a. Business services.
b. Repair services other than automotive.
§ 97-119.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-119.9
1:459
c. Professional services.
d. Printing and news services.
3. Business and professional offices.
4. Personal services:
a. Barber.
b. Hairdresser.
c. Tailors and dressmakers.
d. Nail salon.
e. Licensed massage therapy.
f. Tanning salon.
5. Laundry and dry cleaning, including self-service but not
commercial laundries.
6. Assembly halls, theaters, bowling alleys, tennis courts, racquet ball
courts, health/fitness centers, gymnasiums, and similar
recreational uses, provided that their activities occur entirely
within an enclosed building. [Amended 3-23-93 by Ord. No.
3-93]
7. Governmental buildings and uses other than storage yards for the
maintenance and service of equipment.
8. Public transit stations and terminals.
9. Shopping centers.
10. Parking lots or structures for private passenger vehicles.
11. Schools for art, music and dance.
12. Nonprofit clubs, lodges, social and fraternal organizations.
13. Child day care centers
14. Brewery/winery/distillery. [Added 9-24-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-21]
B. Permitted accessory uses, buildings and structures.
1. Fences and walls (see § 97-123.3).
2. Off-street parking (see § 97-123.7).
3. Signs (see § 97-123.9).
4. Other customary accessory uses, buildings, and structures which
are clearly incidental to the principal use and building
§ 97-119.9 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-119.9
1:460
§ 97-119.10. C-2 Turnpike Commercial District.
Within the C-2 Turnpike Commercial District the following standards shall
apply:
C. Area and bulk requirements: as specified in § 97-117.2 and contained in
the zoning schedule located at the end of this chapter.
D. Conditional uses. The following are subject to the conditions contained
in § 97-124 of this ordinance:
1. Automotive service stations.
2. Churches and places of worship and religious instruction.
3. Restaurants and taverns.
4. Private preschools and public and private schools.
5. Public utilities.
6. Funeral parlors. [Added 7-14-87 by Ord. No. 10-87]
7. Mixed-use developments.
8. Animal Hospitals. [Added 05-27-14 by Ord. No. 12-14]
E. Additional requirements. [Amended 5-9-06 by Ord. No. 13-06]
1. Buffer strip. Where the property line of a non-residential lot abuts a
residential zone or a residential land use, a strip of land at least ten
(10) feet in width adjacent to the abutting zone line or property line
shall be kept free of any building, structure, use, development or
improvement, except sidewalks and landscaped improvements are
permitted. Landscaped improvements shall be densely planted as a
buffer strip as defined in this ordinance. Additional screening shall
be provided in conjunction with § 97-123.7C(11).
A. Permitted uses.
1. The same uses as permitted in the C-1 District, § 97-119.9A.
2. Commercial uses such as:
a. Auto parts and supplies.
b. Plumbing, heating, electrical and building supplies.
c. Landscape and nursery.
3. Wholesale trade establishments, except that outdoor storage of
stock, supplies, medium and heavy duty trucks, industrial
machinery, or raw materials is not permitted.
§ 97-119.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-119.10
1:461
§ 97-119.11. C-3 Neighborhood Commercial District.
Within the C-3 Neighborhood Commercial District the following standards
shall apply:
4. Brewery/winery/distillery. [Added 9-24-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-21]
B. Permitted accessory uses, buildings, and structures: the same
accessory uses, buildings, and structures as permitted in the C-1
District, § 97-119.9B.
C. Area and bulk requirements: as specified in § 97-117.2 and contained in
the zoning schedule located at the end of this chapter.
D. Conditional uses. The following are subject to the conditions contained
in § 97-124 of this ordinance:
1. The same conditional uses as permitted in the C-1 District, §
97-119.9D.
2. Banks and financial institutions.
E. Additional requirements: as specified in the C-1 District, § 97-119.9E.
A. Permitted uses.
1. General merchandise, food, apparel, and accessories.
2. Variety stores, drugstores, florists and other retail trade stores but
not including fuel oil.
3. Business, medical, and professional offices
4. Personal services such as:
a. Barber.
b. Hairdresser.
c. Tailors and dressmakers.
d. Nail Salon.
e. Licensed massage therapy.
f. Tanning salon
5. Child day care centers.
B. Permitted accessory uses, buildings, and structures. The same
accessory uses, buildings and structures permitted in the C-1 District, §
97-119.9B.
C. Area and bulk requirements: as specified in § 97-117.2 and contained in
the zoning schedule located at the end of this chapter.
§ 97-119.10 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-119.11
1:462
§ 97-119.12. I Limited Manufacturing-Industrial District.
Within the I Limited Manufacturing-Industrial District the following
standards shall apply:
D. Conditional uses. The following are subject to the conditions contained
in § 97-124 of this ordinance:
1. The same conditional uses as permitted in the C-1 District, §
97-119.9D.
2. Banks and financial institutions.
E. Additional requirements: as specified in the C-1 District, § 97-119.9E.
A. Permitted uses.
1. Uses of a light manufacturing nature.
a. Manufacturing of light machinery, and fabrication of metal,
paper and wood products, provided that all manufacturing and
fabrication activities are contained within enclosed structures
b. Fabrication of plastic products of a low or moderate hazard
classification as set forth in the Building Code, provided that
all fabrication activities are contained within enclosed
structures.
c. Food and associated industries comprised of baking, bottling,
processing or manufacturing, provided that all activities are
contained within enclosed structures
d. Scientific or research laboratories comprising any of the
following: biological, chemical, dental, electronic,
pharmaceutical and general research.
2. Storage buildings, warehouses and wholesale distribution centers,
provided that such activities are conducted entirely within an
enclosed structure or are conducted in open yard areas which are
screened from view of adjacent lots or roads.
3. Office buildings for executive or administrative purposes.
4. Government buildings and government uses, by a Municipal,
County, State or Federal Agency or authority. [Amended 3-23-93
by Ord. #3-93]
5. Lumber or building material yards and fuel dealers' and
contractors' storage yards, where such storage is not visible at the
street line.
6. Automotive repair, excluding auto body work.
§ 97-119.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-119.12
1:463
7. Facilities used for assembly halls, theaters, bowling alleys, tennis
courts, racquet ball courts, health/fitness centers, gymnasiums and
similar recreational uses provided that their activities are carried
on entirely within the enclosed building. [Amended 3-23-93 by
Ord. No. 3-93]
8. Child day care centers.
9. Brewery/winery/distillery. [Added 9-24-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-21]
B. Permitted accessory uses:
1. Accessory uses as permitted in the C-l District, § 97-119.9B.
2. Food vending machines and snack shops where food is consumed
by patrons of facilities permitted per § 97-119.12A2 and 7.
C. Area and bulk requirements. As specified in § 97-117.2 and contained in
the zoning schedule located at the end of this chapter.
D. Conditional uses. The following uses are subject to the conditions in §
97-124 of this ordinance:
1. Animal hospitals and kennels.
2. Public utilities.
E. Other requirements for industrial uses.
1. Buffering and landscaping. Where the property line of an industrial
lot abuts or is across the street from a residential use or residential
zone, a fifty-foot (50) wide strip of land in the yard area nearest to
the abutting property line or zone line shall be kept free from any
building, development or improvement, except for landscaping
which shall include a buffer strip or fence as defined in this
ordinance.
2. Storage and waste disposal.
a. No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall
be stored in bulk above ground. Their location and
construction shall comply with the safety standards of the Fire
Prevention Bureau.
b. All outdoor storage facilities for raw materials and products
shall be clearly incidental to and necessary to support the
principal permitted use and building on the property and shall
be enclosed by a fence no higher than eight (8) feet and
adequate to conceal the facilities from the adjacent properties.
c. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such a
form or manner that may be transferred off the lot by natural
causes or force.
§ 97-119.12 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-119.12
1:464
§ 97-119.13. AH Affordable Housing District and CAH Commercial
Affordable Housing. [Amended 3-13-90 by Ord. No. 2-90]
Within the AH Affordable Housing District the following standards shall
apply:
d. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or
which constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or
otherwise attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored
outdoors only in closed containers.
F. Performance requirements for industrial uses. If the performance
characteristics of any proposed industrial use are questionable, a
building permit may be withheld until the applicant for such a use shall,
at the request of the Planning Board, furnish the following:
1. A report, in accordance with performance standards covered in
§§ 97-85 and 97-123.8, prepared by competent technical experts
showing that at no time will such use cause or result in any:
a. Dissemination of dust, smoke, smog, observable gas, fumes or
odors or other atmosphere pollution, glare, heat, noise,
radiation or vibration beyond the boundaries of the lot on
which it is located.
b. Hazard of fire or explosion or other physical hazard to any
adjacent building or to any plant growth on any land adjacent
to the site of the use.
c. Hauling of materials, goods or products to or from the site of
the use in a volume or manner materially incongruous with the
normal traffic on the streets in the neighborhood.
d. Dissemination or discharge of thermal energy, chemicals,
waste or other matter, except stormwater runoff directly or
indirectly into a stream, pond or any natural body of water.
2. A site plan with a detailed description of the proposed industrial
process and its products accompanied by approval from the Sewer
Authority.
3. Any process which may involve the creation or emission of any
odors shall be provided with a secondary safeguard system so that
control will be maintained if the primary system should fail.
4. All industrial uses must stay within the tolerance set forth in the
performance standards set forth in § 97-123 of this ordinance, and
the user shall furnish proof of this when asked to do so by the
appropriate authorities.
A. Permitted uses in an AH Zone. A building may be erected or used and a
lot may be used or occupied for townhouse and multi-family residential
dwelling units.
§ 97-119.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-119.13
1:465
§ 97-119.14. AH-1 Affordable Housing District. [Added 5-13-97 by
Ord. No. 11-97]
§ 97-119.15. AHO-1 Affordable Housing Overlay Zone-1. [Added
10-9-2018 by Ord. No. 18-2018]
The AHO-1 Zone shall encompass the entire VC-3 Zone and a portion of the
VC-2 Zone on the east side of the New Jersey Transit railroad tracks. Within
the AHO-1 Zone, the following standards shall apply:
B. Permitted accessory uses in an AH Zone. Permitted accessory uses in an
AH zone are off street parking, recreation facilities, fences, signs, and
other customary accessory uses and buildings which are clearly
incidental to the principle use and building.
C. Permitted Uses in a CAH Zone. A building shall be used and property
developed for all uses permitted in a "AH" zone.
1. Alternatively, a building may be used and property developed for all
uses permitted in a "C-1" zone, provided that there is compliance
with the additional requirements established for development in a
CAH Commercial Affordable Housing District.
D. Additional requirements for development in an AH Affordable Housing
District.
1. Inclusionary development set aside. An affordable housing set
aside shall be applied to all dwelling units in a development in the
AH District in accordance with all current regulations of the New
Jersey Council on Affordable Housing (COAH). All development
shall also be subject to 97-120, Affordable Housing Controls of the
Borough of Waldwick Land Use and Development Code.
A. All the provisions applicable to the AH Affordable Housing District as
set forth in § 97-119.13 of the Municipal Code shall apply to the AH-1
Affordable Housing District.
B. All other definitions which were set forth in the Borough of Waldwick
Land Use and Development Code including § 97-118.3 entitled
"Definitions and Word Usage" shall apply to the AH-1 Affordable
Housing District created by this Ordinance and are incorporated by
reference herein. [Added 5-13-97 by Ord. No. 11-97]
A. Permitted uses in the AHO-1 Zone. In addition to any use permitted in
the underlying zone district, the following uses shall be permitted:
1. Multifamily residential.
2. Mixed-use development. Permitted uses on the ground floor of a
mixed-use development shall include the following permitted uses
in the C-1 District as listed in § 97-119.9A1, 2, 3, 4, and 13: retail
trade stores, service uses, business and professional offices,
§ 97-119.13 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-119.15
1:466
personal services and child day-care centers. Dwelling units in a
mixed-use development shall only be permitted on upper floors.
B. Required conditions. The regulations of the underlying zone district are
still applicable. However, properties within this overlay zone may also
be developed with multifamily residential or mixed-use development in
accordance with the following requirements:
1. Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
2. Minimum lot frontage: 75 feet.
3. Minimum front yard setback: five feet.
4. Minimum side yard setback: five feet.
5. Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet.
6. Maximum building coverage: 40%.
7. Maximum impervious coverage: 85%.
8. Maximum building height: three stories/42 feet.
9. Maximum gross residential density: 10 dwelling units/acre.
10. Residential parking: per New Jersey Residential Site Improvement
Standards.
11. Nonresidential parking: one space per 250 square feet of floor
area.
C. Affordable housing requirements. Low- and moderate-income dwelling
units shall be provided in accordance with this subsection. The
minimum affordable housing set-aside shall be 20% of the dwelling
units in the development, except that the minimum set-aside shall be
15% where affordable rental units are provided. Of these, at least half
must be reserved for, and affordable to, low-income households. A
minimum of 13% of the affordable units shall be affordable to
households earning 30% or less of the area median income for the
Council on Affordable Housing region. Low- and moderate-income
housing units shall be governed by the standards set forth in the
Uniform Housing Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., and
shall comply with the applicable rules of the Council on Affordable
Housing and any other relevant state regulations. All development
including affordable dwelling units shall also be subject to § 97-120,
Affordable Housing Controls, of the Borough of Waldwick Land Use and
Development Code.
§ 97-119.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-119.16
1:467
§ 97-119.16. AHO-2 Affordable Housing Overlay Zone-2. [Added
10-9-2018 by Ord. No. 18-2018]
The AHO-2 Zone includes two properties located a short distance from the
Borough's central business district, Block 101, Lot 6.01 and Block 109.02,
Lot 6.04. Within the AHO-2 Zone, the following standards shall apply:
A. Permitted uses in the AHO-2 Zone. In addition to any use permitted in
the underlying zone district, mixed-use development shall be permitted.
Permitted uses on the ground floor of a mixed-use development shall
include the following permitted uses in the C-1 District as listed in
§ 97-119.9A1, 2, 3, 4, and 13: retail trade stores, service uses, business
and professional offices, personal services and child day-care centers.
Dwelling units in a mixed-use development shall only be permitted on
upper floors, except that ground-floor dwelling units shall be permitted
on the portion of the property located more than 80 feet from any public
street.
B. Required conditions. The regulations of the underlying zone district are
still applicable. However, properties within this overlay zone may also
be developed in accordance with the following requirements:
1. Minimum lot area: 30,000 square feet.
2. Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet.
3. Minimum front yard setback: 10 feet.
4. Minimum side yard setback: 15 feet.
5. Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet.
6. Maximum building coverage: 35%.
7. Maximum impervious coverage: 85%.
8. Maximum building height: three stories/42 feet.
9. Maximum gross residential density: 10 dwelling units/acre.
10. Residential parking: per New Jersey Residential Site Improvement
Standards.
11. Nonresidential parking: one space per 250 square feet of floor
area.
C. Affordable housing requirements. Low- and moderate-income dwelling
units shall be provided in accordance with this subsection. The
minimum affordable housing set-aside shall be 20% of the dwelling
units in the development, except that the minimum set-aside shall be
15% where affordable rental units are provided. Of these, at least half
must be reserved for, and affordable to low-income households. A
minimum of 13% of the affordable units shall be affordable to
households earning 30% or less of the area median income for the
§ 97-119.16 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-119.16
1:468
§ 97-120. Affordable Housing Controls. [Amended 10-9-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-2018; 3-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-08]
Council on Affordable Housing region. Low- and moderate-income
housing units shall be governed by the standards set forth in the
Uniform Housing Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., and
shall comply with the applicable rules of the Council on Affordable
Housing and any other relevant state regulations. All development
including affordable dwelling units shall also be subject to § 97-120,
Affordable Housing Controls, of the Borough of Waldwick Land Use and
Development Code.
A. Affordable housing obligation.
(1) BE IT ORDAINED by the governing body of the Borough of
Waldwick, Bergen County, New Jersey, that the Code of the
Borough of Waldwick is hereby replaced to include provisions
addressing Waldwick's constitutional obligation to provide for its
fair share of low- and moderate-income housing, as directed by the
Superior Court and consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq.,9 as
amended and supplemented, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., as amended
and supplemented, and the New Jersey Fair Housing Act of 1985.
This section is intended to provide assurances that low- and
moderate-income units are created with controls on affordability
over time and that low- and moderate-income households shall
occupy those units. This section shall apply except where
inconsistent with applicable law.
(2) The Borough of Waldwick Planning Board has adopted a Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan pursuant to the Municipal Land Use
Law at N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. The Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan have been endorsed by the governing body. This section
implements and incorporates the adopted and endorsed Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan and addresses the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq., as amended and supplemented,
N.J.A.C.5:80-26.1 et seq. as amended and supplemented, and the
New Jersey Fair Housing Act of 1985.
(3) The Borough of Waldwick shall provide annual reporting of its
Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity to the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs, Council on Affordable Housing
or Local Government Services, or other entity designated by the
State of New Jersey, with a copy provided to Fair Share Housing
Center and posted on the municipal website, using forms developed
for this purpose by the New Jersey Department of Community
Affairs, Council on Affordable Housing or Local Government
Services. The reporting shall include an accounting of all
Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity, including the source and
9. Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.1 et seq. expired 10-16-2016.
§ 97-119.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-120
1:469
amount of funds collected and the amount and purpose for which
any funds have been expended.
(4) The Borough of Waldwick shall provide annual reporting of the
status of all affordable housing activity within the municipality
through posting on the municipal website, with copies provided to
Fair Share Housing Center, using forms previously developed for
this purpose by the Council on Affordable Housing or any other
forms endorsed by the Court-appointed Special Master and Fair
Share Housing Center.
(5) For the midpoint realistic opportunity review due on July 1, 2020,
as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, the Borough of
Waldwick shall post on its municipal website, with copies provided
to Fair Share Housing Center, a status report as to its
implementation of its Plan and an analysis of whether any unbuilt
sites or unfulfilled mechanisms continue to present a realistic
opportunity. Such posting shall invite any interested party to
submit comments to the municipality, with copies provided to Fair
Share Housing Center, regarding whether any sites no longer
present a realistic opportunity and should be replaced. Any
interested party may by motion request a hearing before the Court
regarding these issues.
(6) Every three years, the Borough of Waldwick will post on its
municipal website, with copies provided to Fair Share Housing
Center, a status report as to its satisfaction of its very-low-income
requirements, including the family very-low-income requirements
referenced herein. Such posting shall invite any interested party to
submit comments to the municipality, with copies provided to Fair
Share Housing Center, on the issue of whether the municipality has
complied with its very-low-income housing obligation.
B. Definitions. The following terms when used in this section shall have
the meanings given in this subsection:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A self-contained residential dwelling unit
with a kitchen, sanitary facilities, sleeping quarters and a private
entrance, which is created within an existing home, or through the
conversion of an existing accessory structure on the same site, or
by an addition to an existing home or accessory building, or by the
construction of a new accessory structure on the same site.
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq.).
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for the
administration of affordable units in accordance with this section,
N.J.A.C. 5:96,10 N.J.A.C. 5:9711 and N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
§ 97-120 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-120
1:470
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median
income at which restricted units in an affordable housing development
are affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent within the means of a low-or
moderate-income household as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.412; in the
case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms to
the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and
supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the
unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may
be amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE DEVELOPMENT — A housing development all or a
portion of which consists of restricted units.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included
in or approved pursuant to the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, or
otherwise intended to address the Borough's fair share obligation and
includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal
construction project or a 100% affordable development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in a
municipal Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a
municipality's fair share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant
to the Act and approved for crediting by the Court and/or funded
through an affordable housing trust fund, (housing unit proposed or
created pursuant to the Act, credited pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-4,13 and/
or funded through an affordable housing trust fund.)
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of
the population such that: 1) all the residents of the development where
the unit is situated are 62 years or older; or 2) at least 80% of the
units are occupied by one person that is 55 years or older; or 3)
the development has been designated by the Secretary of the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development as "housing for older
persons" as defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act, 42
U.S.C. § 3607.
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.).
10.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:96 is reserved.
11.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:97 is reserved.
12.Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.1 et seq. expired 10/16/2016.
13.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:97 is reserved.
§ 97-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-120
1:471
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENTS — A structure in which
households live in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing
facilities, central heat and common areas. Alternative living
arrangements include, but are not limited to: transitional facilities for
the homeless; Class A, B, C, D and E boarding homes as regulated by
the State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs; residential
health care facilities as regulated by the New Jersey Department of
Health; group homes for the developmentally disabled and mentally ill
as licensed and/or regulated by the New Jersey Department of Human
Services; and congregate living arrangements.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility licensed by the New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living
services are available when needed for four or more adult persons
unrelated to the proprietor and that offers units containing, at a
minimum, one unfurnished room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and
a lockable door on the unit entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
administrative agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, which is in, but not
of, the Department of Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey,
that was established under the New Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq.).
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety
code violations that require the repair or replacement of a major
system. A major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including
septic systems), lead paint abatement and/or load-bearing structural
systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development including
the holder of an option to contract or purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of
any building or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill,
and any use or change in the use of any building or other structure, or
land or extension of use of land, for which permission may be required
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market-rate units. This term includes, but is not
necessarily limited to: new construction, the conversion of a
§ 97-120 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-120
1:472
nonresidential structure to residential and the creation of new
affordable units through the gut rehabilitation or reconstruction of a
vacant residential structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the median household
income.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a lowincome
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include but are not limited to weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including
septic systems), lead paint abatement or load-bearing structural
systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for the
applicable county, as adopted annually by COAH or a successor entity
approved by the Court.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the
median household income.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
MULTIFAMILY UNIT — A structure containing five or more dwelling
units.
NONEXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than
the transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of
ownership between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial
decree of divorce or judicial separation, but not including sales to third
parties; the transfer of ownership between family members as a result
of inheritance; the transfer of ownership through an executor's deed to
a class A beneficiary and the transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently
income-eligible households are selected for placement in affordable
housing units such that no preference is given to one applicant over
another except for purposes of matching household income and size
with an appropriately priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each
housing region affordable to a four-person household with an income at
80% of the regional median as defined by duly adopted Regional Income
Limits published annually by COAH or a successor entity.
§ 97-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-120
1:473
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or
reconstruction of any building or structure, pursuant to the
Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including
the rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid
utilities computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA for
its Section 8 program. In assisted living residences, "rent" does not
include charges for food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or
ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, but does not include
a market-rate unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income equal to 30% or less of the median household
income.
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
very-low-income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and
crawl space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm
windows, replacement storm doors, replacement windows and
replacement doors, and is considered a major system for rehabilitation.
C. Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to all affordable
housing developments and affordable housing units that currently exist
and that are proposed to be created within the Borough of Waldwick
pursuant to the Borough's most recently adopted Housing Element and
Fair Share Plan.
D. Affordable housing programs. The Borough of Waldwick has
determined that it will use the following mechanisms to satisfy its
affordable housing obligations:
(1) A rehabilitation program.
(a) County of Bergen CDBG rehabilitation program shall be
designed to renovate deficient housing units occupied by lowand
moderate-income households such that, after
rehabilitation, these units will comply with the New Jersey
State Housing Code pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:28.
(b) Both owner-occupied and renter-occupied units shall be
eligible for rehabilitation funds.
(c) All rehabilitated units shall remain affordable to low- and
moderate-income households for a period of 20 years (the
control period). For owner-occupied units the control period
§ 97-120 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-120
1:474
will be enforced with a lien and for renter-occupied units the
control period will be enforced with a deed restriction.
(d) The Borough of Waldwick shall dedicate a minimum of $10,000
for each unit to be rehabilitated through this program,
reflecting the minimum hard cost of rehabilitation for each
unit.
(e) The Borough of Waldwick shall designate, subject to the
approval of COAH, one or more administrative agents to
administer the rehabilitation program in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:9614 and N.J.A.C. 5:97.15 The administrative agent(s)
shall provide a rehabilitation manual for the owner occupancy
rehabilitation program and a rehabilitation manual for the
rental occupancy rehabilitation program to be adopted by
resolution of the governing body and subject to approval of
COAH. Both rehabilitation manuals shall be available for public
inspection in the Office of the Municipal Clerk and in the
office(s) of the administrative agent(s).
(f) Units in a rehabilitation program shall be exempt from N.J.A.C.
5:97-916 and Uniform Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC),
but shall be administered in accordance with the following:
[1] If a unit is vacant, upon initial rental subsequent to
rehabilitation, or if a renter-occupied unit is re-rented
prior to the end of controls on affordability, the deed
restriction shall require the unit to be rented to a low- or
moderate-income household at an affordable rent and
affirmatively marketed pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-9 and
UHAC.
[2] If a unit is renter-occupied, upon completion of the
rehabilitation, the maximum rate of rent shall be the lesser
of the current rent or the maximum permitted rent
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-9 and UHAC.
[3] Rents in rehabilitated units may increase annually based
on the standards in N.J.A.C. 5:97-9.
[4] Applicant and/or tenant households shall be certified as
income- eligible in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:97-9 and
UHAC, except that households in owner-occupied units
shall be exempt from the regional asset limit.
(2) A supportive and special needs housing unit program.
14.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:96 is reserved.
15.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:97 is reserved.
16.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:97 is reserved.
§ 97-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-120
1:475
(a) All supportive and special needs housing units shall meet the
following conditions:
[1] Supportive and special needs housing units shall be
permitted in the VC-2 Village Center District, the VC-3
Village Center District and the C-1 Village Commercial
District. Supportive and special needs housing includes,
but is not limited to: residential health care facilities as
licensed and/or regulated by DCA or the New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services if the facility is
located with, and operated by, a licensed health care
facility; group homes for people with developmental
disabilities and mental illness as licensed and/or regulated
by the New Jersey Department of Human Services;
permanent supportive housing; and supportive shared
living housing. Long-term health care facilities including
nursing homes, and Class A, B, C, D, and E boarding homes
do not qualify as supportive and special needs housing.
[2] Supportive and special needs housing shall comply with all
applicable statutes and regulations of the State of New
Jersey in addition to all building codes.
[3] The following provisions shall apply to permanent
supportive housing, group homes, residential health care
facilities and supportive shared living housing:
[a] The unit of credit shall be the unit for permanent and
supportive housing, but shall be the bedroom for
group homes, residential health care facilities and
supportive shared living housing.
[b] Housing that is age-restricted shall be included with
the maximum number of units that may be agerestricted
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.8.17
[c] Units/occupancy shall not be restricted to youth under
18 years of age.
[d] All sites shall meet the site suitability criteria set forth
in N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.13.18
[e] The municipality or developer/sponsor shall have site
control or the ability to control the site(s).
[f] The bedrooms and/or units shall comply with N.J.A.C.
5:97-919 and UHAC with the following exceptions:
17.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:97 is reserved.
18.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:97 is reserved.
19.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:97 is reserved.
§ 97-120 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-120
1:476
[i] Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15);
however, group homes, residential health care
facilities, permanent supportive housing and
supportive shared living housing shall be
affirmatively marketed to individuals with special
needs in accordance with a plan approved by the
Council's Executive Director;
[ii] Affordability average and bedroom distribution
(N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3); and
[iii] With the exception of units established with
capital funding through a twenty-year operating
contract with the Department of Human Services,
Division of Developmental Disabilities, group
homes, residential health care facilities,
supportive shared living housing and permanent
supportive housing shall have the appropriate
controls on affordability in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:97-9.20
[4] The following documentation shall be submitted prior to
marketing the completed units or facility:
[a] An affirmative marketing plan in accordance with
Subsection D(2)(a)[3] above; and
[b] If applicable, proof that the supportive and/or special
needs housing is regulated by the New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services, the New
Jersey Department of Human Services or another
state agency in accordance with the requirements of
this section, which includes validation of the number
of bedrooms or units in which low- or moderateincome
occupants reside.
[c] Municipal building permit fees shall be waived in all
cases involving permanent supportive housing, group
homes, residential health care facilities and
supportive shared living housing development under
this section.
(3) A market to affordable program.
(a) A market to affordable program is established to permit the
purchase or subsidization of units through a written agreement
with the property owner and sold or rented to low- and
moderate-income households. Subject to the provisions of
Subsection D(3)(b)[3] below, the market to affordable
programs may produce both low- and moderate-income units
20.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:97 is reserved.
§ 97-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-120
1:477
(the program may be limited to only low- or only moderateincome
units as per the Fair Share Plan).
(b) The following provisions shall apply to market to affordable
programs:
[1] At the time they are offered for sale or rental, eligible units
may be new, pre-owned or vacant.
[2] The units shall be certified to be in sound condition as a
result of an inspection performed by a licensed building
inspector.
[3] The municipality will provide a minimum of $25,000 per
unit to subsidize each moderate-income unit and/or
$30,000 per unit to subsidize the each low-income unit,
with additional subsidy depending on the market prices or
rents in a municipality.
[4] The maximum number of creditable market to affordable
units shall be equal to no more than 10 for-sale units and
10 rental units or a combined total of 10% of the fair share
obligation, whichever is greater. Additional units may be
approved by COAH if the municipality demonstrates the
successful completion of its initial market to affordable
program.
(c) The units shall comply with N.J.A.C. 5:97-921 and UHAC with
the following exceptions:
[1] Bedroom distribution [N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3(b) and (c)];
[2] Low/moderate income split [N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3(a)]; and
[3] Affordability average [N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3(d) and (e)];
however:
[a] The maximum rent for a moderate-income unit shall
be affordable to households earning no more than 60%
of median income and the maximum rent for a lowincome
unit shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 44% of median income; and
[b] The maximum sales price for a moderate-income unit
shall be affordable to households earning no more
than 70% of median income and the maximum sales
price for a low-income unit shall be affordable to
households earning no more than 40% of median
income.
E. Alternative living arrangements.
21.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:97 is reserved.
§ 97-120 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-120
1:478
(1) The administration of an alternative living arrangement shall be in
compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.822 and UHAC, with the following
exceptions:
(a) Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15); provided,
however, that the units or bedrooms may be affirmatively
marketed by the provider in accordance with an alternative
plan approved by the Court.
(b) Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.3).
(2) With the exception of units established with capital funding
through a twenty-year operating contract with the Department of
Human Services, Division of Developmental Disabilities, alternative
living arrangements shall have at least thirty-year controls on
affordability in accordance with UHAC, unless an alternative
commitment is approved by the Court.
(a) The service provider for the alternative living arrangement
shall act as the administrative agent for the purposes of
administering the affirmative marketing and affordability
requirements for the alternative living arrangement.
F. Phasing schedule for inclusionary zoning. In inclusionary developments
the following schedule shall be followed:
Maximum Percentage of
Market-Rate Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
25 0
25+1 10
50 50
75 75
90 100
G. New construction.
(1) The following general guidelines apply to all newly constructed
developments that contain low-and moderate-income housing
units, including any currently unanticipated future developments
that will provide low- and moderate-income housing units.
(a) Low/moderate income split and bedroom distribution of
affordable housing units:
[1] The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between
low- and moderate-income units, except that where there
22.Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.1 et seq. expired 10/16/2016.
§ 97-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-120
1:479
is an odd number of affordable housing units, the extra
unit shall be a low-income unit. At least 13% of all
restricted rental units shall be very-low-income units
(affordable to a household earning 30% or less of median
income). The very-low-income units shall be counted as
part of the required number of low-income units within the
development.
[2] At least 25% of the obligation shall be met through rental
units, including at least half in rental units available to
families.
[3] A maximum of 25% of the Borough's obligation may be met
with age-restricted units. At least half of all affordable
units in the Borough's Plan shall be available to families.
[4] In each affordable development, at least 50% of the
restricted units within each bedroom distribution shall be
low-income units.
[5] Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall
be structured in conjunction with realistic market
demands such that:
[a] The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom
units shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and
moderate-income units;
[b] At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units
shall be two-bedroom units;
[c] At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units
shall be three-bedroom units; and
[d] The remaining units may be allocated among two- and
three-bedroom units at the discretion of the developer.
[6] Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be
structured such that the number of bedrooms shall equal
the number of age-restricted low- and moderate-income
units within the inclusionary development. The standard
may be met by having all one-bedroom units or by having a
two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
(2) Accessibility requirements:
(a) The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be
subject to the technical design standards of the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 (and N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14.23).
23.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:97 is reserved.
§ 97-120 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-120
1:480
(b) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units
in other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit
is attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the
following features:
[1] An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor;
[2] An adaptable kitchen on the first floor;
[3] An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor;
[4] An interior accessible route of travel shall not be required
between stories within an individual unit;
[5] An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a
door or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first
floor; and
[6] If not all of the foregoing requirements in Subsection
G(2)(b)[1] through [4] can be satisfied, then an interior
accessible route of travel must be provided between
stories within an individual unit, but if all of the terms of
Subsection G(2)(b)[1] through [4] above have been
satisfied, then an interior accessible route of travel shall
not be required between stories within an individual unit;
and
[7] An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a et seq.) and the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14,24 or
evidence that the Borough of Waldwick has collected funds
from the developer sufficient to make 10% of the
adaptable entrances in the development accessible:
[a] Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a disabled person who is
purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
[b] To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the Borough of Waldwick's affordable
housing trust fund sufficient to install accessible
entrances in 10% of the affordable units that have
been constructed with adaptable entrances.
[c] The funds deposited under Subsection G(2)(b)[7][b]
above shall be used by the Borough of Waldwick for
the sole purpose of making the adaptable entrance of
any affordable unit accessible when requested to do so
by a person with a disability who occupies or intends
24.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:97 is reserved.
§ 97-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-120
1:481
to occupy the unit and requires an accessible
entrance.
[d] The developer of the restricted units shall submit a
design plan and cost estimate for the conversion from
adaptable to accessible entrances to the Construction
Official of the Borough of Waldwick.
[e] Once the Construction Official has determined that
the design plan to convert the unit entrances from
adaptable to accessible meet the requirements of the
Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 (and N.J.A.C.
5:97-3.1425), and that the cost estimate of such
conversion is reasonable, payment shall be made to
the Borough of Waldwick's affordable housing trust
fund in care of the Municipal Treasurer (Chief
Financial Officer) who shall ensure that the funds are
deposited into the affordable housing trust fund and
appropriately earmarked.
[f] Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall
not be required where an entity can demonstrate that
it is site impracticable to meet the requirements.
Determinations of site impracticability shall be in
compliance with the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-7 (and N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.1426).
(3) Design:
(a) In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, low- and
moderate-income units shall be integrated with the market
units.
(b) In inclusionary developments, low- and moderate-income units
shall have access to all of the same common elements and
facilities as the market units.
(4) Maximum rents and sales prices.
(a) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing
units, the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set
forth in UHAC (and in COAH), utilizing the regional income
limits established by COAH or a successor entity, with the most
recent income limits being those established in 2018; said
limits shall automatically increase when the updated
Affordable Housing Regional Income Limits are adjusted.
(b) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households
25.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:97 is reserved.
26.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:97 is reserved.
§ 97-120 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-120
1:482
earning no more than 60% of median income, and the average
rent for restricted low- and moderate-income units shall be
affordable to households earning no more than 52% of median
income.
(c) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental
units shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for
both low-income and moderate-income units provided that at
least 13% of all low- and moderate-income rental units shall be
affordable to very-low-income households earning no more
than 30% of median income.
(d) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within
each affordable development shall be affordable to households
earning no more than 70% of median income, and each
affordable development must achieve an affordability average
of 55% for restricted ownership units; in achieving this
affordability average, moderate-income ownership units must
be available for at least three different sales prices for each
bedroom type, and low-income ownership units must be
available for at least two different sales prices for each
bedroom type.
(e) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance
with the affordability average requirements for restricted units
other than assisted living facilities and age-restricted
developments, the following standards shall be used:
[1] A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
[2] A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-onehalf-
person household;
[3] A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
[4] A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four-and-onehalf-
person household; and
[5] A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(f) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance
with the affordability average requirements for restricted units
in assisted living facilities and age-restricted developments,
the following standards shall be used:
[1] A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
[2] A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-onehalf-
person household; and
§ 97-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-120
1:483
[3] A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(g) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units
shall be calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the
unit, including principal and interest (based on a mortgage
loan equal to 95% of the purchase price and the Federal
Reserve H.15 rate of interest), taxes, homeowner and private
mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowner
association fees do not exceed 28% of the eligible monthly
income of the appropriate size household as determined under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and supplemented;
provided, however, that the price shall be subject to the
affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(h) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so
as not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the
appropriate household size including an allowance for tenantpaid
utilities, as determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may
be amended and supplemented; provided, however, that the
rent shall be subject to the affordability average requirement
of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may be amended and supplemented.
(i) The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units
may increase annually based on the percentage increase in the
regional median income limit for each housing region. In no
event shall the maximum resale price established by the
administrative agent be lower than the last recorded purchase
price.
(j) The rent of low- and moderate-income units may be increased
annually based on the permitted percentage increase in the
Housing Consumer Price Index for the United States. This
increase shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for units
constructed pursuant to low- income housing tax credit
regulations shall be indexed pursuant to the regulations
governing low-income housing tax credits.
H. Utilities.
(1) Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source as
market units within an inclusionary development.
(2) Tenant-paid utilities that are included in the utility allowance shall
be so stated in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility
allowance approved by DCA for its Section 8 program.
I. Affirmative marketing requirements.
§ 97-120 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-120
1:484
(1) The Borough of Waldwick shall adopt by resolution an Affirmative
Marketing Plan, subject to approval of the Court that is compliant
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15, as may be amended and supplemented.
(2) The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and
minority groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin,
ancestry, marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual
orientation, disability, age or number of children to housing units
which are being marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of
affordable housing. The affirmative marketing plan is also intended
to target those potentially eligible persons who are least likely to
apply for affordable units in that region. It is a continuing program
that directs all marketing activities toward Housing Region 2 and
covers the period of deed restriction.
(3) The affirmative marketing plan shall provide a regional preference
for all households that live and/or work in Housing Region 2
comprised of Bergen, Hudson, Passaic and Sussex Counties.
(4) The municipality has the ultimate responsibility for adopting the
Affirmative Marketing Plan and for the proper administration of the
affirmative marketing program, including initial sales and rentals
and resales and re-rentals. The administrative agent designated by
the Borough of Waldwick shall implement the Affirmative
Marketing Plan to assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable
units.
(5) In implementing the affirmative marketing plan, the administrative
agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and
moderate-income applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit
issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and
landlord/tenant law.
(6) The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall describe the media to be used
in advertising and publicizing the availability of housing. In
implementing the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the administrative
agent shall consider the use of language translations where
appropriate.
(7) The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units
shall begin at least four months (120 days) prior to the expected
date of occupancy.
(8) Applications for affordable housing shall be available in several
locations, including, at a minimum, the county administration
building and/or the county library for each county within the
housing region; the municipal administration building and the
municipal library in the municipality in which the units are located;
and the developer's rental office. Pre-applications shall be emailed
or mailed to prospective applicants upon request.
§ 97-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-120
1:485
(9) The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner,
unless otherwise determined or agreed to by Borough of Waldwick.
J. Occupancy standards.
(1) In referring certified households to specific restricted units, to the
extent feasible, and without causing an undue delay in occupying
the unit, the administrative agent shall strive to:
(a) Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
(b) Provide children of different sex with separate bedrooms;
(c) Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children; and
(d) Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single
bedroom.
(2) Additional provisions related to occupancy standards (if any) shall
be provided in the municipal operating manual.
K. Control periods for restricted ownership units and enforcement
mechanisms.
(1) Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and
supplemented, and each restricted ownership unit shall remain
subject to the requirements of this section for a period of at least 30
years until the Borough of Waldwick elects to release the unit from
such requirements; however, and prior to such action, a restricted
ownership unit must remain subject to the requirements of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented for at except that,
for any units approved after October 13, 2016, such controls shall
be for at least 50 years, or until such time after the initial fifty-year
period as the Borough of Waldwick elects to release the unit from
such requirements.
(2) The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to
the unit.
(3) Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the administrative agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine
the nonrestricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an
appraisal or the unit's equalized assessed value without the
restrictions in place.
(4) At the time of the initial sale of the unit, the initial purchaser shall
execute and deliver to the administrative agent a recapture note
obligating the purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs,
§ 97-120 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-120
1:486
successors and assigns) to repay, upon the first nonexempt sale
after the unit's release from the requirements of this section, an
amount equal to the difference between the unit's nonrestricted
fair market value and its restricted price, and the recapture note
shall be secured by a recapture lien evidenced by a duly recorded
mortgage on the unit.
(5) The affordability controls set forth in this section shall remain in
effect despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of
foreclosure with respect to restricted ownership units.
(6) A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the
Construction Official stating that the unit meets all code standards
upon the first transfer of title following the removal of the
restrictions provided under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be
amended and supplemented.
L. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units, homeowner
association fees and resale prices.
(1) Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, including:
(a) The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall
be approved by the administrative agent.
(b) The administrative agent shall approve all resale prices, in
writing and in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with
the foregoing standards.
(c) The master deeds of inclusionary developments shall provide
no distinction between the condominium or homeowner
association fees and special assessments paid by low- and
moderate-income purchasers and those paid by market
purchasers.
(d) The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for
the unit on the basis of capital improvements. Eligible capital
improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable for a
larger household or the addition of a bathroom.
M. Buyer income eligibility.
(1) Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than or
equal to 50% of median income and moderate-income ownership
§ 97-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-120
1:487
units shall be reserved for households with a gross household
income less than 80% of median income.
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the administrative agent
may, upon approval by the Borough Committee, and subject to the
Court's approval, permit moderate-income purchasers to buy lowincome
units in housing markets if the administrative agent
determines that there is an insufficient number of eligible lowincome
purchasers to permit prompt occupancy of the units. All
such low-income units to be sold to moderate-income households
shall retain the required pricing and pricing restrictions for lowincome
units.
(3) A certified household that purchases a restricted ownership unit
must occupy it as the certified household's principal residence and
shall not lease the unit; provided, however, that the administrative
agent may permit the owner of a restricted ownership unit, upon
application and a showing of hardship, to lease the restricted unit
to another certified household for a period not to exceed one year.
(4) The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the
unit, and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private
mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowner association
fees, as applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's
certified monthly income.
N. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership unit; subordination.
(1) Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the owner shall apply to the administrative agent
for a determination in writing that the proposed indebtedness
complies with the provisions of this section, and the administrative
agent shall issue such determination prior to the owner incurring
such indebtedness.
(2) With the exception of original (first) purchase money mortgages,
during a control period neither an owner nor a lender shall at any
time cause or permit the total indebtedness secured by a restricted
ownership unit to exceed 95% of the maximum allowable resale
price of that unit, as such price is determined by the administrative
agent in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6(b).
O. Capital improvements to ownership units.
(1) The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the
unit on the basis of capital improvements made since the purchase
of the unit. Eligible capital improvements shall be those that render
the unit suitable for a larger household or that adds an additional
§ 97-120 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-120
1:488
bathroom. In no event shall the maximum sales price of an
improved housing unit exceed the limits of affordability for the
larger household.
(2) Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit, all items of property
that are permanently affixed to the unit or were included when the
unit was initially restricted (for example, refrigerator, range,
washer, dryer, dishwasher, wall-to-wall carpeting) shall be included
in the maximum allowable resale price. Other items may be sold to
the purchaser at a reasonable price that has been approved by the
administrative agent at the time of the signing of the agreement to
purchase. The purchase of central air conditioning installed
subsequent to the initial sale of the unit and not included in the
base price may be made a condition of the unit resale provided the
price, which shall be subject to ten-year, straight-line depreciation,
has been approved by the administrative agent. Unless otherwise
approved by the administrative agent, the purchase of any property
other than central air conditioning shall not be made a condition of
the unit resale. The owner and the purchaser must personally
certify at the time of closing that no unapproved transfer of funds
for the purpose of selling and receiving property has taken place at
the time of or as a condition of resale.
P. Control periods for restricted rental units.
(1) Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented,
and each restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the
requirements of this section for a period of at least 30 years, until
Waldwick takes action to release the unit from such requirements.
Prior to such action, a restricted rental unit shall remain subject to
the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, except that, for any units approved after October
13, 2016, such controls shall be for at least 50 years, or until such
time after the initial fifty-year period as the Borough of Waldwick
elects to release the unit from such requirements. For new projects
receiving nine-percent low-income housing tax credits, a control
period of not less than a thirty-year compliance period plus a
fifteen-year extended use period shall be required.
(2) Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed
restriction shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records
office of the County of Bergen. The deed shall also identify each
affordable unit by apartment number and/or address and whether
that unit is designated as a very low, low or moderate income unit.
Neither the unit nor its affordability designation shall change
throughout the term of the deed restriction. A copy of the filed
document shall be provided to the administrative agent within 30
days of the receipt of a certificate of occupancy.
§ 97-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-120
1:489
(3) A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability
controls of this section, despite the occurrence of any of the
following events:
(a) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(b) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit;
or
(c) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure.
Q. Price restrictions for rental units; leases.
(1) A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units,
except for units in an assisted living residence, and tenants shall be
responsible for security deposits and the full amount of the rent as
stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease for each restricted
rental unit shall be provided to the administrative agent.
(2) No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover
the customary charges for food and services) without the express
written approval of the administrative agent.
(3) Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall
not exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit
and shall be payable to the administrative agent to be applied to
the costs of administering the controls applicable to the unit as set
forth in this section.
(4) No rent control ordinance or other pricing restriction shall be
applicable to either the market units or the affordable units in any
development in which at least 15% of the total number of dwelling
units are restricted rental units in compliance with this section.
R. Tenant income eligibility.
(1) Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(a) Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for households
with a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of
median income.
(b) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 50% of median
income.
(c) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households
with a gross household income less than 80% of median
income.
§ 97-120 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-120
1:490
(2) The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very-low-income,
low-income household or a moderate-income household, as
applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does not
exceed 35% (40% for age-restricted units) of the household's
eligible monthly income as determined pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.16, as may be amended and supplemented; provided,
however, that this limit may be exceeded if one or more of the
following circumstances exists:
(a) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross
household income for rent, and the proposed rent will reduce
its housing costs;
(b) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(c) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded
living conditions;
(d) The household documents the existence of assets with which
the household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
(e) The household documents proposed third-party assistance
from an outside sources such as a family member in a form
acceptable to the administrative agent and the owner of the
unit.
(3) The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in Subsection R(2)(a) through (e)
above with the administrative agent, who shall counsel the
household on budgeting.
S. Municipal Housing Liaison.
(1) The Borough of Waldwick shall appoint a specific municipal
employee to serve as a Municipal Housing Liaison responsible for
administering the affordable housing program, including
affordability controls, the Affirmative Marketing Plan, monitoring
and reporting, and, where applicable, supervising any contracted
administrative agent. Waldwick shall adopt an ordinance creating
the position of Municipal Housing Liaison. Waldwick shall adopt a
resolution appointing a Municipal Housing Liaison. The Municipal
Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the governing body and may
be a full- or part-time municipal employee. The Municipal Housing
Liaison shall be approved by the Court and shall be duly qualified
through a training program sponsored by Affordable Housing
Professionals of New Jersey before assuming the duties of
Municipal Housing Liaison.
§ 97-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-120
1:491
(2) The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight
and administration of the affordable housing program for
Waldwick, including the following responsibilities which may not be
contracted out to the administrative agent:
(a) Serving as Waldwick's primary point of contact for all inquiries
from the state, affordable housing providers, administrative
agents and interested households;
(b) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in Waldwick's Fair
Share Plan;
(c) Compiling, verifying and submitting annual monitoring reports
as may be required by the Court;
(d) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as needed; and
(e) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing at
least annually and more often as needed.
(3) Subject to the approval of the Court, the Borough of Waldwick shall
designate one or more administrative agent(s) to administer newly
constructed affordable units in accordance with UHAC. An
operating manual for each affordable housing program shall be
provided by the administrative agent(s) to be adopted by resolution
of the governing body and subject to approval of the Court. The
operating manual(s) shall be available for public inspection in the
office of the Borough Clerk, in the office of the Municipal Housing
Liaison, and in the office(s) of the administrative agent(s). The
Municipal Housing Liaison shall supervise the contracting
administrative agent(s).
T. Administrative agent.
(1) The administrative agent shall be an independent entity serving
under contract to and reporting to the municipality. For new sale
and rental developments, all of the fees of the administrative agent
shall be paid by the owners of the affordable units for which the
services of the administrative agent are required. For resales,
single-family homeowners and condominium homeowners shall be
required to pay 3% of the sales price for services provided by the
administrative agent related to the resale of their homes. That fee
shall be collected at closing and paid directly to the administrative
agent. The administrative agent shall perform the duties and
responsibilities of an administrative agent as set forth in UHAC,
including those set forth in §§ 5:80-26.14, 16 and 18 thereof, which
include:
(a) Affirmative marketing:
§ 97-120 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-120
1:492
(b) Conducting an outreach process to affirmatively market
affordable housing units in accordance with the Affirmative
Marketing Plan of the Borough of Waldwick and the provisions
of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
(c) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects
such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental
lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
(2) Household certification:
(a) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
(b) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(c) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(d) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(e) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located; and
(f) Employing a random selection process as provided in the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Borough of Waldwick when
referring households for certification to affordable units.
(3) Affordability controls:
(a) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
(b) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(c) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the Bergen County Register of Deeds or County
Clerk's office after the termination of the affordability controls
for each restricted unit;
(d) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
§ 97-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-120
1:493
(e) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
(4) Resales and Re-rentals:
(a) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or re-rental; and
(b) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or re-rental.
(5) Processing requests from unit owners:
(a) Reviewing and approving requests for determination from
owners of restricted units who wish to take out home equity
loans or refinance during the term of their ownership that the
amount of indebtedness to be incurred will not violate the
terms of this section;
(b) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the
depreciated cost of central air conditioning systems;
(c) Notifying the municipality of an owner's intent to sell a
restricted unit; and
(d) Making determinations on requests by owners of restricted
units for hardship waivers.
(6) Enforcement:
(a) Securing annually from the municipality a list of all affordable
housing units for which tax bills are mailed to absentee
owners, and notifying all such owners that they must either
move back to their unit or sell it;
(b) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the administrative agent;
(c) The posting annually in all rental properties, including twofamily
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent
together with the telephone number of the administrative
§ 97-120 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-120
1:494
agent where complaints of excess rent or other charges can be
made;
(d) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling
units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined
in N.J.A.C. 5:80- 26.18(d)4;
(e) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to
the municipality's Affordable Housing Trust Fund; and
(f) Creating and publishing a written operating manual for each
affordable housing program administered by the
administrative agent, to be approved by the Borough
Committee and the Court, setting forth procedures for
administering the affordability controls.
(7) Additional responsibilities:
(a) The administrative agent shall have the authority to take all
actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its
responsibilities hereunder.
(b) The administrative agent shall prepare monitoring reports for
submission to the Municipal Housing Liaison in time to meet
any monitoring, requirements and deadlines imposed by the
Court.
(c) The administrative agent shall attend continuing education
sessions on affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and
affirmative marketing at least annually and more often as
needed.
U. Enforcement of affordable housing regulations.
(1) Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations
governing the affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant the
municipality shall have all remedies provided at law or equity,
including but not limited to foreclosure, tenant eviction, municipal
fines, a requirement for household recertification, acceleration of
all sums due under a mortgage, recoupment of any funds from a
sale in the violation of the regulations, injunctive relief to prevent
further violation of the regulations, entry on the premises, and
specific performance.
(2) After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer
or tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the
municipality may take the following action against the owner,
developer or tenant for any violation that remains uncured for a
period of 60 days after service of the written notice:
(a) The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation, or violations, of the regulations
§ 97-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-120
1:495
governing the affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer
or tenant is found by the court to have violated any provision of
the regulations governing affordable housing units the owner,
developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the
following penalties, at the discretion of the court:
[1] A fine of not more than $500 per day or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days, or both. Each and every day
that the violation continues or exists shall be considered a
separate and specific violation of these provisions and not
as a continuing offense;
[2] In the case of an owner who has rented his/her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units, payment into the
Borough of Waldwick Affordable Housing Trust Fund of
the gross amount of rent illegally the collected;
[3] In the case of an owner who has rented his/her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units, payment of an
innocent tenant's reasonable relocation costs, as
determined by the court.
(b) The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment, which would result in the termination of
the owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of
a mortgage foreclosure. Any judgment shall be enforceable as
if the same were a judgment of default of the first purchase
money mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the lowand
moderate-income unit.
(3) Such judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
municipality, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at which
time the low- and moderate-income unit of the violating owner shall
be sold at a sale price which is not less than the amount necessary
to fully satisfy and pay off any first purchase money mortgage and
prior liens and the costs of the enforcement proceedings incurred
by the municipality, including attorney's fees. The violating owner
shall have the right to possession terminated as well as the title
conveyed pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
(4) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to satisfy the
first purchase money mortgage lien and any prior liens upon the
low- and moderate-income unit. The excess, if any, shall be applied
to reimburse the municipality for any and all costs and expenses
incurred in connection with either the court action resulting in the
judgment of violation or the Sheriff's sale. In the event that the
proceeds from the Sheriff's sale are insufficient to reimburse the
municipality in full as aforesaid, the violating owner shall be
personally responsible for and to the extent of such deficiency, in
§ 97-120 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-120
1:496
addition to any and all costs incurred by the municipality in
connection with collecting such deficiency. In the event that a
surplus remains after satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if
any, shall be placed in escrow by the municipality for the owner and
shall be held in such escrow for a maximum period of two years
or until such earlier time as the owner shall make a claim with the
municipality for such. Failure of the owner to claim such balance
within the two-year period shall automatically result in a forfeiture
of such balance to the municipality. Any interest accrued or earned
on such balance while being held in escrow shall belong to and
shall be paid to the municipality, whether such balance shall be
paid to the owner or forfeited to the municipality.
(5) Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units shall not extinguish the
restrictions of the regulations governing affordable housing units
as the same apply to the low- and moderate-income unit. Title shall
be conveyed to the purchaser at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the
restrictions and provisions of the regulations governing the
affordable housing unit. The owner determined to be in violation of
the provisions of this plan and from whom title and possession were
taken by means of the Sheriff's sale shall not be entitled to any
right of redemption.
(6) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient
amounts are bid to satisfy the first purchase money mortgage and
any prior liens, the municipality may acquire title to the low- and
moderate-income unit by satisfying the first purchase money
mortgage and any prior liens and crediting the violating owner with
an amount equal to the difference between the first purchase
money mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the enforcement
proceedings, including legal fees and the maximum resale price for
which the low- and moderate-income unit could have been sold
under the terms of the regulations governing affordable housing
units. This excess shall be treated in the same manner as the excess
which would have been realized from an actual sale as previously
described.
(7) Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold at
the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality shall obligate the
owner to accept an offer to purchase from any qualified purchaser
which may be referred to the owner by the municipality, with such
offer to purchase being equal to the maximum resale price of the
low- and moderate-income unit as permitted by the regulations
governing affordable housing units.
(8) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable for
complying with the terms and restrictions of governing affordable
housing units until such time as title is conveyed from the owner.
V. Appeals.
§ 97-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-120
1:497
§ 97-121. General Provisions.
§ 97-121.1. Applicability.
Each of the provisions of this section shall apply to all zone districts unless
otherwise stated.
§ 97-121.2. Accessory buildings, structures, utility sheds and uses.
(1) Appeals from all decisions of an administrative agent designated
pursuant to this section shall be filed in writing with the Court.
A. Accessory buildings, structures, emergency generators, or uses as part
of principal buildings. Any building, structure, emergency generator, or
use, or any part of a building, structure, or use attached to a principal
building, whether temporary or permanent, shall adhere to the yard
requirement for the principal building. [Amended 05-27-14 by Ord.
13-14]
B. Construction after principal building. No accessory building, structure
or use may be built on any lot on which there is no principal building or
structure.
C. Distance from adjacent buildings. No portion of an accessory building,
structure, or use (except for utility sheds as regulated by 97-121.2I)
shall be closer to an adjacent building on the same lot than ten (10) feet
or the height of said accessory building, whichever is greater.
D. Distance from property lines. No accessory building, structure,
emergency generator, or use (except for utility sheds as regulated by
97-121.2I) shall be located within the front yard. Accessory buildings,
structures, emergency generators, or uses shall comply with the
minimum distance from the side and rear property lines as contained in
the schedule. [Amended 05-27-14 by Ord. 13-14]
E. Height. No accessory building, structure, or use (except for utility
sheds as regulated by 97-121.2I) shall exceed one (1) story or the height
contained in the schedule for the district in which it is located, except
for accessory buildings, structures, or uses constructed in connection
with agricultural uses.
F. Area of accessory buildings, structures or uses. The total ground floor
area of all accessory buildings, structures, or uses shall not exceed the
ground floor area of the principal building and may not occupy more
than twenty-five percent (25%) of the required rear yard, whichever is
smaller. Agricultural and horticultural buildings, structures or uses may
be excluded from these requirements.
G. Corner and Flag lots. Accessory buildings, structures, emergency
generators, or uses on corner and flag lots may not be erected nearer to
the street than the front yard required on the adjacent lot. [Amended
05-27-14 by Ord. 13-14]
§ 97-120 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-121.2
1:498
§ 97-121.3. Agricultural uses.
§ 97-121.4. Appearance of buildings.
Within any residential district no building where a permitted professional
office or home occupation is to be located shall be constructed or altered in
H. Dwellings prohibited. No accessory building, structure, or use shall be
used as a dwelling.
I. Utility sheds. A utility shed shall be exempt from the provision of §
97-121.2C, D and E, provided that it is located on a lot whose principal
building is a residence; and it is located no closer than ten (10) feet to
any adjacent building; and it is located in the rear yard at a minimum
three-foot setback from the rear lot line and interior side line. No utility
shed shall be greater than ten (10) feet in height, or larger than one
hundred forty-four (144) square feet. [Added 6-10-86 by Ord. No.
15-86]
J. Except during the course of an emergency, emergency generators shall
only be utilized or tested between 9:00 am and 8:00 pm any day of the
week. [Added 05-27-14 by Ord. 13-14]
A. Agricultural buildings, including customary accessory structures, shall
be at least one hundred (100) feet from any property line.
B. Permitted agricultural uses shall be principally for the raising of field
and garden crops, and for vineyards and orchard farming.
C. The raising and breeding of livestock shall be prohibited.
D. Agricultural uses on five (5) acres or more shall be permitted incidental
farm animals, provided that they are housed and kept in a manner
which will not constitute a public nuisance.
1. The following ratios of animals per acre of land exclusive of the first
acre shall be complied with:
a. Cattle, horses and ponies: one to one (1:1).
b. Swine, sheep and goats: five to one (5:1).
c. Fowl: five to one (5:1).
2. These regulations shall not apply to house pets.
E. Provided that the lot involved consists of two (2) acres or more, the
keeping of one (1) horse for riding purposes is permitted. The keeping
of one (1) additional horse for riding purposes is permitted for each one
(1) acre in the lot involved over the minimum of two (2) acres.
F. The sale of farm produce grown and produced on the same property is
permitted, provided that said property has an area of at least five (5)
acres.
§ 97-121.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-121.4
1:499
a manner so that its exterior design and appearance are not compatible and
harmonious with a normal exterior residential appearance.
§ 97-121.5. Area or space required.
No lot, yard, parking area or other open space shall be so reduced in
area or dimension as to make it less than the minimum required under
this ordinance. No lot, yard or parking area or other open space which
is already less than the minimum required under this ordinance shall be
further reduced in area or dimension.
§ 97-121.6. Building identification.
All principal buildings in all districts shall be clearly identified as to street
numbers, in accordance with the Borough of Waldwick Street Numbering
Ordinance, by means of a small unobstructed sign clearly visible and legible
from the main abutting street. The Official Waldwick Street Numbering Map
shall be used for selection of street numbers assigned by the Borough tax
assessor. Street numbers shall be placed only on the side of a building for
which the tax department has determined the street address.
§ 97-121.7. Number of principal residential buildings per lot.
No lot shall have erected upon it more than one (1) principal residential
building except in the case of multifamily dwelling projects as permitted by
this ordinance.
§ 97-121.8. (Reserved)
§ 97-121.9. Building permits pending.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans, construction
or designated use for which a building permit has heretofore been issued
and the construction of which shall have been diligently pursued within the
applicable period of time regulated by the State of New Jersey.
§ 97-121.10. Building setback and yards.
A. All front yards must face upon a public street or private street approved
by the Planning Board or the Borough Council. On streets less than fifty
(50) feet in width, the required front yard shall be increased by one-half
(1/2) of the difference between the width of the street and fifty (50) feet.
If a width greater than fifty (50) feet is shown on the adopted Master
Plan or Official Map, the required front yard shall be increased by onehalf
(1/2) of the difference between the width of the street and said
greater width. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply if an
established setback of fifty (50) feet had been formed for a distance of
five hundred (500) feet in either direction of the proposed lot.
B. Front, side and rear building locations within five (5) feet of the
minimum setback requirements of this section shall be surveyed and
§ 97-121.4 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-121.10
1:500
§ 97-121.11. Conversion of dwellings.
The conversion of any existing dwelling to a business or industrial use shall
comply with the district regulations of this ordinance and shall be subject to
the review and approval of a site plan prior to the issuance of the building
permit or certificate of occupancy.
§ 97-121.12. Corner lots.
Where a lot is bounded by more than one (1) street the front yard setback
shall be taken along the side on which the main entrance is located; the
side yard setback shall not be less than seventy percent (70%) of the front
yard requirement in the district or conform to the setback line established
along the same side of the street within five hundred (500) feet, whichever
is greater. On corner lots, the average lot depth measured from any abutting
street shall not be less than one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the
required minimum lot width.
§ 97-121.13. Dangerous conditions; incongruous buildings.
No permit shall be granted for a building or use if the design or construction
of the same is likely to involve exceptional risk of traffic congestion, public
safety or hazard, nor shall a permit be issued for a building or use if
the design or construction of same is so markedly incongruous with the
character of the neighborhood as to materially affect the value of adjacent
property.
§ 97-121.14. Display of goods for sale. [Deleted on January 22, 1994
by Ord. No. 2-94]
§ 97-121.15. Driveways.
certified by a licensed engineer or land surveyor. The survey may be
performed at any time prior to the erection of a building above the
foundation. A certified copy of the survey shall be presented to the
Building Inspector when the foundation of the building is complete.
C. On corner lots the front yard shall be construed as the yard on which
the main entrance to the dwelling faces and the rear yard shall be the
yard opposite the front yard. If a building is located diagonally on a lot
facing two (2) streets, the yard adjoining both streets, shall comply with
the front yard requirement.
A. Residential driveways shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in width; except
that circular driveways extending from a driveway of twenty (20) feet in
width shall be no wider than eleven (11) feet. The minimum setback to a
property line shall be three (3) feet.
B. No driveway shall provide access to a lot located in another district,
which lot is used for any use prohibited in the district in which such
driveway is located.
§ 97-121.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-121.16
1:501
§ 97-121.16. Existing uses.
Except as specified in § 97-125 of this ordinance, any use, building, sign
or structure existing at the time of the enactment of this ordinance may
be continued, even though such use, building, sign or structure may not
conform with the provisions of this ordinance for the district in which it is
located.
§ 97-121.17. Groundwater supplies.
§ 97-121.18. Landfill.
All lots being filled shall be filled with topsoil and/or clean fill to allow
complete surface draining of the lot into local storm sewer systems. No
construction shall be permitted which creates or aggravates water
stagnation or a drainage problem.
A. Distance restriction for structures near supplies. No building or
structure shall be erected in any zone district of the Borough of
Waldwick within fifty (50) feet of any well, infiltration gallery, spring or
similar source of groundwater now or hereafter developed for a public
water supply system.
B. Special requirements for sanitary sewer construction near supplies. No
sewer or line carrying sanitary or industrial waste located within one
hundred (100) feet of any well, infiltration gallery, spring or other
similar source of groundwater now or hereafter developed for a public
water supply system may be installed in any zone district in the
Borough of Waldwick unless the same shall be of steel-reinforced
concrete, cast iron or other similar material, properly protected and of
completely watertight construction and other constructed in
accordance with the Rules and Regulations for the Preparation and
Submission of Plans for Public Water Supply Systems and Water
Treatment Plants now or hereafter issued by the New Jersey State
Department of Health.
C. District restriction for sanitary sewer manholes and connections. No
manholes or connections on a sanitary sewer system shall be permitted
within one hundred (100) feet of any well now or hereafter developed
for a public water supply system in any zone district in the Borough of
Waldwick.
D. Public water systems. "Public water system" is defined as a system
comprising structures which, operating alone or with other structures,
result in the derivation, conveyance, transmission or distribution of
water for potable or domestic purposes to consumers in twenty (20) or
more dwellings or properties.
§ 97-121.16 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-121.19
1:502
§ 97-121.19. Landscaping.
All properties shall be suitably landscaped, except for areas covered by
buildings or surfaced as parking or service areas. All landscaping shall be
properly maintained throughout the life of any use on any lot.
§ 97-121.20. Land use.
The control and regulation of the uses of buildings and structures as herein
provided shall equally apply to the nature and extent of the use of the land.
§ 97-121.21. Lighting and sound systems.
The provisions of this section shall apply to all principal and accessory uses
or activities permitted within a residential district or within two hundred
(200) feet of a residential district boundary line.
§ 97-121.22. Lot width.
The minimum lot width as set forth in the schedule shall be measured in the
following manner:
§ 97-121.23. Natural features preserved.
No structure shall be built within fifty (50) feet of the bed of a stream. No
building shall be constructed on land subject to periodic overflow or on land
which has an average water table within two (2) feet of the ground surface.
No person shall strip, excavate or otherwise remove topsoil for sale or other
use other than on the premises from which taken, except in accordance with
the construction or alteration of a building on such premises and excavating
or grading incidental thereto or except as hereinafter specified. Existing
natural features such as trees, brooks, drainage channels and views shall be
retained. Whenever such features interfere with the proposed use of such
property a retention of the maximum amount of such features consistent
A. Any outdoor lighting shall be adequately shielded and directed away
from the adjoining properties.
B. Any public address system or loud speaker device which can be heard
beyond the property line is specifically prohibited.
A. Irregularly shaped lots. In the case of irregularly shaped lots, the
minimum lot width specified in the schedule may be measured at the
building line, provided that in no case shall the lot frontage measured at
the street right-of-way line be less than fifty percent (50%) of the
minimum lot width requirement or fifty (50) feet, whichever is the
greater.
B. Frontage along curves. Lot frontage shall be measured along the street
right-of-way line at a public street. The measurement of lot frontage
along curves shall be taken in a straight line between the two (2) side
lot lines, along the chord, and not measured along the arc of the curve.
§ 97-121.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-121.23
1:503
with the use of the property shall be required wherever possible at the
discretion of the Planning Board. Natural waterways are not to be altered.
§ 97-121.24. Outdoor storage.
§ 97-121.25. Temporary storage units.
A. No outdoor storage of materials, or storage of vehicles, trailers or other
such equipment shall be permitted in the front yard in any zone. This
should not be considered to prohibit the use of a designated commercial
parking area within a front yard for customer and employee parking.
B. No article or material shall be kept, stored or displayed outside the
confines of a building unless the same is so screened by fences, walls or
plantings so that it cannot be visible from the public street or adjoining
property.
C. Outdoor storage of materials, vehicles, trailers or other such equipment
shall be limited to items associated with the principal use of a property.
D. In all nonresidential zones, outdoor storage is only permitted in rear
yard, as herein regulated. No articles, equipment, vehicles, supplies or
materials shall be kept, stored or displayed outside the confines of any
building unless and until the same are screened by special planting or
fencing, as approved by the Planning Board, and maintained in good
condition, so that they shall not be visible from any adjacent property or
public street. Any fence required to screen the outdoor storage of
flammable material otherwise permitted by this ordinance shall not be
closer than twenty (20) feet to any property line on the lot upon which it
is erected.
A. No person shall place upon their property or upon any premises in the
Borough a temporary storage unit, unless the owner of the premises
has previously obtained a temporary storage unit permit from the
Borough Zoning Official.
B. Application for such temporary storage unit shall be in writing and shall
be presented to the Zoning Official and state the following:
1. Name and address of the owner of the property;
2. Name and address of the applicant;
3. If the applicant is different from the owner, an affidavit from the
owner that the applicant has permission to request such permit;
4. Description of the temporary storage unit
a. Size;
b. Borough Zone in which temporary storage unit is to be located;
and
§ 97-121.23 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-121.25
1:504
5. An executed statement indicating that the applicant understands
and agrees that this storage unit is temporary in nature and the
applicant has read the ordinance regulating the same.
C. The cost for such temporary storage unit permit shall be twenty dollars
($20) and submitted to the Zoning Official with the application. Any
extension requested pursuant to Subsection 7 below shall be an
additional ten dollars ($10) which shall be submitted with the extension
request.
D. The temporary storage unit shall be placed in a location as directed by
the Zoning Official and preference shall be given to locating the
temporary storage unit in the rear yard.
E. The application shall be reviewed by the Zoning Official who shall
review the application for completeness and issue said permit within
seven (7) business days of filing.
F. The temporary storage unit shall be temporary in nature and unless
approved by the Planning Board, no temporary storage unit shall be
placed or remain on the same premises more than one hundred and
twenty (120) days, cumulatively, within a twelve (12) month period. The
start date of the time period shall be the date delivery, as shown on the
delivery ticket, which must be supplied to the Zoning Official upon
request.
G. The temporary storage unit permit shall be granted for an initial period
of no more than sixty (60) days, however, two thirty (30) day extensions
of the permit may be granted, but in no case shall more than two (2)
extensions be granted unless otherwise approved by the Planning
Board. After expiration of the initial time period as well as the two (2)
extensions, if additional time is still required, the applicant may submit
such an application to the Planning Board for consideration. Such
application must be submitted to the Planning Board within fourteen
(14) days of the expiration of the second extension so as to have the
matter heard prior to or as close as possible to the expiration of the
maximum one hundred and twenty (120) day period as set forth in
Subsection 6 above.
H. No more than one (1) temporary storage unit shall be placed upon any
single lot at any one (1) time, and the temporary storage unit shall not
exceed sixteen (16) feet in length.
I. If upon expiration of the permit period, the temporary storage unit has
not been removed and remains on the premises, the Zoning Official
shall notify the applicant and the property owner that they have five (5)
days to correct such violation. Said notification shall be sent via regular
and certified mail and if the violation is not remedied, a summons shall
be issued.
§ 97-121.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-121.26
1:505
§ 97-121.26. Refuse storage.
The storage of refuse outside a structure shall be in tightly closed
containers located no closer than ten (10) feet to the property line or
the setback prescribed for accessory buildings in that district whichever
is greater. All areas providing for the outside storage of refuse shall be
screened so that it is not visible from the public street or adjoining property.
§ 97-121.27. Trucks; parking in residential districts. [Amended
2-28-84 by Ord. No. 2-84]
Not more than one (1) truck or commercial vehicle owned or used by
a resident shall be parked or stored outside overnight in any residential
zone; provided, however, that no truck which is licensed by a state for a
gross weight of such vehicle and load exceeding eight thousand (8,000)
pounds shall be parked or stored overnight in any residential zone. In
addition, the washing and maintenance of commercial vehicles is prohibited
on residential property.
§ 97-121.28. Visibility. [Amended 10-14-97 by Ord. No. 20-97]
On any corner lot in any residential zone, no structure, (except for fences
conforming to the requirements of § 97-123.3) planting or shrubbery over
thirty (30) inches in height above the level of the pavement of the roadway,
except deciduous trees, shall be erected or maintained within twenty-five
(25) feet of the intersection formed by the projections of the two (2) street
side lines at the corner so as to interfere with traffic visibility across the
corner. All trees adjoining street side lines in all zones shall have their
branches trimmed at all times to ensure unobstructed vision eight (8) feet
above street pavement level. This section of this ordinance shall be enforced
by the Police Department of the Borough of Waldwick.
§ 97-122. Exceptions and Modifications.
§ 97-122.1. Exceptions to height limits.
No part of a building or structure may exceed the building height limits
defined elsewhere in these ordinances with the following exceptions and
clarifications:
1) Housings or roof structures, including but not limited to, elevators,
stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, air-conditioning equipment required
to operate and maintain a building, fire walls or parapet walls,
skylights, towers, chimneys, cupolas, smoke stacks, monuments, water
tanks, silos or similar structures may be erected above the height limits
permitted by this ordinance provided that they are adequately screened
or decorative in nature, but in no case more than twenty-five percent
(25%) more than the maximum height permitted in the district.
2) Spires and steeples on building for the exclusive use of non-profit and
religious institutions may be approved through the site plan process but
§ 97-121.26 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-122.1
1:506
§ 97-122.2. Exceptions to area requirements.
§ 97-122.3. (Reserved) [Exceptions to corner lot requirements, was
repealed 3-36-85 by Ord. No. 3-85]
§ 97-122.4. Exceptions to frontage requirements.
For residential lots not fronting on a public road:
in no case more than 50% the maximum building height limits in that
district.
3) Roof mounted flagpoles on a building may not exceed twenty-five
percent (25%) of the building height limits for any district.
4) Antennas for broadcast reception, amateur radio, and similar uses shall
be located to minimize visual impact on the neighborhood. In no case
shall any part of the structure or antennas mounted thereon be closer
than ten feet from any property line. Any antenna must comply with any
regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, the Federal
Aviation Authority and must comply with any other applicable federal or
state statues or regulations.
A. Contiguous lots. Whenever title to two (2) or more contiguous lots is
held by the same owner, regardless of whether or not each of said lots
have been approved as portions of a major subdivision or acquired by
separate conveyance or by other operation of law, and one (1) or more
of said individual lots should, by reason of exceptional narrowness,
shallowness, topographical conditions, substandard area or yard space,
not conform with the minimum lot area and dimensional requirements
of the zone in which it is located, the contiguous lots of said owner, for
the purpose of this ordinance, shall be considered as a single lot, and
the provisions of this ordinance shall hold.
B. Deficient because of dedication. Whenever land has been dedicated to
the Borough by a lot owner to meet the minimum street width
requirements of this chapter or to implement the Official Map (Chapter
61 of the Borough of Waldwick Municipal Code) or Master Plan of the
Borough, the Building Inspector shall issue building and occupancy
permits for the lot whose depth and/or areas are rendered substandard
in area only because of such dedication and where the owner has no
other adjacent land to provide the minimum requirements.
A. Where an existing single-family use is set back a greater distance than
the minimum lot depth required for that district and has access from a
public street by means of a private lane, the required frontage on a
public road may be reduced to not less than fifty (50) feet, if such
reduction will not adversely affect the development of the remaining
undeveloped land, and as long as any such frontage reduction shall be
measured at the street line and the side lines perpendicular to such
frontage so that the lot area created is reasonably suited for the
§ 97-122.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-122.4
1:507
§ 97-122.5. Exceptions to front and side yards.
Uses may be located closer to the street right-of-way than required in
the schedule but only where the pattern of existing buildings within three
hundred (300) feet on either side of the lot on the same side of the street
is established at a closer distance. Such new buildings may then be built
no closer to the street line than the average setbacks of these existing
buildings but no closer than the adjoining buildings. Undersized lots where
§ 97-122.2 is not applicable may be permitted a reduction in the side yard
requirements in proportion to the width of the undersized lot related to the
minimum requirements of this ordinance; however, in no case shall any side
yard be less than five (5) feet.
§ 97-122.6. Exceptions to frontage on curves.
Where roads or streets are curved, the measurement of lot width may be
met at the building setback line, but in no case may the lot frontage at the
street line be less than one-half (1/2) of the required lot width or fifty (50)
feet, whichever is the greater.
§ 97-122.7. Exceptions in application or site plan regulations.
The Planning Board, when acting upon applications for preliminary or minor
subdivision approval or preliminary site plan approval, shall have the power
to grant such exceptions from requirements for subdivision or site plan
approval as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent
of the provisions for subdivision and/or site plan revision and approval of
an ordinance adopted pursuant to this ordinance, if the literal enforcement
of one (1) or more provisions of the ordinance is impractical or will exact
undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in
question.
§ 97-123. Special Regulations.
construction and used as a private lane and possible development of a
Borough road.
B. The remainder of the lot, exclusive of the private lane, shall meet all
requirements of the schedule for the district in which it is located.
C. In the event that an additional lot be located and developed on such
private lane and said private lane becomes the access road for the
additional lot, the owner of the private lane shall, at his/her own
expense, pave and improve and dedicate to the Borough said private
lane in accordance with all Borough standards regulating street
construction and the provisions of Article VIII, Subdivision of Land.
Furthermore, such road improvements shall be made prior to the
issuance of a building permit for the additional dwelling.
§ 97-122.4 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.1
1:508
§ 97-123.1. Boats; trailers; disabled vehicles.
Except as provided below, in the Borough of Waldwick the outside storage
or parking and use of a boat, recreational vehicle, trailer (box trailer or
utility trailer) or disabled vehicle by any person or persons is hereby
prohibited in all districts.
A. Parking and storage of boats and recreational vehicles. The outside
parking and storing of boats and recreational vehicles in any zone shall
be permitted subject to the following restrictions and regulations:
1. All recreational vehicles, boats or boat trailers shall be stored in
the side or rear yard only. No recreational vehicle, boat or boat
trailer shall be parked or stored in the front yard of a lot or in front
of the front yard building line.
2. Any recreational vehicle, boat or boat trailer parked in the side or
rear yard of a lot shall meet the requirements and regulations
applicable to accessory buildings.
3. Any recreational vehicle, boat or boat trailer parked or stored in a
side or rear yard and not in an enclosed garage shall be screened
from view of any adjoining street or property. Such screening shall
not exceed six (6) feet and shall consist of a wall, dense shrubbery,
fence or other attractive material. Such screening may be waived if
topographic or other physical conditions would render the
screening ineffective.
4. The area devoted to the storage of boats or recreational vehicles
shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the lot area or four hundred
(400) square feet, whichever is the lesser.
5. The area in which any recreational vehicle, boat or boat trailer is to
be parked or stored shall not preempt any off-street parking space
required to be provided by any provision of this ordinance.
6. At no time shall a stored recreational vehicle be occupied or used
for working, living, sleeping or storage purposes.
B. Use of temporary storage trailers in connection with site construction.
The use of temporary storage trailers in any zone in connection with a
temporary construction field office shall be permitted subject to the
following restrictions and regulations:
1. Such trailers shall be located on the lot on which construction is
progressing and shall not be located within twenty-five (25) feet of
the boundary line of any abutting residential lot.
2. Such trailers shall be used only as field offices and not for any
dwelling use whatsoever.
3. Such trailers shall not be moved onto a construction site until a
date on or after which construction actually commences and shall
§ 97-123.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.1
1:509
§ 97-123.2. Cluster development.
Cluster development shall be permitted subject to Planning Board site
plan approval in the districts permitting such use subject to the following
regulations. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to require the
Planning Board to approve any subdivision employing cluster development
standards if said subdivision is in conflict with any provision of the Waldwick
Master Plan or if said subdivision will in any way result in a land use pattern
that will adversely affect that portion of the Borough in which it lies.
be removed from such site on or before the completion of
construction.
4. A permit for the location and use of such trailer shall be obtained
from the Zoning Officer. Such a permit shall be renewed every six
(6) months.
C. Disabled and nonregistered vehicles. Disabled and/or nonregistered
vehicles may not be stored longer than seventy-two (72) hours in any
zone except in an enclosed garage unless the same are awaiting repair
at a licensed public garage or unless the same are new vehicles being
stored or displayed at a licensed motor vehicle dealership. For the
purpose of this ordinance, the term "disabled" shall refer to a motor
vehicle which is in such a state of disrepair that it cannot readily be
made operable and conforming to all requirements of the New Jersey
Division of Motor Vehicles.
A. Area and bulk requirements. Within the R-1 Single-Family Residential
District cluster development proposals shall be subject to the following
regulations:
1. The number of proposed dwelling units in such cluster
developments shall be no greater than if proposed as a
conventional subdivision.
2. One-third (1/3) of the total tract area must be devoted to open
space and for public uses which area shall be subtracted from the
total tract area before streets and lots are delineated.
3. The minimum tract area for which cluster development standards
may be applied for shall not be less than five (5) acres.
4. Fifty percent (50%) of the lots may be ten thousand (10,000) square
feet in area but in no case shall the average lot size be less than
twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. [Amended 3-26-85 by Ord.
No. 3-85]
5. The minimum lot width shall be seventy-five (75) feet.
6. All buildings shall comply with the minimum required yard areas
for principal and accessory buildings.
§ 97-123.1 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.2
1:510
B. Open space. Lands to be devoted to public purpose and accepted by the
Borough shall be deeded to the Borough of Waldwick. Land to be used
as common open space by all homeowners and tenants shall be deeded
to a duly created homeowners' association. Lands reserved as open
space shall be subject to the following regulations:
1. No area to be deeded to the Borough or reserved as open space
under terms of this ordinance shall be less than one (1) acre unless
said area is to be joined to an existing parcel of Borough land or
unless a smaller area is shown on the Master Plan or Official Map of
the Borough.
2. The area deeded to the Borough or reserved as open space under
the terms of this ordinance shall be used only for one (1) or more of
the following purposes:
a. Undeveloped public open space.
b. Recreational facilities.
c. Public schools and school grounds.
d. Public uses designated for the property in question on the
Master Plan.
3. The area to be deeded to the Borough or reserved as open space
under the terms of this section shall be at a location and of a shape
as required by the Planning Board, provided that:
a. Said area shall adequately accommodate one (1) or more of the
permitted uses listed above and shall complement the existing
and contemplated future surrounding development.
b. Said area shall be adaptable to the above permitted uses
without undue public expenditure that might be required by
reason of adverse topography, adverse drainage or slope
conditions or inadequate accessibility.
C. Homeowners' association.
1. The dedication of open space land, streets or other land in common
ownership of the homeowners' association shall be absolute,
perpetual and not subject to reversion for possible future use or
further development. Membership in a homeowners' association by
all property owners shall be mandatory, such required membership
and the responsibilities upon the members shall be in writing
between the homeowners' association and the individual in the
form of a covenant, each member agreeing to their liability for their
pro rata share of the association's costs and providing that the
Borough shall be a part beneficiary to such covenant entitled to
enforce its provisions. Such association shall be responsible for
liability insurance, local taxes, maintenance of land deeded to them
and any facilities that may be erected on this land. The property
§ 97-123.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.2
1:511
owners in the approved homeowners' association shall pay their
pro rata share of the cost for providing liability insurance, local
taxes, and maintenance of such deeded open land and recreation
facilities upon it. The assessment levied by the association may
become a lien on the private properties in the development. The
duly created homeowners' association shall be allowed to adjust
the assessment to meet changing needs, and any deeded land may
be sold, donated or in any other way conveyed to the Borough for
a public purpose only, i.e., schools, parks, municipal facilities and
other public uses.
2. The homeowners' association, initially created by the developer,
shall clearly describe in its bylaws the rights and obligations of any
homeowner in the cluster development, along with the covenants
and model deeds, the articles of incorporation of the association
and any other information that the Borough and its attorney may
deem necessary for the protection of all parties concerned prior to
the granting of final approval by the Planning Board.
3. The developer shall assume all responsibility for the homeowners'
association until a majority of the dwelling sites are sold at which
time the homeowners' association shall be automatically
established. Provisions shall be made to ensure that control of the
homeowners' association shall be transferred to the individual
homeowners in the development at such time as the lot owners, on
the basis of one (1) vote per lot, shall represent two-thirds (2/3) of
the total number of votes.
4. Prior to site plan approval the developer shall file with Borough
Council a performance bond to ensure the proper installation of all
recreation and park improvements shown on the site plan and a
maintenance bond to ensure the proper maintenance of all common
lands until the homeowners' association has been established. The
amount and period of said bond shall be determined by the
Planning Board and the form, sufficiency, manner of execution and
security shall be approved by the Borough Attorney and Borough
Council.
5. In the event that the organization established to own and maintain
common open space shall, at any time after establishment of the
cluster development, fail to maintain the common open space in
reasonable order and condition in accordance with the plan, the
Borough may serve notice, hold hearings and enter upon said
common open space in order to maintain the same, and the cost of
such maintenance by the Borough shall be assessed
proportionately against the properties within the cluster
development that have a right of enjoyment of the common open
space and shall become a tax lien on said properties.
6. In the event that the organization established to own and maintain
stormwater management facilities shall, at any time after
§ 97-123.2 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.2
1:512
§ 97-123.3. Fences and walls.
establishment of the cluster development, fail to maintain the
stormwater management facilities in reasonable order and
condition in accordance with the plan, the Borough may serve
notice, hold hearings and enter upon said stormwater management
facilities in order to maintain the same, and the cost of such
maintenance by the Borough shall be assessed proportionately
against the properties within the cluster development and shall
become a tax lien on said properties.
A. In any district on any corner lot, no fence, wall, sign, structure or other
obstruction of vision shall be erected or maintained in any front yard.
Shrubbery, trees, bushes and other natural growth is allowed except
where the height of same obstructs visibility at a corner as regulated by
§ 97-121.28.
B. On any lot, except as provided in Subsection A, in any residential
district, no fence of a solid type of either wooden or masonry
construction, less than seventy-five percent (75%) open, shall be more
than thirty (30) inches high in the required front yard area, and any
fence seventy-five percent (75%) or more open may be four (4) feet high
in the front yard. In the side and rear yards, any type of fence is
permissible up to six (6) feet in height. Plantings used as screening/
fencing in driveway areas must not create an obstruction to a clear
view.
C. No fence around residential property shall be erected of barbed wire,
topped with metal spikes or constructed of any material or in any
manner which may be dangerous to persons or animals.
D. Every fence shall be maintained in a safe, sound, upright condition and
in accordance with the approved plan on file with the Building
Inspector.
E. All fences must be erected within the property lines, with the finished
side facing the street or adjoining property, and no fences shall be
erected so as to encroach upon a public right-of-way.
F. The foregoing restrictions shall not be applied so as to prevent the
erection of an open wire fence not exceeding eight (8) feet in height
above ground level anywhere within public park, public playground or
public school properties. These restrictions shall not be applied so as to
restrict the erection of a wall for the purpose of retaining space,
provided that such wall does not exceed such height to be measured
from the ground level of the highest adjacent grade.
G. On any corner lot fences may be erected under the following conditions:
[Added Oct. 14, 1997 by Ord. No. 20-97]
1. When a corner lot's rear yard abuts the rear yard of another corner
lot a six foot high fence may be erected along the sideline adjacent
§ 97-123.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.3
1:513
§ 97-123.4. Outdoor cafes. [Added 8-22-00 by Ord. No. 12-00]
An outdoor cafe shall be permitted as an accessory use to a restaurant
located in the VC-2 Village Center District, VC-3 Village Center District,
C-1 Village Commercial District, C-2 Turnpike Commercial District, C-3
Neighborhood Commercial District subject to the standards and conditions
set forth below:
to the right-of-way. The fence shall have a front yard setback equal
to one and one half times the required front yard setback for that
particular zone. The fence may be extended to the rear property
line.
2. When a corner lot's rear yard abuts a yard line other than a rear
yard line of the adjacent property a four foot high fence of any
permitted type construction may be erected. The fence shall have a
front yard setback equal to one and one half times the required
front yard setback for that particular zone. The fence may be
extended to the rear property line.
H. Fences on top of retaining walls, berms, or other features. No fence
constructed on a retaining wall, berm, or other man-made feature shall
exceed a height of six (6) feet above the natural grade.
I. Fences on above-ground swimming pools shall not exceed four (4) feet
in height.
A. Outdoor Cafe Permit. Any person, firm, corporation or organization
(hereinafter referred to as the applicant) shall first apply for and obtain
from the Construction Code Official an outdoor cafe permit. In
connection with the outdoor cafe permit application signed by the
applicant on a form prepared by the Borough of Waldwick, which shall
include the following information:
1. A description of the proposed design and location of the outdoor
cafe and all temporary structures, equipment, furniture, and
apparatus to be used in connection with its operation, including
tables, chairs, planters, awnings, umbrellas, lighting and electrical
outlets, if any, and the type and amount of plant material to be used
in the planters;
2. A statement of seating capacity of the proposed outdoor cafe and
the existing eating establishment actually operated by the
applicant in the adjacent building. All outdoor seating is subject to
the Borough parking requirements within 97-123.7.
3. The number of feet and location of unobstructed space permitting
free passage of pedestrian traffic around or through each outdoor
cafe. There shall be a minimum of four (4) feet of unobstructed
paved surface of the sidewalk available for pedestrian traffic. The
applicant shall submit a diagram showing the area to be utilized
and the location of the table and chairs.
§ 97-123.3 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.4
1:514
4. The location of all fire hydrants, parking meters, utility poles,
benches, handicap ramps or any other fixtures permanently located
on the sidewalk abutting the restaurant or within ten (10) feet
thereof on either side or any side;
5. That the location of the outdoor cafe shall be directly abutting the
restaurant to which the outdoor cafe is accessory. Any doors
leading from the restaurant shall not be obstructed in any manner.
6. The name, residence address and telephone number of each
individual, owner, partner or if a domestic corporation, the names,
residence addresses and telephone numbers of the directors and
officers owning a ten percent (10%) or greater interest in the
corporation and the chief operating executive of the corporation
and if a non-domestic corporation, the name, residence address
and telephone number of the managing office for service of process
within the State of New Jersey and a copy of the qualification of
said non-domestic corporation to conduct business in the State of
New Jersey.
a. A copy of the trade, corporate, business or fictitious name upon
which the applicant intends to do business pursuant to this
Ordinance.
b. The address of the place where the applicant intends to
operate an outdoor cafe.
7. The name and address of the person owning the premises, if other
than the applicant, and the consent of the owner of the premises to
the application.
B. Action on Application and Appeal. The Construction Code Official will
review the application for completeness and compliance with the terms
of this Ordinance. The Construction Code Official will act on the
application within seven (7) business days of its receipt. If the permit
application meets the standards of this Ordinance, the permit shall be
granted. The applicant or any interested party may appeal the grant or
denial of the permit application to the Zoning Board of Adjustment
within twenty (20) days by filing a notice of appeal in accordance with §
97-38 of this chapter.
C. Rules and Specifications. An outdoor cafe authorized and operating
pursuant to this section shall comply with all of the following rules and
regulations and such others as may be adopted from time to time by
resolution or ordinance of the governing body of the Borough of
Waldwick:
1. The cafe shall be operated and maintained in accordance with the
finally approved permit.
2. No furniture, apparatus, decoration or appurtenance used in
connection with the operation of the outdoor cafe shall be located
§ 97-123.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.4
1:515
in such a way as to impede the safe and speedy ingress and egress
to or from any building or structure. Tables and chairs shall be
placed adjacent to the building on the premises.
3. The cleanliness of the outdoor cafe area is the responsibility of the
restaurant. The area utilized for the cafe shall be kept clean and
free of litter. Trash receptacles shall be provided. Litter shall not be
permitted on adjoining sidewalks or property. Sidewalks must be
swept daily and debris placed in appropriate containers and not in
the street or gutter. Sidewalks shall be washed as necessary.
4. Noise shall be kept at such a level as to comply with all provisions
of the Borough ordinances relating to noise. In addition, there shall
not be any public address systems, loudspeakers, sound systems,
radios, or any other type of exterior sound system.
5. Outdoor cafes shall be permitted to operate from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m. from April 1st through March 31st of each calendar year. The
license shall be valid for one (1) season each calendar year. The
application fee shall be paid annually. [Amended 5-28-13 by Ord.
No. 8-13]
6. Within one (1) hour after the closing of the outdoor cafe, the
operator shall have all furniture, apparatus, decoration and
appurtenances and any other items used in connection with the
operation of such outdoor cafe removed from the outdoor cafe area.
All such materials shall be stored in a safe and secure interior
location in such a way as to not interfere with speedy ingress to the
premises after hours by emergency service personnel.
7. The outdoor cafe shall be actually operated and maintained by the
same person who operates and maintains the restaurant of which
the cafe is a part and extension thereof.
8. All food preparation shall be in the regular kitchen area of the
restaurant and such food preparation shall not be permitted within
the outdoor cafe area.
9. All outdoor furniture used in the cafe operation shall be of quality
construction and durable for continued outdoor use.
10. All necessary amendments to liquor license applications with
regard to the description of the area of the licensed premises shall
be made and approval for such obtained prior to the operation of an
outdoor cafe which is a part of a premises for which a liquor license
has been previously issued. The provisions of Chapter 29 shall not
apply to the area covered by the outdoor cafe permit.
11. There shall be no additional signage on the premises.
§ 97-123.4 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.4
1:516
12. The Borough retains the right to temporarily suspend an outdoor
cafe license to allow for construction activity, utility repairs, special
events or for any reasons deemed appropriate.
13. No condiments, or other food or beverage shall be stored outside.
14. The placement of the outdoor cafe shall not reduce the parking
available or violate any land use development approval.
15. The area containing the tables and chairs should be, if reasonably
practicable, separated from the pedestrian passageway. This
should be accomplished by planters, fence, or other decorative
devices. The divider shall not be a permanent structure and shall
be removed at the expiration of an outdoor cafe permit.
D. Outdoor cafe permit fee. The fee for an outdoor cafe permit shall be as
set forth in Chapter 48.
E. Consent to Inspection. Acceptance of the outdoor cafe permit by the
applicant shall operate as a consent to the Board of Health, Fire, Police
and Building officials of the Borough to inspect the outdoor cafe for
continued compliance with the terms and conditions of this ordinance
and any federal, state, county or local law, ordinance or regulation
affecting the same.
F. Enforcement. The Borough Clerk shall be responsible for licensing and
the collection of fees. This section shall be enforced by the Construction
Code Official, the Police Department, the Board of Health, as to the
sanitary code, Superintendent of Public Works as to trash, litter and
recycling regulations, the Borough's Fire Safety Official, the Borough
Construction Official or any other Borough Official as designated by the
Mayor and Council.
G. Notice of violation; Failure to Comply. Upon a determination of an
officer or employee of the Borough of Waldwick charged with the
responsibility for enforcing the provisions of this section that a
permittee has violated one (1) or more of such provisions, such officer
or employee shall give written notice to the permittee to correct such
violation within twenty-four (24) hours of the receipt of such notice by
the licensee. In the event that the licensee fails or refuses to correct
such violation within such period, the permittee's outdoor cafe license
shall thereupon and automatically be revoked.
1. Upon the revocation of such license, the licensee, upon written
request, shall be entitled to a hearing before the governing body of
the Borough of Waldwick within fourteen (14) days of the date of its
request. The governing body may, in its sole discretion, restore
such license as a result of the information presented to it at the
hearing.
2. In addition to revocation of the outdoor cafe license, any violation
of this Ordinance may be prosecuted in the Waldwick Municipal
§ 97-123.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.4
1:517
§ 97-123.5. Standards for senior citizen housing.
All senior citizen projects shall comply with the following standards:
Court. Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions
of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500). Each violation of a provision of this section and each
day that a violation continues, shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Area, density and lot coverage.
1. Area. No senior citizen housing project shall be permitted on a lot
having an area of less than fifteen (15) acres. [Amended 2-28-84
by Ord. No. 2-84]
2. Density. There shall be no more than ten (10) dwelling units for
each acre of land within the site.
3. Lot coverage. No more than fifty percent (50%) of the total lot area
shall be used for structures, vehicular driveways and parking area
with a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the total area left with
existing natural features and/or landscape plantings and
pedestrian site improvements.
B. Site plan review and approval.
1. Necessity. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any
senior citizen project until the site plan has been reviewed and
approved by the Planning Board.
2. Application. Application for site plan approval of a senior citizen
project shall be submitted to the Waldwick Planning Board in
accordance with the Municipal Land Use Law of the State of New
Jersey, Article IX, Site Plan Review, and the procedures established
in accordance therewith.
3. Site plan details. In addition to the requirements of § 97-83 of this
chapter, the applications for review and approval of a site plan for a
senior citizen housing project shall include the following:
a. Plot plan or plans showing the location and use of each
proposed building and/or accessory uses and structures, the
gross floor area of all buildings, driveways and private roads,
pedestrian site improvements, area and arrangements for
parking, drainage systems, utilities, landscaping, exterior
lighting, screening, fire hydrants and other safety devices or
equipment.
b. General floor plan and unit floor plan for each type of dwelling
unit.
c. General elevations.
§ 97-123.4 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.5
1:518
d. Outline specifications providing a brief description of
construction materials, finishes and equipment.
e. Schedule showing minimum requirements together with
details of the proposal relating to area, density, lot coverage
and off-street parking.
f. Proposed rules, restrictions, covenants, etc., if cooperative or
condominium ownership is planned.
g. Land uses of adjoining lands within five hundred (500) feet
from each boundary of the proposed site/
h. Such other data as may be necessary or appropriate to
ascertain compliance with minimum standards and required
conditions and to judge the effectiveness of the design and the
character of the proposed project and to consider properly
such things as its relationship to a surrounding area,
anticipated traffic and public health, safety and welfare.
4. Additional information. Prior to approving or disapproving the site
plan, the Planning Board shall have the right to require the
applicant to furnish additional information, documents, deeds,
agreements and other items which it considers relevant and
material to its consideration of the proposed site plan or as may be
necessary to give proper assurance and guarantee to the Borough
of Waldwick that the said senior citizen project will be developed,
constructed and maintained in the manner, form and within the
limitations set forth in the application, plans, specifications,
conditions and regulations governing said senior citizen project,
and as may be required for the protection of the health, welfare and
safety of the citizens of the Borough of Waldwick, and the Planning
Board may require such other documents or information as it may
deem necessary to show proper compliance by said applicant for a
senior citizen project with all standards, regulations and provisions
of the municipal ordinances of the Borough of Waldwick, or such of
them as the Planning Board may determine to be applicable to the
specific senior citizen project in question.
5. Swimming Pools within senior citizen housing projects. See §
97-123.10C.
C. Required conditions. The Planning Board shall not approve a site plan
for the development of a senior citizen project which does not give
reasonable assurance that such project will comply with the following
required conditions:
1. Access. Access to each dwelling unit shall be not more than fifty
(50) feet from a driveway, private road or parking area which is
available to be used by emergency or other service vehicles.
§ 97-123.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.5
1:519
2. Clustering. No more than four (4) grade level dwelling units shall
be constructed within a cluster or building group utilizing common
or party walls. A second floor shall be permitted, the area of which
shall not exceed twenty-five (25%) of the building or cluster and
may constitute not more than one (1) additional dwelling unit. Each
grade level dwelling unit shall have more than one (1) exit to
provide ingress and egress from two (2) different sides of the
building.
3. Completion schedules. General scheduling shall be provided for the
construction, installation and completion of structures and site
improvements included within the plan. No site plan shall be
approved which includes structures or other improvements not to
be completed within three (3) years after initial commencement of
construction.
4. Design and construction. The design of all buildings and
recreational facilities shall be consistent with the overall intent and
purpose of such project and the reasonably anticipated needs and
desires of its residents for privacy and participation in community
and social activities. All dwelling units shall be provided with an
adequate heating system with a design capacity to maintain a
temperature of eighty degrees Fahrenheit (80 F) in all bathrooms
and seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70 F) in all other habitable areas
when the outside temperature is zero degrees Fahrenheit (0 F).
Each dwelling unit shall have bath facilities. The size of the
bathroom and arrangement of the facilities shall be designed to
meet the needs of older persons and have a floor finish with nonslip
characteristics and an imperviousness to water. All plumbing
fixtures, accessories and treatment shall be selected for and
provide design features that contribute to the safety, convenience
and aid of older persons. Shower stalls shall include a built-in seat
or bench or sufficient space for a bath stool.
5. Driveways or private roads. Within a senior citizen project there
shall be provided a system of drives or private roads of a functional
design adequate to meet reasonably anticipated traffic needs and
give safe and convenient vehicular access to all dwelling units and
other facilities. Any such drive or private road intended to serve
more than one (1) dwelling unit shall have a minimum width of
twenty-four (24) feet, except that a driveway which is less than fifty
(50) feet in length and which is intended for the sole purpose of
providing access to one (1) designated parking area shall have a
minimum width of sixteen (16) feet. All such drives or private roads
shall have suitable indications of any parking restrictions provided
herein and shall conform to the following minimum specifications
for construction:
a. The roadway shall consist of a four-inch macadam base course,
a two-inch modified penetration intermediate course and a one
§ 97-123.5 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.5
1:520
and one half inch bituminous concrete surface course Type
FABC-1 Mix No. 5.
b. The roadway shall conform to New Jersey State Highway
Department Standard Specifications. A standard six-by-nineby-
twenty-inch concrete curb shall be constructed on both
sides of the roadway and shall also conform to the New Jersey
State Highway Department Standard Specifications.
6. Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants and other fire safety protection
equipment shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the
specification of the Waldwick Fire Prevention Bureau.
7. Height. No building shall exceed a maximum of two and one-half
(2-1/2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet in height, whichever is the
lesser.
8. Landscaping. All existing prominent natural features, such as large
rock outcrops, large trees, tree groves, ponds, streams, glens and
wildlife and plant conservation areas, shall be preserved,
maintained or enhanced wherever possible. Such natural features
shall be considered to be a desired asset and an integral part of the
site. Landscape plantings and shade trees shall be shown for the
areas around and between all buildings, around the perimeter and/
or within parking service areas and along driveways or private
roads. Pedestrian site improvements, such as sidewalks, paths,
benches and statuary, shall be provided for the use and enjoyment
of the residents. All landscaping details shall be an integral part of
the site plan.
9. Lighting. Lighting shall be provided to illuminate all driveways,
private roads, sidewalks, walkways and parking areas during the
hours of darkness. The intensity of such illumination and the
arrangement of all fixtures shall be such as to minimize the effect of
any beam or glare on adjoining properties or dwelling windows.
10. Parking. Parking as required by the New Jersey Residential Site
Improvements Standards shall be provided in designated parking
areas. Parking shall not be permitted along any drive or private
road having a width of less than thirty (30) feet and which is
intended to be used to serve more than one (1) dwelling unit. All
parking areas shall be constructed so as to provide a smooth and
safe driving surface, properly drained with suitable concrete curb
protection. All parking spaces within any parking area shall be
clearly marked to show the parking arrangement within said
parking area.
11. Pedestrian site improvements. Due consideration shall be given in
planning walks, ramps and driveways to minimize any danger of
tripping, slipping or stumbling. Gradients of walks shall not exceed
ten percent (10%), and handrails shall be required where
appropriate. Outdoor areas available to residents shall be designed
§ 97-123.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.5
1:521
to permit older persons to move about with minimum effort or
danger.
12. Screening. All parking or service areas shall be effectively screened
on any side which faces a public street or adjoining property by a
fence, wall or hedge at least five (5) feet in height, approved by the
Planning Board and maintained in good condition.
13. Setbacks.
a. No structure shall be located within forty (40) feet of any
property line or State, County or municipal road, and no
driveway, private road or parking area shall be located closer
than forty (40) feet to any adjoining property. Buildings shall be
located to conform to the following minimum open space
requirements between such building and any vehicular
driveway, parking areas or other structures.
1. Front of building space: twenty-five (25) feet.
2. Side of building space: eight (8) feet.
3. Rear of building space: twenty-five (25) feet, except that
parking areas may be located in said required rear of
building space, but not less than ten (10) feet from said
building.
b. No portion of the open space required around any building for
the purpose of complying herewith shall be included as part of
the open space similarly required for another building.
c. In applying the minimum setback and open space
requirements as set forth herein, distances shall be measured
on a horizontal plane to the closest part of any structure.
Building overhangs, protrusions and attachments, whether at
or above grade level and whether temporary or permanent,
shall be deemed to be part of the structure for purposes of
determining the minimum setback or open space
requirements.
14. Unit size. All rooms of a dwelling unit shall be one (1) level, except
that a split-level design shall be considered as one (1) level. Each
unit shall contain one (1) or two (2) bedrooms. One-bedroom
dwelling units shall have a minimum floor area of not less than
seven hundred twenty (720) square feet, and two-bedroom
dwelling units shall have not less than eight hundred (800) square
feet.
15. Utilities. All utility lines, pipes and wires shall be placed
underground.
D. Approval with conditions. The Planning Board may attach such
conditions for any site plan approval for a senior citizen project as it
§ 97-123.5 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.5
1:522
§ 97-123.6. Standards for planned residential development. [Added
3-26-85 by Ord. No. 3-85]
All planned residential development projects shall be developed in
accordance with an approved comprehensive site plan (see Article IX, Site
Plan Review) that complies with the following standards:
shall deem necessary to protect the safety, health and welfare of the
citizens of the Borough of Waldwick and future occupants of such
project and to assure delivery of proper water supply, disposal of
sewage and solid wastes, drainage, policing of the project, assurance
of right of ingress and egress by the police, health, fire, inspecting
officials and other officials of the Borough of Waldwick and guarantee of
maintenance of facilities to be used by the residents of the said senior
citizen project, and should said senior citizen project be organized as
a cooperative or condominium, the Planning Board may require such
covenants and agreements to be filed by the applicant prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy as may be necessary for the
protection of the occupants of said project and the citizens of the
Borough of Waldwick and guaranteeing compliance by the project and
the cooperative or condominium with the rules, regulations, plans,
specifications and conditions established by the Planning Board
pertaining to said project.
A. Area, density, lot coverage and size:
1. Area. A planned residential project shall have a minimum lot size of
thirty thousand (30,000) square feet and a maximum lot size of five
(5) acres.
2. Density. There shall be no more than one (1) dwelling unit for each
three thousand six hundred thirty (3,630) square feet of land within
the site.
3. Lot coverage. Not more than thirty-five percent (35%) of the lot
area shall be occupied by buildings.
4. Lot width. The minimum lot width and frontage shall be one
hundred fifty (150) feet.
5. Lot depth. The minimum lot depth shall be one hundred fifty (150)
feet.
B. Purpose of planned residential development project. The intent of the
planned residential development regulations is to permit greater
flexibility and consequently, more creative and imaginative design for
the development of residential uses than generally possible under
conventional zoning regulations. It is further intended to promote more
economical and efficient use of the land while providing a harmonious
variety of housing choices, a higher level of urban amenities and
preservation of natural scenic qualities of open spaces. It is the
§ 97-123.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.6
1:523
responsibility of the applicant to provide documentation and
demonstrate compliance with the objectives herein stated.
C. Access to planned residential development project. Access to a planned
residential development project containing twenty (20) or more
dwelling units shall be directly onto an arterial or collector street as
shown in the Master Plan.
D. Yard requirements.
1. Street and property line setback. Every principal building shall
have a minimum setback of one and five-tenths (1.5) times the
highest portion of wall or building facade which faces the public
street or property line. The wall height shall be the vertical
distance measured from the lowest perimeter finished grade of the
building wall to the highest point of the wall or roof peak adjacent
to the property line. In any event, no principal building setback
shall be less than the following:
a. Front. Every principal building shall have a minimum front
yard setback of at least thirty-five (35) feet from all public
streets, but not less than the average prevailing setback that
exists for two hundred (200) feet on either side, whichever is
greater.
b. Side. Every principal building shall have a minimum side yard
setback of at least twenty (20) feet on one (1) side and a
combined side yards setback for both sides of not less than fifty
(50) feet.
c. Rear. Every principal building shall have a minimum rear yard
setback of at least thirty-five (35) feet.
2. Interior setback. Every building shall have a minimum setback of
ten (10) feet from all interior roads and parking areas.
3. Buffer strip. There shall be a buffer strip along the entire perimeter
of the property exclusive of the front yard, of at least ten (10) feet in
width measured inward from the property line and suitably
landscaped with grass and/or ground cover, shrubs and trees. Said
buffer strip is included in the setback requirement.
4. Courtyards. Courtyards bounded on three (3) or more sides by the
wings of the same building or by the walls of separate buildings
shall have a minimum court width of two (2) feet for each foot of
height of the tallest building.
5. Accessory buildings. No accessory building shall be located in the
front yard. All accessory buildings shall not be located closer than
ten (10) feet to any property line, except for pools which require
twenty (20) feet.
§ 97-123.6 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.6
1:524
6. Distance between buildings. The total minimum distance between
buildings shall be the sum of the two (2) abutting yard
requirements. The following yard areas shall be the minimum
distances as measured horizontally in feet and shall be measured
away from the front, side and rear of each building or group of
attached townhouses. When the ends of buildings are opposite, or
generally opposite, no building as measured radially from any
corner shall be closer to another building than forty (40) feet where
vehicular access is required between the buildings. The closest
radial distance between the buildings may be reduced to not less
than twenty (20) feet, provided that one (1) or more of the following
conditions exist: the facing walls overlap no more than fifty percent
(50%); the acute angle formed by the intersection of projected lines
of each sidewall is greater than forty-five degrees (45); and if the
height of the building is no greater than one (1) story.
a. Front: twenty-five (25) feet.
b. Side: twenty (20) feet.
c. Rear: thirty (30) feet.
E. Bulk requirements.
1. Open space. At least thirty-five percent (35%) of the tract area,
exclusive of roads, shall either be left in its natural state,
appropriately landscaped or grassed, not to be occupied by
driveways, parking areas or buildings.
2. Building height. No principal building shall be more than two and
one-half (2-1/2) stories and not in excess of thirty-five (35) feet in
height. No accessory building shall be more than one (1) story and
not in excess of twenty (20) feet in height.
3. Building length. No building shall exceed two hundred (200) feet in
length. A row of townhouses shall be considered as one (1)
building.
F. Construction requirements.
1. The design layout of buildings shall provide, where possible, that
the front of one (1) building does not face the back of another
building or accessory building.
2. Each building shall contain a minimum of two (2) means of egress
to the ground.
3. Each dwelling unit shall contain complete kitchen facilities, toilet,
bathing and sleeping facilities, as well as living space and shall
have a minimum livable floor area in accordance with the following:
a. Studio apartment: five hundred (500) square feet.
§ 97-123.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.6
1:525
b. One bedroom unit: seven hundred (700) square feet.
c. Each additional bedroom: two hundred (200) square feet is
required.
4. There shall be no dwelling unit below the first floor nor above the
second story of any such structure.
5. There shall be no more than sixteen (16) bedrooms per acre. A
studio apartment shall be considered a one-bedroom apartment.
6. There shall be no more than ten (10) dwelling units in each gardentype
apartment building or group of duplexes.
7. Each dwelling unit shall contain central utilities, heating and
storage space.
G. Storage areas. Required storage areas shall be centrally provided in
garden and attached rental-type housing construction and individually
provided within each dwelling for townhouse, duplex or other
condominium-type construction.
1. In addition to any room closets contained inside individual dwelling
units, there shall be provided for each dwelling unit a minimum of
three hundred (300) cubic feet of storage area in convenient,
centrally located place in the basement or ground floor where
personal belongings and effects of occupants may be separately
stored and secured from those of other occupants without
constituting a fire or health hazard.
2. There shall be a common storage area in each building for strollers,
bicycles and similar types of frequently used equipment of at least
fifty (50) cubic feet per dwelling unit.
H. Circulation and parking.
1. Off-street parking. Parking shall be provided in conformance with
the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards. A total of
twenty-five percent (25%) of all required parking spaces shall be in
garages. Garages may be located within the principal building or
separated as an accessory structure.
2. Parking areas shall be located in the side or rear yards no less than
ten (10) feet from a property line.
3. Means of traffic ingress and egress to all parking areas shall be in
accordance with § 97-123.7. For one-way traffic movements,
driveway entrance-exit width shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet.
For two-way traffic movements, driveway's width shall not be less
than twenty-five (25) feet with a minimum two-foot wide concrete
median separating opposing traffic lanes.
I. Landscaping and screening.
§ 97-123.6 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.6
1:526
1. All housing developments shall be provided with liberal and
functional professional landscaping schemes. The developer shall
furnish along with the plans and specifications required under this
ordinance, landscaping plans drawn by a licensed landscape
designer, which shall include plans for lighting the grounds, roads,
drives, walks, parking areas and building entrances to the
development as well as the plantings and other landscaping
intended for the development.
2. Screening or buffers, consisting of planting strips and fences, shall
be required around outdoor utility and around other similar areas,
along property lines of adjacent property and around all parking
areas, in order to shield apartment occupants and adjoining
properties from such unsightly, disturbing or light-glaring areas.
Clothes-drying areas shall not be permitted out-of-doors. Refuse
disposal areas shall be completely enclosed.
J. Utilities and facilities.
1. Garbage and refuse storage and collection areas shall be provided
with each apartment project in the appropriate numbers and
locations to serve the convenience of the residents; such areas shall
be screened from view but in suitable locations to permit the use of
dumpsters which shall be required.
2. Coin-operated laundry washing and drying machines shall be
located in the basement of garden apartment buildings.
3. All utilities shall be located underground.
4. Pedestrian sidewalks shall also be provided in other suitable
locations, including entrances and exits wherever normal
pedestrian traffic will occur and in order to handle the pedestrian
traffic which the development will create.
K. Signs.
1. Housing developments may have one (1) unlighted sign for
advertising purposes with a gross area of not more than sixty-five
(65) square feet. Such signs shall be of a temporary nature and may
be located in the required front yard space, provided that such sign
shall be no closer than twenty (20) feet to any street right-of-way
line. Such sign may be erected during the construction period, but
shall be permitted to remain for a period of one (1) year from date
of occupancy of the first unit. A permanent project identification
sign, architecturally consistent with the design of the dwelling unit
may be erected, provided that such sign does not exceed twenty
(20) square feet and which may bear only the name of the project,
the street address and the presence or lack of vacant units.
2. No other signs, other than pedestrian and vehicular directional
signs, shall be visible from the premises.
§ 97-123.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.7
1:527
§ 97-123.7. Off-street parking and loading.
All off-street parking and loading areas shall be subject to the approval of
the Planning Board to ensure their adequacy, relation to traffic safety and
protection of adjacent properties.
A. Residential and agricultural off-street parking.
(1a) Quantity. Provision shall be made for off-street parking spaces for
all residential development subject to the New Jersey Residential
Site Improvement Standards (RSIS). For detached dwellings, at
least one residential parking space shall be in an enclosed garage,
for each dwelling unit hereinafter erected. Those residential
dwelling units without an enclosed garage prior to the effective
date shall be considered legal, non-conforming structures.
[Amended 7-22-97 by Ord. No. 15-97]
(1b) For mixed-use developments, the residential portion of the
development shall require two spaces per dwelling unit.
(1c) Non-residential uses permitted in residential zones or the nonresidential
portion of a mixed-use development shall provide the
number of parking spaces required by the specific use prescribed
in the parking schedule in Subsection B(1). The effective date shall
be October 14, 1983.
(1d) Any residential structure which had an enclosed garage prior to the
effective date but after the effective date no longer has an enclosed
garage, shall be deemed a legal, non-conforming structure if all of
the following conditions are met: (i) on or before December 31,
1997, the residential lot is inspected by the zoning officer and
Building Department; (ii) the inspection reveals that the residential
lot has at least three usable off-street parking spaces; (iii) the
payment of the appropriate fee as set forth in Chapter 48; (iv) the
width of the driveway does not exceed twenty (20') feet; (v)
conversion of the enclosed garage so that it cannot be used for offstreet
parking occurred prior to June 1, 1997; (vi) a letter is issued
by the zoning officer of the Borough of Waldwick that there is
compliance with § 97-59A(1b) (i-v).
(2) Driveway. Off-street parking areas shall be so designed as to permit
all vehicles to turn around on the site onto streets in order to
prevent any vehicles backing out onto a public street from the site,
designated as arterial or collector streets on the Master Plan. Refer
to § 97-121.15 for additional standards.
(3) Surface materials. All parking areas, passageways and driveways
shall be entirely surfaced with a properly designed durable, allweather
pavement either bituminous concrete or Portland cement
concrete or of pavers. Driveways in excess of one hundred (100')
feet in length with grades not exceeding four percent (4%) may, in
§ 97-123.7 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.7
1:528
lieu of the foregoing requirements, be constructed of shale, stone
or other materials as approved by the Borough Engineer.
(4) Grades. Driveway grades shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) at
any point along the driveway's entire length. In addition, the
driveway grade shall not exceed eight percent (8%) for a distance
of eight (8) feet from the curbline and a vertical curve provided
between said eight-percent grade and any increasing grade.
(5) Side slopes. The side slopes of driveways shall be topsoil, seeded,
fertilized and mulched to prevent erosion. If banks exceed a grade
of thirty percent (30%), crown vetch or some other stabilizing
material shall be planted or a retaining wall constructed based
upon recommendations of the Borough Engineer.
(6) Farmer's roadside stands. Any permit approved for the erection of a
farmer's roadside stand shall hereinafter provide for parking and
maneuvering space at least ten (10) feet back from the existing or,
when applicable, future right-of-way line of a public street. Such
roadside business establishments shall provide at least two (2) offstreet
parking spaces in addition to what may be required for the
operator of the stand. Under no circumstances shall the parking
areas and driveway be so designed as to permit vehicles to back out
onto a public street.
B. Non-residential off-street parking.
(1) For all new buildings or uses or additions to existing buildings or
uses in the non-residential zones and for non-residential buildings
and uses in the residential zones, there shall be provided the
number of off-street parking spaces required by the specific use in
accordance with the following schedule: [Amended 7-14-87 by
Ord. No. 10-87]
Parking Schedule
Uses Required Parking Spaces
Assembly halls, dance halls,
community buildings, social
clubs and institutions
1 for every 200 square feet of
floor area
Automobile Service stations 2 for each gasoline service
pump and 2 for each garage
service bay
Banks 1 for every 200 square feet of
floor area
Bowling alleys 4 for each alley
Churches, auditoriums and
theaters
1 for every 4 seating spaces
including school auditoriums
§ 97-123.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.7
1:529
Parking Schedule
Uses Required Parking Spaces
Dwelling units within mixed-use
developments
2 per dwelling unit
Funeral homes and mortuaries 1 for every 4 seating spaces at
maximum capacity
Furniture and appliance stores,
motor vehicle sales, wholesale
stores, building material stores
and similar hard good sales
1 for each 300 square feet of
floor area plus 1 for every 2
employees on the maximum
shift
Health Club/Fitness Center 1 space per 200 square feet of
floor area
Home occupations 1 for every 150 square feet of
floor area utilized for said
business
Hospitals, nursing homes,
assisted living and medical
institutions
1 for every 200 square feet of
floor area
Hotels and motels 1 for each sleeping room
Indoor commercial recreation
facility
1 space per 500 square feet of
floor area, plus 1 space per
each employee on the maximum
shift
Industrial uses 1 for each 400 square feet of
floor area
Kennel 1 space for each 600 square
feet of floor area
Laundromats 1 space for every 3 washing
machine
Medical and dental clinics or
offices
1 per every 200 square feet of
floor area, plus 1 space for
every 2 employees, but not less
than 1 space for every 200
square feet of floor area
Offices: general and
professional
1 for every 200 square feet of
floor area
Parks and other outdoor
recreation sites
5 for each acre up to 50 acres
and 1 for each acre above 50
acres
Physical therapy clinic 1 space per every 200 square
feet of floor area
§ 97-123.7 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.7
1:530
Parking Schedule
Uses Required Parking Spaces
Private preschools and private
schools
Elementary schools: one (1) for
each staff member or employee,
plus one (1) for each twenty
(20) pupils
All other schools: one (1) for
each staff member or employee,
plus one (1) for each five (5)
pupils, plus adequate space for
buses and delivery vehicles.
The Planning Board shall
determine if adequate space for
buses and delivery vehicles is
provided. Further, the Planning
Board may increase parking
requirements, if such
considerations as the
unavailability of bus services,
the distance from centers of
population, or a relatively high
percentage of pupils driving
their own cars, make such
increased requirements
desirable.
Public/Private Swimming Pools
and Swim Clubs
1 per each 75 square feet of
water surface area, plus one
space for every 200 square feet
of office square footage
Public Utilities 1 space per vehicle required to
service the facility
Restaurants: taverns, eating
and drinking places, and snack
shops
1 for every 4 seats (including
maximum outdoor seating) and
1 for every two employees on
the maximum shift
Restaurants: drive-in/take-out
and fast food
1 for each 4 seats (including
maximum outdoor seating) and
1 for each 150 square feet of
floor area if no seats
Retail store and service
establishments
1 for each 200 square feet of
floor area
Supermarkets and self-service
food stores
1 for each 200 square feet of
floor area
§ 97-123.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.7
1:531
Parking Schedule
Uses Required Parking Spaces
Warehouses and storage 1 for each 400 square feet of
floor area
(2) In using the above table for calculating required parking spaces if
the number derived comes out to be a fraction of a parking space,
the required number shall be rounded off to the next highest whole
number.
(3) Any building containing more than one (1) use shall meet the
combined parking space requirements for all uses in the building.
Any change in use within a building shall be required to meet the
minimum parking requirements for the new use.
(4) If it can be clearly demonstrated that because of the peculiar
nature of any use all of the required parking is not necessary, the
Planning Board may permit a reduction in the amount of parking
area to be paved; provided, however, that the entire required
parking area shall be shown in the site plan so that it will be
available in the event that future conditions should so require it.
For any parking spaces that are waived, the applicant shall be
required to post a performance bond for two (2) years in the
amount estimated by the Borough Engineer as the cost to construct
the additionally required parking spaces.
(5) Parking for disabled persons compliant with the standards of the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). In any parking lot designed
to accommodate the public, a minimum number of designated
parking spaces accessible to disabled persons shall be required as
follows For example in a 25 space parking lot, one handicap
accessible space and 24 additional spaces are required.
Total Parking Spaces in Lot
Required Number of
Accessible Spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 2% of total
§ 97-123.7 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.7
1:532
Total Parking Spaces in Lot
Required Number of
Accessible Spaces
501 to 1,000 20, plus 1 for each 100 over
1,000
C. General requirements for nonresidential off-street parking. Unless
otherwise provided in this ordinance, all nonresidential off-street
parking and loading areas shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Aisles.
(a) All parking areas shall be designed with service aisles from
which cars directly enter or leave parking spaces to meet the
following standards:
Type of Parking Aisle Widths (feet)
Parallel 15
30-degree angle 20
45-degree angle 20
60-degree angle 22
90-degree angle 25
(b) In addition, there shall be a minimum distance between the
ends of parallel parking spaces of six (6) feet when found
necessary to provide convenient access.
(2) Curbing. Curbing shall be provided so that vehicles cannot drive
onto required landscaped areas or street rights-of-way except at
controlled entrance and exit points. Parking areas shall be enclosed
by concrete or Belgian block curbing six (6) inches above the paved
surface located at least five (5) feet from a property line, street
right-of-way or nearest structural wall of a building. Within similar
commercial districts, abutting lots may pave their adjacent parking
lots up to the property line, provided that the proper access and
circulation between the two (2) parking areas is provided and
approved by the Planning Board. Upon recommendation of the
Borough Engineer, the Planning Board may waive the curbing
requirement where considered advisable in order to facilitate
surface drainage.
(3) Drainage. All parking and loading areas shall be graded and
equipped with adequate drainage facilities as approved by the
Borough Engineer.
(4) Driveways.
a. The number of driveways provided from site directly to any one
(1) municipal street shall be as follows:
§ 97-123.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.7
1:533
Length of Site Frontage
(feet)
Recommended Number of
Driveways
100 or less 1
100 to 800 2
Over 800 Specified by Borough
Engineer
b. No driveway to or from a parking area shall be located closer
than one hundred (100) feet to the nearest right-of-way line of
an intersecting street. However, any major use, such as a
shopping center or industrial use, which in the opinion of the
Planning Board will generate large traffic volumes shall not be
located closer than two hundred (200) feet to the nearest rightof-
way line of a street intersection.
c. The width of driveway entrances to and from a site shall be
designed to adequately accommodate the volume and
character of the vehicles anticipated to be attracted daily onto
the site. Driveways serving large volumes of traffic shall be
required to utilize high to maximum dimensions, while sites
served by low traffic volumes shall be permitted to use low two
minimum dimensions. For one-way traffic movements driveway
entrance-exit widths shall be from twenty (20) feet to thirty
(30) feet. For two-way traffic movements driveway widths shall
range from twenty-five (25) feet up to forty-fix (46) feet.
d. Driveways used by vehicles in a one-way direction of travel
shall not form any angle smaller than forty-five degrees (45º)
with the public street, unless acceleration and deceleration
lanes are provided. Driveways used for two-way traffic
movements will intersect the public streets at an angle as near
to ninety degrees (90º) as the site conditions will permit and in
no case shall be less than sixty degrees (60º).
(5) Fire zones. Parking areas shall be so arranged as to provide
adequate access to all buildings in case of fire or other
emergencies. No parking shall be allowed within thirty (30) feet of
the outer walls of the structure or within such other adequate
distances as the Planning Board in consultation with the Borough
Fire Officials may approve. The owner of the site shall post
adequate signs and provide pavement marking, approved by the
Planning Board, prohibiting parking in areas designated as fire
zones.
(6) Interior traffic islands. All parking areas for thirty (30) or more
vehicles shall contain grassed or landscaped island areas of at least
eight (8) feet in width separating rows of proposed head-on parking
spaces. Such interior traffic islands shall be spread throughout the
parking area to control traffic movement in accordance with a site
§ 97-123.7 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.7
1:534
plan approved by the Planning Board. Interior traffic islands shall
occupy a minimum of ten percent (10%) of the area, formed by
the outer perimeter of the paved parking lot. Interior traffic islands
shall be landscaped and contain shade trees as required under
Subsection C(7).
(7) Landscaping. All portions of the property not used for off-street
parking shall be attractively landscaped with grass lawns, trees
and shrubs as approved by the Planning Board. Off-street parking
areas providing parking for twenty (20) or more vehicles shall be
provided with shade trees of a type approved by the Borough
Engineer. These shade trees shall be located in a planned manner
with the parking lot area in a quantity equal to not less than one (1)
shade tree for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of parking
area or part thereof. Provisions shall be made for the protection of
said trees from vehicles by curbing or other acceptable methods.
The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of
said shade trees and the replacement of any tree which dies.
(8) Lighting. All parking areas, passageways and driveways serving
commercial, industrial and multifamily uses shall provide an
average lighting level of two-tenths (0.2) horizontal footcandles of
illumination during the hours between sunset and sunrise when the
use is in operation. Adequate shielding shall be provided by
commercial and industrial uses to protect adjacent residential
zones from the glare from such illumination and from that of
automobile headlights.
(9) Location of parking. Parking areas may be located in any yard
space for commercial uses and in any yard but the front yard for
other uses, but shall not be closer than five (5) feet to any street or
property line.
(10) Pavement markings. All parking and loading spaces shall be
appropriately marked with painted lines. Parking spaces shall be
delineated by hairpin or double-line markings. Parking stalls
delineated by hairpin markings shall be measured from the
centerline of each side to determine width. Traffic flow indicators
shall also be marked on the pavement as specified in the approved
site plan. All pavement markings shall be adequately maintained.
(11) Screening. All off-street parking areas shall be effectively screened
on any side which adjoins or faces any residential use or zone, by a
fence, wall or landscaped buffer area. Commercial areas shall be
required to be screened from a residential use or zone by a fence
for the purpose of protecting the residential property from litter,
debris, light and glare and other such nuisances that would disturb
peaceful possession. A fence or wall six (6) feet in height,
containing no advertising, shall be maintained in good condition by
the owner and tenant of the property. Fencing used shall be of
closed post picket solid fence containing no more than twenty-five
§ 97-123.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.7
1:535
percent (25%) open space. The Planning Board may substitute
a hedge or other natural landscaping for the required fence or
wall. The fence as required by this section may be waived by the
Planning Board if, in the Board's judgment, because of topographic
or other unusual conditions, said fence is not necessary to screen
adjoining residential property. Where parking is located in the front
yard, the Planning Board may require construction of a landscaped
berm up to a height of five (5) feet with slopes at a ratio of not less
than two to one (2:1).
(12) Setbacks. Off-street parking areas shall be separated from the
street right-of-way or other property lines by a minimum setback of
five (5) feet to prevent any part of a vehicle from overhanging
street or property lines.
(13) Sight distance. Wherever possible, driveway exits onto public
streets shall be so designed with regard to profile, grading and
location to permit the following recommended sight distance
measured in each direction at the edge of pavement along the
public street.
Allowable Speed on
Municipal Street
(miles per hour)
Required Sight Distance
(feet)
25 150
30 200
35 250
40 300
45 350
50 400
(14) Size. Each off-street parking space shall be measured not less than
nine by eighteen (9 x 18) feet, exclusive of access drives and aisles,
except that parallel curb parking spaces shall be ten by twentythree
(10 x 23) feet.
(15) Surface material. All parking areas, passageways and driveways
shall be surfaced with a properly designed impervious durable
concrete all-weather pavement either bituminous concrete or
portland cement concrete.
D. Shared parking. Any owner or group of owners of a business building or
buildings in a commercial district may jointly sponsor off-street parking
facilities, provided that the area of the parking facility equals the total
area required for each owner participating therein, that such jointly
sponsored facilities comply with all other requirements of this
ordinance and further provided that any participating use is no further
from the parking area than three hundred (300) feet.
§ 97-123.7 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.7
1:536
§ 97-123.8. Performance standards.
As a condition of approval and the continuance of any use, occupancy of any
structure and operation of any process or equipment, the applicant shall
supply evidence, satisfactory to the Planning Board or to its designated
E. Off-street loading space.
1. Number of loading spaces. In all districts, for every building or use
requiring the receipt or distribution in vehicles of materials or
merchandise, there shall be provided, on the same property with
such building or use, off-street loading spaces in relation to floor
area as follows:
Floor area (square feet) Number of spaces
Under 10,000 1
10,000 to 19,999 2
20,000 to 49,999 3
50,000 to 99,999 4
Each additional 100,000 or part
thereof
1
2. Size of loading space. Each loading space shall be at least twelve
(12) feet in width, by forty (40) feet in length and have a fourteenfoot
clearance above the grade; provided, however, that the
Planning Board may require additional length of up to fifty-five (55)
feet depending upon the length of vehicles using said space.
3. Location. Off-street loading spaces shall be located in the side or
rear yard only, but in no case in a side yard adjoining a street.
4. Whenever an off-street loading and unloading space shall be
located next to a residential use or zone, the loading and unloading
space shall be suitably screened and buffered in accordance with
Subsection C(11).
5. Surface material. Off-street loading and unloading spaces shall be
surfaced with a dustless, all-weather pavement, of either
bituminous concrete or portland cement concrete, which shall be
adequately drained and designed and clearly marked as loading
spaces, all subject to the approval of the Borough Engineer.
6. Access. Access to loading spaces shall be provided directly from a
public street or alley or from any right-of-way that will not interfere
with public convenience and will permit orderly and safe movement
of truck vehicles.
7. Loading spaces shall be provided in addition to off-street parking
spaces and shall not be considered as supplying off-street parking
space.
§ 97-123.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.8
1:537
representative, that the proposed use, structure, process or equipment
will conform fully with all of the applicable performance standards. As
evidence of compliance the Board may require certification of tests by
appropriate government agencies or by recognized testing laboratories, any
costs thereof to be borne by the applicant. The Planning Board may require
that specific operating procedures or methods be followed or that specific
types of equipment, machinery or devices be installed if the government
agencies or testing laboratories examining the proposed operation shall
determine that the use of such specific types of machinery, equipment,
devices, procedures or methods are required in order to ensure compliance
with the applicable performance standards. Permits and certificates
required by other government agencies shall be submitted to the Planning
Board as proof of compliance with applicable codes.
A. Preservation of natural features. No structure shall be built within any
drainage or conservation easement or, in their absence, within one
hundred (100) feet of the top of the bank of a stream. No building shall
be constructed within the floodplain of any stream or on land subject to
periodic overflow or on land which has an average water table within
two (2) feet of the ground surface. No persons, firms or corporation
shall strip, excavate or otherwise remove soil for sale or other use than
on the premises from which it was taken, except in connection with the
construction or alteration of a building on such premises and
excavating or grading incidental thereto, or except as hereinafter
specified or pursuant to the terms of Article X, Soil Movement. Existing
natural features such as trees, brooks and drainage channels shall be
retained. Whenever such features interfere with the proposed use of
such property, a retention of the maximum amount of such features
consistent with the use of the property shall be required wherever
possible at the discretion of the Planning Board.
B. Noise.
1. Noise produced within any structure in any zone shall not be in
excess of the standards set by the Department of Labor,
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, Occupational
Safety and Health Standards and applicable established federal
standards.
2. Any noise produced on any premises in any zone shall not be in
excess of 55 decibels from any property line, unless otherwise
indicated in this ordinance, and shall comply with Chapter 62, the
Borough Noise Ordinance.
3. If the noise is not smooth and continuous but is of an impulsive or
periodic character, the decibel levels indicated above shall be
reduced by fifteen percent (15%).
C. Air pollution. All standards and provisions of the New Jersey State
Department of Environmental Protection Air Pollution Control Code, as
amended or supplemented, shall be complied with.
§ 97-123.8 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.8
1:538
1. Smoke. In any nonresidential zone, smoke shall not be emitted into
the open air from any fuel-burning equipment in excess of the
standards set by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code, Chapter 4,
Control and Prohibition of Air Pollution by Smoke, as amended or
supplemented.
2. Solid particles.
a. In any zone there shall be no discharge of solid particles
through a stack, duct or vent in excess of the standards set by
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, New
Jersey Air Pollution Control Code, Chapter 7, Control and
Prohibition of Solid Particles, as amended or supplemented.
b. No open burning shall be permitted in any zone, except in
compliance with the New Jersey State Department of
Environmental Protection Air Pollution Control Code, Chapter
2, Control and Prohibition of Open Burning, as amended or
supplemented.
c. All incinerators shall be approved by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection and comply with all
standards and provisions of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, New Jersey Air Pollution Control
Code, Chapter 11, Control and Prohibition of Air Pollution
From Incinerators, as amended or supplemented.
d. Any road, parking area, driveway, truck loading or unloading
station or any other exterior area having a substantial
movement of vehicles or equipment shall be paved or
otherwise stabilized during construction sufficiently to
minimize the generation of dust from the movement of such
vehicles or equipment.
D. Odors. In any zone, odorous material shall not be emitted into the
atmosphere in quantities sufficient to be detected without instruments
or in excess of the standards and provisions set by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, New Jersey Air Pollution
Control Code, Chapter 6, Prohibition of Air Pollution, as amended or
supplemented. Any process which may involve the creation or emission
of any odors shall be provided with a secondary safeguard system, so
that control will be maintained. Table 1, Odor Thresholds in Air, in Part
1, Odor Thresholds for 53 Commercial Chemicals, of Research on
Chemical Odors, copyrighted October, 1968, by the Manufacturing
Chemists Association, Inc., Washington, D.C., shall be used as a guide in
determining quantities of offensive odors.
E. Liquid waste.
1. No liquid waste shall be discharged, directly or indirectly, into any
watercourse except as to conform to federal, state and local
§ 97-123.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.8
1:539
statutes, laws and rules and regulations, as amended or
supplemented. If the applicant proposes to construct facilities for
the treatment of waste, he/she shall supply:
a. A statement by, or a permit to construct issued by, the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection certifying that
such proposed facilities are in compliance with applicable
federal and state laws and regulations.
b. Approval of the installation of such facilities by the Sewer
Authority.
2. No liquid waste shall be discharged into any sewage collection and
disposal system unless the appropriate administering officials shall
first have investigated the character and volume of such waste and
shall have certified that the system is adequate to receive the liquid
waste. The applicant shall comply with any requirements of said
officials including the pretreating of such wastes, the installation of
processing methods, separation or screening of waste, control of
pH and other methods of improving such wastes prior to discharge,
as a condition of approval of such facilities.
F. Solid waste. All users in the Borough shall:
1. Assume full responsibility for adequate and regular collection and
removal of all refuse except if the municipality assumes the
responsibility.
2. Comply with all applicable provisions of the New Jersey State
Department of Environmental Protection Air Pollution Control
Code, as amended or supplemented.
3. Comply with all provisions of the State Sanitary Code, Chapter 8,
Refuse Disposal, and standards and provisions of the Borough of
Waldwick Board of Health codes.
4. Permit no accumulation on the property of any waste, trash or
garbage except in areas designated for temporary accumulation of
such material prior to disposal. Any such areas shall be
appropriately designed and adequately fenced and screened with
suitable landscaping when required by the Planning Board.
5. Not engage in any sanitary landfill operation on the property
except as permitted by other Borough codes and ordinances.
G. Radiation. All uses of materials, equipment or facilities which are or
may be sources of radiation shall comply with all controls, standards
and requirements of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, and
any codes, rules or regulations promulgated under such act, as well as
the Radiation Protection Act, P.L. 1958, c. 116, as amended(See N.J.S.A.
26:2D-1 et seq.), whichever shall be more stringent, and also all
§ 97-123.8 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.8
1:540
§ 97-123.9. Signs.
No sign shall be constructed, erected, displayed, altered, relocated or
reconstructed unless a permit shall have first been obtained from the
Building Inspector.
provisions and standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of
1971 as applicable at any time, and as amended from time to time.
H. Fire and explosion hazards. If it appears that any proposed use,
structure, process or resulting product or material may constitute a fire
or explosion hazard, the Planning Board may require the applicant to
supply proof:
1. Of approval of the use, structure, process or resulting product or
material from the State Department of Labor and Industry
indicating that adequate safeguards against fire and explosion have
been taken or installed.
2. Of approval from the appropriate Borough Fire Prevention Officer
that the applicant has complied with all applicable Borough fire
prevention regulations.
3. That no activity shall be maintained on the premises which will
produce heat or glare beyond any property line.
4. That no machinery or operation shall be permitted which shall
cause perceptible earth-shaking vibration beyond the property line
of the lot on which the use is located.
A. Definitions.
ABANDONED SIGN — A sign that no longer identifies or advertises a
location, product, or activity conducted on the premises on which the
sign is located.
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign employing actual motion or the illusion
of motion. Animated signs can be activated by environmental factors
such as wind or thermal changes, mechanically activated by motors,
or electrically activated through flashing or patterned illusionary
movement.
AWNING — An architectural projection or shelter projecting from and
supported by the exterior wall of a building and composed of a covering
of rigid or non rigid materials and/or fabric on a supporting framework
that may be either permanent or retractable.
AWNING SIGN — A sign displayed on or attached flat against the
surface or surfaces of an awning. See also: Wall or Fascia Sign.
BACKGROUND AREA OF SIGN — The entire area of a sign on which
copy and/or graphics could be placed.
§ 97-123.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.9
1:541
BACK-LIT AWNING — An awning whose covering material exhibits
the characteristic of luminosity obtained by means of a source of
illumination contained within its framework.
BANNER — A flexible substrate on which copy or graphics may be
displayed.
BILLBOARD — A sign or portion of any structure upon which lettering
or pictorial matter is displayed for advertising purposes, which directs
attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment or attraction
sold, offered or existing elsewhere than upon the same lot where such
sign is displayed or only incidentally upon such lot.
CANOPY (ATTACHED) — A multi-sided structure or architectural
projection supported by attachment to a building on one or more sides
and either cantilevered from such building or also supported by
columns at additional points.
CANOPY (FREESTANDING) — A multi-sided structure supported by
columns.
CANOPY SIGN — A sign affixed to the visible surface(s) of an attached
or freestanding canopy. Canopy signs may not be internally or
externally illuminated.
CHANGEABLE SIGN — A sign with the capability of content change by
means of manual or remote input. Includes the following types:
COPY — The graphic content or message of a sign.
COPY AREA OF SIGN — The actual area of the sign copy as applied
to any background. Copy area on any individual background may be
expressed as the sum of the geometrically computed area(s)
encompassing separate individual letters, words, or graphic elements
on that background.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Any sign that is designed and erected for the
purpose of providing direction and/or orientation for pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
DOUBLE-FACED SIGN — A sign with two faces, commonly back to
back.
MANUALLY ACTIVATED — Changeable sign whose message copy
or content can be changed manually on a display surface.
1.
ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED — Changeable sign, such as a lightemitting
diode (LED) electronic message board or digital display,
whose message copy or content can be changed by means of
remote electrically energized on-off switching combinations of
alphabetic or pictographic components arranged on a display
surface. Illumination may be integral to the components, such as
characterized by lamps or other light-emitting devices; or it may be
from an external light source designed to reflect off the changeable
component display.
2.
§ 97-123.9 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.9
1:542
EXTERIOR SIGN — Any sign placed outside a building.
FACADE — That portion of any exterior elevation of a building
extending vertically from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves
and horizontally across the entire width of the building elevation.
GROUND SIGN — Any sign supported by one (1) or two (2) uprights
or braces upon the ground and not attached to any building shall be
considered a ground sign.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign characterized by the use of artificial
light, either projecting through its surface(s) (Internally illuminated); or
reflecting off its surface(s) (Externally Illuminated).
INTERIOR SIGN — Any sign placed within a building, but not including
Window Signs as defined by this ordinance. Interior signs, with the
exception of Window signs as defined, are not regulated by this
ordinance.
MANSARD — A roof-like facade comparable to an exterior building
wall.
OFF-PREMISE SIGN — A sign whose message content may not
necessarily bear any relationship to the activities conducted on the
premises on which it is located, or to the expression of commercial or
non-commercial speech by the owner or bona fide user of the premises
on which it is located.
ON-PREMISE SIGN — A sign whose message content bears a direct
relationship to the activities conducted on the premises on which it
is located, or to the expression of any commercial or non-commercial
speech by the owner or bona fide user of the premises on which it is
located.
PARAPET — The extension of a building facade above the line of the
structural roof.
POLE SIGN (also known as "Ground Sign") — A sign principally
supported by one or more columns, poles or braces placed in or upon
the ground. Pole signs shall advertise only the permitted use, products
or services conducted on the premises.
POLITICAL SIGN — A temporary sign intended to advance a political
statement, cause, or candidate for office.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign other than an Wall sign that is attached to
or projects more than four (4) feet from a building face or wall or from
a structure whose primary purpose is other than the support of a sign.
REVOLVING SIGN — A sign that revolves three hundred and sixty (360)
degrees about an axis. See also: Animated sign.
ROOF LINE — The uppermost line of the roof of a building or, in the
case of an extended facade or parapet, the uppermost point of said
facade or parapet.
§ 97-123.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.9
1:543
SANDWICH BOARD SIGN — An "A-frame" shaped sign that identifies
or advertises a place of business and that consists of two sign boards
that are hinged together at the top.
SIGN — Any device, visible structure or object for visual for visual
communication that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject to
the attention of others, but not including any flag or insignia of any
public, civic, charitable or religious groups.
SIGN STRUCTURE — Any structure designed for the support of a sign.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign intended to display either commercial or
non-commercial messages of a transitory or temporary nature. Portable
signs or any sign not permanently embedded in the ground, or not
permanently affixed to building or sign structure that is permanently
embedded in the ground, are considered temporary signs.
TEMPORARY REAL ESTATE SIGN — A temporary sign advertising
the sale, lease or rental of the property or premises upon which it is
located.
UNDER CANOPY SIGN — A sign attached to the underside of a canopy
or marquee.
V SIGN — A sign containing two faces of equal size, positioned at an
interior angle subtending less than one hundred seventy-nine degrees
(179) at the point of juncture of the individual faces.
WALL OR FASCIA SIGN — A sign that is in any manner affixed to any
exterior wall of a building or structure and that projects not more than
eighteen (18) inches from the building or structure wall. Also includes
signs affixed to architectural projections that project from a building
provided the copy area of such signs remains on a parallel plane to the
face of the building facade or to the face or faces of the architectural
projection to which it is affixed. They shall advertise only the permitted
use, products or services on the premises on which they are displayed.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign affixed to the surface of a window with its
message intended to be visible to the exterior environment.
B. General Provisions. The following regulations apply to all permitted
signs.
1. Any sign hereafter erected or maintained shall conform to the
provisions of this ordinance and the provisions of the Municipal
Building Code and of any other ordinance or regulations of the
municipality.
2. No sign shall be constructed, erected, displayed, altered, relocated
or reconstructed unless a permit shall have first been obtained
from the Building Inspector.
3. No sign other than an official traffic sign or similar sign shall be
erected within the lines of any street or public way unless
specifically authorized by other ordinances or regulations of the
§ 97-123.9 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.9
1:544
municipality or by specific authorization of the municipal
authorities.
4. No sign or sign structure shall be erected at the intersection of any
street in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision, nor at
any location where by its position, shape or color may interfere
with or obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized
traffic sign, signal or device.
5. If a premise contains walls facing more than street or other
property usages, the sign area(s) for each building wall will be
computed separately for each building wall facing a different
street. The sign area(s) thus calculated may then be applied to
permitted signs placed on each separate wall.
6. Every sign permitted by this ordinance must be kept in good
condition and repair. When any sign become insecure, in danger of
falling, or is otherwise deemed unsafe by the Municipal Building
Sub-Code Official responsible for the maintenance of public safety,
or if any sign shall be unlawfully installed, erected, or maintained
in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance, the owner
thereof or the person or firm using same shall, upon written notice
by the Building Sub-Code Official forthwith in the case of
immediate danger and in any case within not more than ten (10)
days, make such sign conform to the provisions of this ordinance,
or shall remove it. If within ten (10) days, the order is not complied
with, the Building Sub-Code Official may remove or cause such sign
to be removed at the expense of the owner and/or the user of the
sign.
7. Any sign that no longer advertises or identifies a use conducted on
the property on which said sign is erected must be removed within
ten (10) days after written notification from the Municipal Building
Sub-Code Official; and upon failure to comply with such notice, the
Building Sub-Code Official is hereby authorized to cause removal of
such sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the
owner of the building, structure, or ground on which the sign is
located.
8. Illumination.
a. No sign shall be illuminated except as provided herein.
b. All light shall be shielded to the greatest extent possible to
minimize glare from the street or adjoining property. Light
levels off site from sign lights shall be less than 0.1 footcandles.
c. Flashing signs, highly reflective glass or fluorescent paint and
illuminated tubing outlining roofs, doors, windows or wall
edges of a building are prohibited.
§ 97-123.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.9
1:545
d. Any light box sign or lit awning is subject to the following
limitations:
(i.) Only the letters and symbols may be illuminated
(ii.) An opaque background must set off the illuminated
sections
(iii.) The letters, logos and symbols may take up a maximum of
40% of the sign area, leaving 60% opaque.
e. Any permitted sign may be illuminated 1/2 hour before and
after closing. No sign within 150 feet of any residential zone
shall be illuminated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. unless the business is open during these hours or
permitted to operate signage by resolution of approval.
f. The Borough of Waldwick encourages illumination of signs
from external sources, provided glare is minimized. Floodlights
used for illumination of any sign, whether or not such
floodlights are attached to or separate from the building, shall
not project above the height of the highest elevation of the
illuminated wall of the building. Wherever it is impractical to
provide such a source of illumination, and only as specifically
permitted by this chapter, internally illuminated signs may be
permitted. Light sources from internally illuminated signs shall
not be visible from outside the sign, and the light from the light
source shall be diffused to eliminate hot spots. Light sources
shall be protected from damage. Light levels at property lines
shall be less than 0.1 footcandles.
9. The area of a sign is to be calculated as follows:
a. Computation of area of individual signs. The area of a sign face
shall be computed by measuring the total area of the space
utilized for sign purposes including the spaces between all
letters, figures, numbers, images or symbols. Where a sign
frame and any material or color forming an integral part of the
background of the sign display is used as a backdrop against
the structure in which it is placed, sign area shall be measured
to the extreme limits of the sign frame or backdrop. Sign area
shall also include the ground structure or any decoration which
is an integral part of the sign, but excluding supports.
b. Computation of area of multifaced signs. The sign area for any
double faced sign shall be computed based on one face only,
except in the case of a double faced sign with unequal sides, in
which the area of the larger side shall be used to determine
sign area.
10. Any sign legally existing at the time of the passage of this
ordinance that does not conform in use, location, height, or size
§ 97-123.9 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.9
1:546
with the regulations of the zone in which such sign is located shall
be considered a protected nonconforming use and may continue in
such status until such time as it is either abandoned or removed by
its owner.
C. General Prohibitions. The following types and uses of signs are
prohibited in all districts for all temporary or permanent signs.
1. Any new sign erected in violation of any section of this chapter. Any
sign not specifically permitted is hereby prohibited.
2. No flashing, moving, rotating or apparent motion signs or lights,
including searchlights. Barber poles are permitted.
3. No signs with more than two (2) display faces are allowed.
4. No sign as permitted shall extend or project above the highest
elevation of the wall to which it is attached, nor shall any sign be
erected on or attached to the roof of a building.
5. No sign shall be painted on or affixed to water towers, storage
tanks, smoke stacks or similar structures.
6. Signs emitting a sound, odor or visible matter such as smoke or
vapor.
7. No sign erected shall contain audio equipment.
8. No billboard or billboard sign shall be permitted.
9. Off-premises signs advertising an article or product not
manufactured, assembled, processed, repaired, serviced or sold
upon the premises are prohibited in all districts.
10. Projecting signs are prohibited other than as specified for On-
Premises Signs Permitted in Non-Residential Zones
11. Pole signs, except as otherwise provided for in this chapter.
12. Exterior use of advertising devices such as banners, streamers,
pennants, flags, and balloons, lights (whether flashing, flickering,
blinking, or rotating), wind-operated devices and any other type of
fluttering or flashing devices or emitting an unsteady or glaring
light. This regulation should not be considered to restrict the
erection of a non-advertising flag or flagpole on a lot occupied by a
residential dwelling.
13. Signs placed or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers which are parked
on a public right-of-way, public property or private property so as to
be visible from a public right-of-way where the apparent purpose is
to advertise a product or direct people to a business or activity
located on the same or nearby property. However, this is not in any
way intended to prohibit signs placed on or affixed to vehicles and
§ 97-123.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.9
1:547
trailers, such as permanent lettering on motor vehicles, where the
sign is incidental to the primary use of the vehicle or trailer.
14. Paper posters and painted signs applied directly to a tree, rock or
natural feature of any kind or to a wall of a building, fence or pole
or other support.
15. Signs painted or otherwise affixed on the inside or outside of
automobile windows except for pricing information associated with
the sale of new and used cars and only when such vehicles are
located on the premises of an establishment which has been
approved for such use.
16. Portable or movable signs, except temporary sandwich board signs
as permitted by this chapter.
17. Neon signs of any kind, whether located on the exterior or interior
of a wall or window if visible from the street upon which the
premises fronts.
18. Signs erected or painted or composed of day-glow or
phosphorescent or similar material.
19. Signs on parking lot light standards not relating to traffic control.
20. Signs within the public street right-of-way (other than public
notices and temporary political signs and unless otherwise allowed
in this chapter).
21. Signs that are in such a state of disrepair as to constitute an
immediate threat to the public health, welfare and safety.
22. Business signs for businesses which are discontinued for a period
in excess of 30 days.
23. Signs or other advertising structures, as regulated by this chapter,
erected at the intersection of any streets in such a manner as to
obstruct free and clear vision, or at any location where, by reason
of the position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the
view of, cause optical illusion or be confused with any authorized
traffic sign, signal or device, or which makes use of words, phrases,
symbols, or characters in such manner as to interfere with, mislead
or confuse traffic.
24. Any sign not in compliance with the Borough Building or Electrical
Codes, as amended, as to design, structural members and
connections.
25. Any sign located or displayed upon any sidewalk or street or area
between the sidewalk and curb or projecting on or over a sidewalk
or street except as provided in this chapter.
26. Hand-lettered interior window signs.
§ 97-123.9 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.9
1:548
27. Exhibiting statements, words, pictures or images of an obscene or
pornographic nature.
28. Signs attached to, projecting from or hanging underneath a
building eave.
29. Any manually activated or electronically activated changeable copy
sign (including a light-emitting diode (LED) electronic message
center sign or digital display), used to temporarily display time and
weather, and/or other information. Automotive service stations are
permitted a manually activated changeable copy sign to display
prices. Changeable copy signs within automotive service stations
are limited to pricing, and shall not include copy pertaining to the
business, occupation, or tenant advertised or identified.
D. Permits.
1. Unless specifically exempted, a permit must be obtained from the
Building Sub-Code Official for the erection of all signs erected in
the municipality. No new sign shall hereafter be erected,
constructed except as herein provided and until after a permit, if
required, has been issued by the Building Sub-Code Official.
Exemptions from the necessity of securing a permit, however, shall
not be construed to relieve the owner of the sign from
responsibility for its erection and maintenance in a safe manner
and in a manner in accord with all the other provisions of this
ordinance.
2. Before any permit is granted for the erection of a sign or sign
structure requiring such permit, plans and specifications shall be
filed with the Building Sub-Code Official. All sign permit
applications shall include sign dimensions (height, size, sign area),
colors, materials, illumination and required details of construction
including loads, stresses, anchorage, and any other pertinent data.
A scaled facade elevation plan that indicates the placement and
location of signage shall be provided for all proposed wall signage
or signage attached to a structure. A scaled site plan shall be
submitted for all proposed pole and ground signage indicating sign
location and setbacks from existing property lines and road rightof-
way. The permit application shall be accompanied by the written
consent of the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign
is to be erected.
3. No sign shall be enlarged or relocated except in conformity to the
provisions herein, nor until a proper permit, if required, has been
secured. The changing of movable parts or components of an
approved sign that is designed for such changes, or the changing of
copy, display and/or graphic matter, or the content of any sign or
sign structure shall not be deemed an alteration.
4. Permit fees to erect, alter, or relocate a sign shall be in accordance
with the sign fee schedule contained within Chapter 48 of this code.
§ 97-123.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.9
1:549
E. Exempt Signs. The following signs are exempt from the requirements of
securing a permit:
1. Municipal, County or State traffic or directional signs located
within the right-of-way of a public street.
2. A memorial sign or tablet, which indicates the name of the building
and/or its date of erection, when cut into any masonry surface or
when constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials.
3. Real estate offering signs, "for sale", or "to let", erected by the
owner of the property, not to exceed two (2) square feet in area,
which do not advertise an agent or agency.
4. Temporary Political Signs.
5. Garage and Yard Sale Signs shall be governed by Ordinance 96-6.
6. Public safety or public notice signs which are required by provision
of the law or other ordinance.
7. Directional and informational signs for nonresidential uses,
provided the area of such sign is not more than three square feet,
and provided the number of such signs on site is limited to that
which is reasonably necessary and appropriate for safety,
circulation, information or other noncommercial purposes. Such
directional or informational signs shall not contain advertising,
logo, symbols, business identification or other nondirectional copy.
8. Signs for official governmental or quasi-governmental business,
including temporary signs or banners advertising public or quasipublic
events that are posted or displayed with the permission of
the governing body or its designee(s).
F. Regulation by Zone.
1. On-Premise Signs Permitted In All Zones. In addition to any signs
designated as permissible in the General Provisions and/or in any
other sections of this ordinance, the following signs and/or sign
types are permitted in all zones:
A. Temporary Real Estate signs as defined herein, provided that
the area of such signs shall not exceed the following limitations
by zone:
i. Residential:
a. One- and Two-family dwellings - six (6) square feet.
b. Other residential uses - ten (10) square feet.
c. No sign shall exceed a height of five (5) feet.
ii. All other zones except Industrial: eight (8) square feet.
§ 97-123.9 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.9
1:550
iii. Industrial: eight (8) square feet.
And further provided that not more than one (1) such sign
shall be placed on property held in single and separate
ownership unless such property fronts on more than one
street, in which case one such sign shall be permitted
on each separate street frontage. All such signs shall be
permitted only during the time in which the property
advertised is available for sale, lease or rental, and must
be removed within 48 hours after execution of an
agreement of sale, lease or rental. This includes the
posting of such property as sold, leased or rented.
B. Trespassing signs, signs indicating the private nature of a
road, driveway or premises, provided that the area of any such
sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot.
C. Temporary signs erected in connection with the development
or proposed development of the premises or property provided
that the area of any such sign shall not exceed nine (9) square
feet per each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of lot area in
the subject development, or thirty two (32) square feet,
whichever is smaller. Not more than one (1) such sign shall be
placed on property held in single and separate ownership
unless the property fronts on more than one (1) street, in which
case one (1) such sign shall be permitted on each separate
street frontage. Such signs shall be removed within ten (10)
days after the development has been completed and/or the last
structure occupied.
D. Temporary Political signs as defined herein provided that the
area of any such signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet and
that not more than two (2) such signs shall be displayed on any
single privately owned premises or property, unless such
premises or property fronts on more than one street in which
case two (2) such signs shall be permitted on each separate
street frontage. If used for the purpose of advertising political
parties and/or candidates for election or issues subject to
referendum, such signs shall be allowed for a period not to
exceed forty-five (45) days prior to such election or
referendum, and shall be removed within five (5) days
following such election or referendum. If the person(s)
responsible for the sign has not removed it within five (5) days
the local municipal chairman of the political party affiliated
with the sign shall be ordered to remove it. [Amended
3-25-08 by Ord. No. 5-08]
2. On-Premise Signs Permitted In Residential Zones. In all residential
zones only the following signs shall be permitted, provided that no
sign area limitation is exceeded:
§ 97-123.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.9
1:551
A. Nameplate and professional signs. A professional sign or
nameplate sign, indicating the name and/or address of the
occupant, shall not be larger than one (1) square foot. If
illuminated, the direct source of the light shall be shielded in
such a manner that it is not visible from the street or any
adjoining residential property, unless lit by porch light or
lamppost light. A permitted home occupation may be included
with the name of the occupant and occupation. Only one (1)
sign per dwelling unit is permitted.
B. Temporary signs of contractors or artisans displayed during
the period such contractors or artisans are performing work on
the premises on which such signs are displayed, provided that
the area of any such sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square
feet. Such signs shall be limited to one (1) sign per contractor
or artisan, and shall be removed immediately upon completion
of the work of the contractor or artisan.
C. Subdivision identification signs, and/or signs identifying
apartment or condominium complexes, provided that the area
of any such sign shall not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet,
and further provided that one (1) such sign shall be permitted
for each separate street and/or separate building frontage
occupied by the subdivision, apartment, or condominium
complex and/or for each means of entrance to or exit from the
subdivision, apartment or condominium complex.
D. Permitted on-premises signs for institutional uses within
residential zones. One (1) sign identifying permitted
institutions such as schools, colleges, churches, nursing,
assisted living facilities or other institutions of a similar public
or semipublic nature may erect and maintain ground signs
provided that:
i. The height of such sign does not exceed 6 feet from grade
to the highest point of the sign.
ii. The sign face does not exceed a height of three feet above
the surrounding grade base of the sign
iii. No sign shall be located no closer than 10 feet to any
property line and 25 feet from any residential land use.
iv. The size of such signs is not in excess of sixteen (16)
square feet.
v. If such signs are illuminated, the direct source of light
shall be shielded in such a manner as not to be visible from
the street or any adjoining residential property.
3. General Regulations — On-Premise Signs In Residential Zones.
§ 97-123.9 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.9
1:552
a. Animated, Changeable or Revolving signs are prohibited.
b. Billboard and Projecting signs are prohibited.
c. Setback — None of the signs permitted in the residential zones
shall be erected within fifteen (15) feet of any street right-ofway
line, provided that a nameplate sign not more than one (1)
square foot in area as regulated above may be placed
anywhere in the front yard.
4. On-Premises Signs Permitted in Non-Residential Zones. In nonresidential
zones only the following signs shall be permitted: Only
one (1) wall or projecting sign per tenancy and either (1) ground
sign for the property shall be permitted, except for uses in which
this section dictates specific sign regulations per use. No sign shall
be permitted which is not accessory to the business conducted on
the property and then only if the following requirements are
complied with:
A. All signs shall be limited to a maximum of four (4) colors
(including black and white). Garish, fluorescent and day-glow
colors are prohibited.
B. Ground signs. One (1) ground sign is permitted per parcel in
the C-1, C-2 and C-3, C-AH, and I Zones, except for uses in
which this section dictates specific sign regulations per use.
Said signs shall be subject to the following conditions:
1. Said sign shall be located in the front yard no closer than
(5) feet from the front property line and ten (10) feet from
any other property line, except that no ground sign shall
be less than 25 feet from a residential land use.
2. The area of said sign shall not exceed twenty-four (24)
square feet.
3. The height of the sign structure, including its supporting
members, shall not exceed six (6) feet.
4. The bottom of the sign display area shall not exceed three
(3) feet above grade at the base of the sign.
5. The maximum width of the sign, including its supporting
structure, shall not exceed six (6) feet.
6. No ground sign shall be placed upon a lot so as to cause a
visual hazard for vehicular traffic. When necessary the
Building Sub-Code Official shall consult an opinion for the
Chief of the Police Department.
7. A directory ground sign identifying two or more
businesses located in a single office, mixed-use, industrial
§ 97-123.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.9
1:553
or other similarly utilized building is permitted and subject
to the requirements of this section.
C. Wall signs are permitted for uses in all non-residential zones,
except where the requirements of this section provide sign
regulations for specific uses. One (1) wall shall be permitted
for every parcel or lot fronting on a public street. For parcels or
lots that front on more than one street, one (1) such sign shall
be permitted for each separate street frontage. Wall signs shall
be subject to the following conditions:
1. No sign shall extend further than ten (10) inches from the
face of the building upon which it is attached. Where a sign
extends more than three (3) inches from the face of a wall,
the bottom of said sign shall not be closer than ten (10)
feet to the ground level below said sign.
2. The maximum height of any sign shall not exceed six (6)
feet or twenty five percent (25%) of the height of the wall
of the establishment to which it is attached, whichever is
the lesser.
3. The maximum width of any sign shall not exceed twenty
(20) feet or ninety (90%) percent of the width of the wall of
the establishment to which it is attached, whichever is the
lesser.
4. The maximum area of any sign shall not exceed thirty-two
(32) square feet. In those cases where a parcel or lot has
more than one street frontage, the maximum sign area for
additional permitted wall signage shall not exceed 24
square feet.
5. In the case of a shopping center, group of stores, multitenant
building, or other business uses on a lot held in
single and separate ownership, the provisions of this
section relating to the total area of signs permitted on a
premises shall apply with respect to each building,
separate store, or facade of each individual leasing unit.
6. Each building or property may have one (1) additional wall
sign for tenant(s) in a single or multi-tenant building
located above an entrance that faces customer parking
areas or pedestrian walkways not visible from either a
public or private street. Said sign is not to exceed sixteen
(16) square feet.
7. No wall signage is permitted above the first floor of any
commercial building, except where permitted elsewhere in
this chapter.
§ 97-123.9 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.9
1:554
D. Projecting signs. Projecting signs are permitted for all uses in
all non-residential zones, and limited to one (1) such sign per
establishment. A business establishment shall not erect both a
projecting sign and a wall sign. Projecting signs shall be
subject to the following conditions:
1. Said sign shall project at right angles to the structure.
2. The area of said sign shall not exceed eight (8) square feet.
3. The bottom of said sign shall not be closer than eight (8)
feet to the sidewalk and shall not project more than four
(4) feet from the structure.
4. All such signs from a series of stores should have the same
area and proportional dimensions.
E. Automotive service station signs. In addition to signage
permitted within this section, automotive service stations may
display the following signs:
1. Directional signs or lettering displays on the building walls
over individual entrance doors or bays consisting only of
the words "washing", "lubrication", "repairs", "mechanic
on duty" or other words closely similar in importance,
provided that there shall be no more than one (1) such sign
over each bay or entrance, the letters thereof shall not
exceed twelve (12) inches in height and that such letters
shall be limited to a single line.
2. Customary lettering on, or other insignia which are a
structural part of, a gasoline pump consisting only of the
brand name of gasoline sold, lead warning signs, a price
indicator and any other sign required by law and not
exceeding a total of three (3) square feet on the pump.
3. Pole sign. One (1) pole sign is permitted for gasoline
service stations and shall be subject to the following
conditions:
i. Said sign shall be located in the front yard no closer
than (15) feet from any property line.
ii. The area of said sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square
feet inclusive of the gasoline service station price sign.
Such sign shall not be separated from the gasoline
price sign, but shall appear as a single integrated sign.
iii. The height of the sign structure, including its
supporting members, shall not exceed sixteen (16)
feet.
§ 97-123.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.9
1:555
iv. The maximum width of the sign, including its
supporting structure, shall not exceed six (6) feet.
v. No pole sign shall be placed upon a lot so as to cause a
visual hazard for vehicular traffic. When necessary the
Building Sub-Code Official shall consult an opinion for
the Chief of the Police Department.
4. Automotive service station canopy signs.
i. A gasoline service station with a canopy shall be
permitted two canopy signs in total.
ii. The canopy sign or signs shall collectively not exceed
20 square feet in area.
iii. The canopy sign shall be a flat sign permanently
affixed to the vertical face of the canopy and shall not
project above or below or from any side of the vertical
face of the canopy.
iv. The canopy sign may be illuminated by internal and
nonintermittent light sources.
v. A business logo, inclusive of striping or other symbols,
may appear on this canopy sign as part of the
allowable sign area. Any striped area of the canopy
shall be counted towards the permissible area of the
sign.
F. Shopping Center signs. In addition to signage permitted within
this section, the following signs are permitted within shopping
centers:
1. Pole sign. One (1) pole sign is permitted for shopping
centers and shall be subject to the following conditions:
i. Said sign shall be located in the front yard no closer
than (15) feet from any property line.
ii. The area of said sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square
feet.
iii. The height of the sign structure, including its
supporting members, shall not exceed sixteen (16)
feet.
iv. The maximum width of the sign, including its
supporting structure, shall not exceed six (6) feet.
v. No ground sign shall be placed upon a lot so as to
cause a visual hazard for vehicular traffic. When
necessary the Building Sub-Code Official shall consult
an opinion for the Chief of the Police Department.
§ 97-123.9 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.9
1:556
G. Freestanding office buildings, laboratories and other non-retail
commercial buildings in excess of 6,500 square feet. In
addition to signage permitted within this section, the following
signs are permitted for said uses:
1. Identification signs.
i. One wall-mounted identification sign, with the copy
limited to a company name and/or corporate logo, is
permitted on said uses with frontage on one street.
For establishments with frontage on two or more
streets, a maximum of two identification signs are
permitted.
ii. Identification signs shall be located no more than four
feet below the parapet or uppermost roofline or facade
of the building. Signs shall not project above the
roofline or parapet of the building.
iii. The maximum size of each identification sign shall be
one square foot for each 250 square feet of building
space for the first 10,000 square feet of building space
and one square foot for each 500 square feet of
building space above 10,000 square feet, up to a
maximum of 200 square feet. No identification sign
shall exceed 200 square feet in size.
2. Ground sign or pole sign. Ground signs and pole signs are
subject to the regulations within § 97-123.9F4B and F1,
except office buildings, laboratories and similar non-retail
commercial structures are permitted one ground sign or
pole sign per street frontage.
H. Canopy signs.
1. Signs affixed or applied in an essentially flat plane to the
face of a freestanding canopy or architectural projection
provided that the sign area of any such sign, as defined
herein, does not exceed an area equal to forty percent
(40%) of the area of the face area of the canopy or
architectural projection to which such sign is affixed or
applied.
2. Graphic treatment in the form of striping or patterns shall
be permitted on the face of any building or freestanding
canopy, or architectural projection without restriction, and
the area of any such graphic treatment shall not be
calculated as a component of permitted copy area.
3. No canopy sign can be illuminated by either internal or
external lighting.
§ 97-123.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.9
1:557
4. No establishment shall contain both a wall sign and a
canopy sign. No canopy shall be erected, and no canopy
sign shall be permitted above the first floor of any building.
I. Awning signs.
1. Signs affixed or applied to the face or side surfaces of an
awning provided that the sign area, as defined herein,
does not exceed 10 percent of the total facade area to
which the awning is secured, or 24 square feet, whichever
is lesser. For buildings and property containing more than
one use or tenant, permitted awning sign area shall be
determined by the facade area of the individual lease unit.
2. Graphic treatment and/or embellishment in the form of
striping, patterns, or valances shall be permitted on the
face or side surfaces of any awing or backlit awning
without restriction, and the area of any such graphic
treatment and/or embellishment shall not be calculated as
a component of permitted sign area.
3. No awning shall be illuminated.
4. No awning shall be erected above the first level of any
building except on the upper floors of buildings in which a
commercial tenant is present. Awnings attached to the
same building shall be of the same shape, color and height.
To the extent possible, awnings shall be of the same size.
5. No establishment shall contain both a wall sign and an
awning sign, and no awning sign shall be permitted above
the first level of any building.
J. Window Signs. Window advertising signs shall be prohibited in
all non-residential districts, with the exception of permitted
ground level retail and personal service business uses,
supermarkets and restaurant establishments located in the
VC-2, VC-3, C-1, C-2 and C-3 Zones, subject to the following
conditions:
1. Information on such signs shall be limited to
advertisements for special promotions, grand openings,
temporary sales and other such similar nonpermanent
sales promotions. An exception shall be granted for
restaurants, which may post one permanent menu not
larger than two square feet in size. In addition, an
exception shall be granted for supermarkets which may
permanent display signage in accordance with item 5
below.
2. The period such signs are permitted to be displayed shall
be per the regulations of § 97-123.9F4L1 and 4.
§ 97-123.9 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.9
1:558
3. Such signs may be constructed of paper, cardboard or
other such written, numerical, graphic or photographic
material or information displayed in the window of such
establishment.
4. Such signs shall be contained entirely within the ground
level interior of the building in which the business is
located.
5. Window signs shall not exceed 15% of the total area of the
window to which they are affixed. All letters, numbers and
symbols of window signage shall include lettering not
more than 5 inches in height. Window and window signs
shall not be more than 15% opaque.
6. Such signs shall be maintained in an orderly manner at all
times.
K. Directory signs are permitted in all non-residential districts
subject to the following conditions:
1. Directory signs for office or mixed use commercial
buildings in the VC-2, VC-3, shall be limited to one wallmounted
directory sign not exceeding six square feet in
size and no higher than 10 feet above surrounding grade in
addition to permitted wall, awning and/or projecting signs.
2. For office, mixed-use, industrial and other similar uses in
the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-AH and I Zone Districts, one (1)
ground sign or one (1) wall directory sign is permitted. A
wall directory sign is permitted in addition to permitted
wall, awning and/or projecting signs. No more than one
ground sign is permitted per parcel, development tract or
lot. The following additional requirements are required for
directory signs in the above listed zoning districts:
i. Directory ground signs are subject to the provisions
for ground signs within item 2 of this section.
ii. Buildings containing less than 50,000 square feet and
more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area may
have one wall directory sign containing a maximum of
20 square feet of sign area.
iii. Buildings containing less than 10,000 square feet of
gross floor area may have one wall directory sign
containing a maximum of 12 square feet of sign area.
L. Temporary signs. General Regulations for exterior temporary
signs. Temporary signs are subject to the General Provisions
section of § 97-123.9, as well as the following requirements:
§ 97-123.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.9
1:559
1. Except for those temporary signs whose time of display is
specifically addressed elsewhere in this ordinance, no
temporary sign shall be permitted to be displayed for a
period in excess of thirty (30) days unless a longer span of
display time is approved by the municipal Zoning Official.
2. Except for those temporary signs whose size is specifically
addressed elsewhere in this ordinance, the size of any
temporary sign shall not be in excess of the size permitted
for any permanent sign of like configuration and/or type in
a given zone. In the event existing permanent signage is
present on a structure or parcel, temporary signage shall
not exceed the size of any existing signage, unless the size
of said temporary sign is dictated elsewhere in this
ordinance.
3. No temporary sign shall be electrically energized or
contain any electrical device.
4. Temporary signs advertising special events and/or
promotions of a commercial or non-commercial nature,
unless specifically addressed elsewhere in this ordinance,
and provided that such signs shall be non-illuminated,
shall be displayed during a time period of no more than ten
(10) days prior to the special event and/or promotion, and
shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours following
the special event and/or promotion. Not more than one (1)
such sign shall be placed on any single premises or
property unless such premises or property fronts on more
than one street, in which case one (1) such sign shall be
permitted on each separate street frontage.
5. Ground Signs — Forty percent (40%) of the area permitted
for a permanently installed pole and ground sign as
permitted within this section.
6. Building-mounted temporary signs — Ten percent (10%) of
the building facade area on which such sign is mounted.
7. Sandwich Board Signs — One (1) sign not exceeding thirtytwo
(32) inches in width and thirty-six (36) inches in height
may be permitted within the sidewalk or grass strip of a
public right of way, subject to the following standards:
i. The sign is located in front of, and within twelve (12)
feet of the main entrance to the establishment it
advertises.
ii. Placement of the sign allows a minimum of thirty-six
(36) inches of unobstructed sidewalk clearance
between it and any building or other obstruction.
§ 97-123.9 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.9
1:560
§ 97-123.10. Swimming pools.
iii. The sign must be free-standing and shall not be
affixed, chained, anchored, or otherwise secured to
the ground or to any pole, parking meter, tree, tree
grate, fire hydrant, railing, or other structure.
iv. No materials such as papers, balloons, wind socks,
etc., may be added to the sign to increase its height
and/or width.
v. The sign shall not contain foil, mirrors, bare metal or
other reflective materials which could create
hazardous conditions to motorist, bicyclist, or
pedestrians.
vi. The sign must be internally weighted so that it is
stable and windproof.
vii. The sign is placed within the public right of way only
during the hours of the establishment's operation.
viii. No sign shall be placed within a public parking space
or such that it obstructs vehicle sight distance.
A. Permanent private pools. Permanent private residential swimming
pools are permitted as an accessory structure subject to the following
standards:
1. Pools may be located in side or rear yards only. No pool or wading
pool shall be constructed or installed on any lot unless upon said lot
shall be located a dwelling unit.
2. No edge of any pool shall be closer to any lot line than ten (10) feet.
3. In the case of a corner lot, a permanent private swimming pool
shall not be constructed, erected, installed or maintained closer to
the street line than the prevailing setback line on that street.
4. The pool may be lighted by underwater or exterior lights, or both,
provided that all exterior lights are located so that the light is
neither directed or reflected upon adjacent properties in such a
manner as to be a nuisance or any annoyance to neighboring
property. Underwater lighting shall be in compliance with the
applicable National Electrical Code.
5. The pool shall be completely surrounded by fencing between four
(4) feet and six (6) feet in height. All fences shall be constructed in
conformance with required building codes.
6. No public amplifying system shall be used with a private residential
swimming pool.
§ 97-123.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.10
1:561
7. All accessory cabanas and pool houses shall be subject to §
97-121.2 Accessory buildings, structures, and uses.
8. All pools shall be properly filtered to the specifications of the
Construction Official.
B. Commercial; recreational pools. Swim clubs, commercial recreation
associated with lakes and public swimming pools shall adhere to the
following standards:
1. Said uses shall be located within a lot area of a minimum of five (5)
acres. Within such area may also be located clubhouse, open space,
terraces, pools, recreational uses, cabanas, etc. Where the pool is
located in a tract in excess of five (5) acres in area in which other
recreational facilities are provided, a specific allocation of the fiveacre
area does not have to be provided.
2. No edge of any pool or separate swimming tank shall be closer to
any property line than one hundred fifty (150) feet.
3. Pools shall be enclosed with a fence or in lieu thereof located on a
terrace or landscaped or surrounded by structures or any
combination of the above or similar techniques in order to control
access to the immediate pool area.
4. Pools shall be lighted both internally and externally but in no case
shall any light be directed in a direct or indirect fashion upon any
adjacent property. All freestanding pole standards used for exterior
lighting shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height and shall be
no closer than twenty-five (25) feet to the edge of any pool. All
lighting shall be in compliance with the applicable National
Electrical Code.
5. Pools shall be constructed below the surface of the ground except
that nothing shall prohibit the pool areas from being terraced on
side hill locations.
6. Pools shall be landscaped to effectively screen the view of the pool
from neighboring properties.
7. All loudspeakers or public address systems shall be located in such
recreation areas so that speakers are not directly aimed at any
adjacent residential properties.
8. One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for every thirty
(75) square feet of water surface. Such parking facilities may be
included with other parking areas associated with clubhouses,
other recreational uses and similar uses as part of a total site plan.
C. Pools within senior citizen housing projects. Pools included as part of
the overall development are permitted as a private accessory structure
for the residents or guests and shall adhere to the following standards:
§ 97-123.10 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.10
1:562
§ 97-123.11. Nonconforming decks. [Added 5-22-84 by Ord. No.
8-84; amended 12-12-00 by Ord. No. 22-00]
1. Pools shall be located in the side or rear yards only and within an
area no less than four thousand (4,000) square feet that is devoted
to the use of the pool.
2. No edge of any pool or separate swimming tank shall be closer to
any building or property line than twenty (20) feet.
3. The total land devoted to the use of the pool shall be enclosed with
a fence no less than six (6) feet in height nor more than ten (10) feet
in height.
4. The pool shall be lighted both internally and externally, but in no
case shall any light be directed in a direct or indirect fashion upon
any dwelling or adjacent property. All lighting shall be in
compliance with the applicable National Electrical Code.
5. All pools shall be constructed below the surface of the ground.
6. If any portion of the pool, part of the land devoted to the use of the
pool, light pole standards or loudspeakers are located closer than
one hundred (100) feet to any residential building located outside
this property, adequate dense buffers of trees and shrubs shall be
provided.
D. Maintenance. All pools referred to in the above section shall have all the
area surrounding the pool made and kept neat and attractive so as to be
in conformity with surrounding property, and no rubbish, debris or litter
shall be permitted to remain or accumulate in or about the pool.
A. A rear deck may be constructed, erected or altered on any building lot,
provided that the construction of the deck conforms to the
requirements of the Land Use and Development Code of the Borough of
Waldwick. The property owner or contractor shall apply to the
Construction Code Official for, and obtain, a building permit prior to the
construction of the deck.
B. A property owner must apply for a permit to the Construction Code
Official. The permit may be issued only if the Construction Code Official
determines that construction of the nonconforming rear deck complies
with the conditions enumerated in § 97-123.11C.
C. Conditions for construction of a nonconforming deck.
1. After the construction of the deck, the rear yard setback of the
subject property shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet, and the
side yard setback shall not be less than 10 feet
2. The deck shall be constructed only at the rear of the dwelling.
§ 97-123.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.11
1:563
§ 97-123.12. Wireless telecommunications towers and antennas.
[Added 8-12-97 by Ord. No. 19-97]
3. The deck shall have a maximum size of two hundred seventy-five
(275) square feet.
4. The deck shall be constructed of natural wood, pressure-treated
lumber which is rot resistant, or simulated wood engineered
plastics. The appearance of the deck shall conform to the aesthetics
of the existing neighborhood, and the deck itself shall be
constructed and maintained in conformance with the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code.
5. The maximum height of the platform portion of the deck shall not
exceed six (6) feet from the grade at any point.
6. No permanent cover, of any type, shall be permitted over the deck.
7. The deck shall not protrude beyond either side of the dwelling to
which it is attached.
8. The area of a rear deck shall be excluded from determining the
applicable maximum percent of building coverage [Added 7-14-87
by Ord. No. 10-87]
1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines
for the siting of wireless communications towers and antennas. The
goals of this section is to: (1) protect residential areas and land uses
from potential adverse impacts of towers and antennas; (2) encourage
the location of towers in non-residential areas; (3) minimize the total
number of towers throughout the community; (4) strongly encourage
the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a primary option rather
than construction of additional single-use towers; (5) encourage users
of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas
where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; (6) encourage
users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes
the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas through careful
design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging
techniques; (7) enhance the ability of the providers of
telecommunications services to provide such services to the community
quickly, effectively, and efficiently; (8) consider the public health and
safety of communication towers; and (9) avoid potential damage to
adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful
siting of tower structures. In furtherance of these goals, the Borough of
Waldwick shall give due consideration to the Borough of Waldwick's
master plan, zoning map, existing land uses, and environmentally
sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of towers and
antennas.
2. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings set forth below:
§ 97-123.11 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.12
1:564
(a) "Alternative tower structure" means man-made trees, clock towers,
bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting
structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or
towers.
(b) "Antenna" means any exterior transmitting or receiving device
mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in
communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves,
digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar
signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other
communication signals.
(c) "Backhaul network" means the lines that connect a provider's
towers/cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching
offices, and/or long distance providers, or the public switched
telephone network.
(d) "FAA" means the Federal Aviation Administration.
(e) "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission.
(f) "Height" means, when referring to a tower or other structure, the
distance measured from the lowest finished grade of the parcel to
the highest point on the tower or other structure, including the
base pad and any antenna.
(g) "Preexisting towers and preexisting antennas" means any tower or
antenna for which a building permit or conditional use permit has
been properly issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
including permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been
constructed so long as such approval is current and not expired.
(h) "Tower" means any structure that is designed and constructed
primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for
telephone, radio and similar communication purposes, including
self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers.
The term includes radio and television transmission towers,
microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone
towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. The term
includes the structure and any support thereto.
3. Applicability.
(a) New Towers and Antennas. All new wireless telecommunications
towers or antennas in the Borough of Waldwick shall be subject to
these regulations, except as provided in Sections 3(b) through (d),
inclusive.
(b) Amateur Radio Station Operators/Receive Only Antennas. This
section shall not govern the installation of any antenna that is
under seventy (70) feet in height, owned and operated by a
federally licensed amateur radio operator exclusively for private
§ 97-123.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.12
1:565
noncommercial purposes. See § 97-124.11 for regulations
applicable to amateur radio.
(c) Preexisting Towers or Antennas. Preexisting towers and
preexisting antennas shall not be required to meet the
requirements of this section, other than the requirements of
Sections 4(f) and 4(g), absent any enlargement or structural
modification of the addition of any structures.
(d) AM Array, For purposes of implementing this section, an AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground
system which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be
considered one tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation
distances shall be measured from the outer perimeter of the towers
included in the AM array. Additional tower units may be added
within the perimeter of the AM array by right.
4. General Requirements.
(a) Principal or Accessory Use. Antennas and towers may be
considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing
use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the
installation of an antenna or tower on such lot.
(b) Lot Size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with zone development regulations,
including but not limited to setback requirements, lot-coverage
requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the
entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be
located on leased parcels within such lot.
(c) Inventory of Existing Sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or
tower shall provide to the zoning officer an inventory of its existing
towers, antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas, that
are either within the jurisdiction of the Borough of Waldwick or
within one mile of the border thereof, including specific
information about the location, height, and design of each tower.
The Zoning Officer may share such information with other
applicants applying for administrative approvals or conditional use
permits under this ordinance or other organizations seeking to
locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the Borough of Waldwick,
provided, however that the Zoning Officer is not, by sharing such
information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites
are available or suitable.
(d) Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following
requirements:
(1) Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or,
subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a
neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
§ 97-123.12 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.12
1:566
(2) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related
structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors,
textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend them into
the natural setting and surrounding buildings.
(3) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment
must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely
compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to
make the antenna and related equipment as visually
unobtrusive as possible.
(e) Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by
the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the
lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least
disturbance to the surrounding views.
(f) State or Federal Requirements. All towers must meet or exceed
current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any
other agency of the state or federal government with the authority
to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations
are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed
by this ordinance shall bring such towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six
(6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations,
unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the
controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and
antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or
antenna at the owner's expense.
(g) Building Codes; Safety Standards. To ensure the structural
integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is
maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable
state or local building codes and the applicable standards for
towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association,
as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the Borough of
Waldwick concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes
and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property,
then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the
owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such tower into
compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into
compliance within said thirty (30) days shall constitute grounds for
the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
(h) Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and
separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities
located in the Borough of Waldwick irrespective of municipal and
county jurisdictional boundaries.
§ 97-123.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.12
1:567
(i) Not Essential Services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this ordinance section and shall not be
regulated or permitted as essential services public utilities, or
private utilities.
(j) Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall
certify that all franchises required by law for the construction and/
or operation of a wireless communication system in the Borough of
Waldwick have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required
franchises with the Zoning Officer.
(k) Public Notice. For purposes of this ordinance, any conditional use
request, variance request, or appeal of an administratively
approved use or conditional use shall require public notice to all
abutting property owners and all property owners of properties
that are located within the corresponding separation distance
listed in Section 7(b)(5)(ii), Table 2, in addition to any notice
otherwise required by this Ordinance.
(l) Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.
(m) (Reserved)
(n) Buildings and Support Equipment. Buildings and support
equipment associated with antennas or towers shall comply with
the requirements of Section 8.
(o) Multiple Antenna/Tower Plan. The Borough of Waldwick
encourages the users of towers and antennas to submit a single
application for approval of multiple towers and/or antenna sites.
Applications for approval of multiple sites shall be given priority in
the review process.
(p) Height. The maximum height of a new tower shall be one hundred
fifty (150) feet.
5. Permitted Uses.
(a) General. The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted
uses and shall not require administrative approval or a conditional
use permit.
(b) Permitted Uses. The following uses are specifically permitted:
(1) Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or
otherwise controlled by the Borough of Waldwick provided a
license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been
approved by the Borough of Waldwick. However, the Borough
may, as a condition of such lease, require site plan approval.
The decision to extend such leases to an applicant shall be
vested solely with the municipality, and shall not be governed
by this ordinance.
§ 97-123.12 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.12
1:568
6. Administratively Approved Uses.
(a) General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of
administrative approvals for towers and antennas.
(1) The Zoning Officer may administratively approve the uses
listed in this section.
(2) Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the
Zoning Officer providing the information set forth in Sections
7(b) (1) and 7(b)(3) of this ordinance and a nonrefundable fee
as established by resolution of the Governing Body to
reimburse the Borough of Waldwick for the costs of reviewing
the application.
(3) The Zoning officer shall review the application for
administrative approval and determine if the proposed use
complies with sections 4, 7(b)(4) and 7(b)(5) of this ordinance.
(4) The Zoning Officer shall respond to each such application
within sixty (60) days after receiving it by either approving or
denying the application. If the Zoning Officer fails to respond
to the applicant within said sixty (60) days, then the application
shall be deemed to be approved.
(5) In connection with any such administrative approval, the
Zoning officer may, in order to encourage shared use,
administratively waive any zoning district setback
requirements in Section 7 (b) (4) or separation distances
between towers in Section 7 (b) (5) by up to fifty percent (50%).
(6) In connection with any such administrative approval, the
Zoning Officer may, in order to encourage the use of
monopoles, administratively allow the reconstruction of an
existing tower to monopole construction.
(7) If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant shall file
an application for a conditional use permit pursuant to Section
7 prior to filing any appeal that may be available under this
Ordinance.
(b) List of Administratively Approved Uses. The following uses may be
approved by the Zoning Officer after conducting an administrative
review:
(1) Locating antennas on existing structures or towers consistent
with the terms of subsections (a) and (b) below.
(a) Antennas on existing structures. Any antenna which is not
attached to a tower may be approved by the Zoning Officer
as an accessory use to any commercial, industrial,
professional, institutional structure not located in a
residential zone, provided:
§ 97-123.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.12
1:569
(i) The antenna as measured from the lowest grade, does
not extend more than the maximum building height
for the zone wherein the structure is located;
(ii) The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA
regulations; and
(iii) The antenna complies with all applicable building
codes.
(iv) The property is not located in a residential zone.
(b) Antennas on existing towers. If an antenna is attached to
an existing tower in a non-residential zone collocating
antennas may be approved by the Zoning Officer to
minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the
proliferation and clustering of towers, provided such
collocation is accomplished in a manner consistent with
the following:
(i) A tower which is modified or reconstructed to
accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna
shall be the existing tower.
(ii) Height.
(a) An existing tower may be rebuilt to a taller height,
not to exceed the maximum tower height
established by this Ordinance.
(iii) On-site location.
(a) After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate
collocation, only one tower may remain on the
site.
(c) Replacement or upgrading existing antennas or
improvements. Any existing antenna, improvement, trade
fixture, or other personal property which is requested by
the owner or tenant to be replaced or upgraded shall be
permitted provided: [Added 9-24-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-20]
(i) An engineered site plan be provided indicating the
nature and extent of such replacement or upgrade
including the specific antenna, improvement, trade
fixture, or other personal property to be removed,
replaced, or upgraded having all the technical
specifications, including but not limited to the existing
and proposed size, height, weight and location; and
(ii) A recent, no older than six months, structural analysis
is provided that certifies that such removal,
§ 97-123.12 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.12
1:570
replacement, or upgrades to such antenna,
improvements, trade fixture, or other personal
property meets the applicable structural industry
standards; and
(iii) An application fee in the amount of $1,500 for an
existing installation or $2,500 for a new collocation,
which amount shall be collected by the Borough.
7. Conditional Use Permits.
(a) General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of
conditional use permits for towers or antennas by the Planning
Board:
(1) (Reserved)
(2) If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under Section 5
of this ordinance or permitted to be approved administratively
pursuant to Section 6 of this ordinance, then a conditional use
permit shall be required for the construction of a tower or the
placement of an antenna in all zoning districts.
(3) Applications for conditional use permits under this section
shall be subject to the procedures and requirements of §
97-124 of this Ordinance, except as modified in this section.
(4) In granting a conditional use permit, the Planning Board may
impose conditions to the extent the Planning Board concludes
such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect
of the proposed tower on adjoining properties.
(5) Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant
submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be
certified by a licensed professional engineer.
(6) An applicant for a conditional use permit shall submit the
information described in this section and a non-refundable
application fee and an escrow deposit as established by the
Borough of Waldwick for the costs of reviewing the application.
(7) Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of
additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in
connection with said tower or antenna are permitted as
conditional uses only in the following zones: C-1, C-2, C-3, I.
(8) No towers or antennas shall be permitted as conditional uses in
residential zone districts.
(b) Towers.
(1) Information required. In addition to any information required
for applications for conditional use permits pursuant to §
§ 97-123.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.12
1:571
97-124 of this Ordinance, applicants for a conditional use
permit for a tower shall submit the following information
(i) A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and
height of the proposed tower, on site land uses and zoning,
adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to
other municipalities), Master Plan classification of the site
and all properties within the applicable separation
distances set forth in Section 7(b)(5), adjacent roadways,
proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines,
elevation drawings of the proposed tower and any other
structures, topography, parking, and other information
deemed by the Zoning Officer to be necessary to assess
compliance with this ordinance.
(ii) Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
(iii) The setback distance between the proposed tower and the
nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned
properties, and unplatted residentially zoned properties.
(iv) The separation distance from other towers described in
the inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to
Section 4(c) shall be shown on an updated site plan or
map. The applicant shall also identify the type of
construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner/
operator of the existing tower(s), if known.
(v) A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
(vi) Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable,
the method of camouflage and illumination.
(vii) A description of compliance with Sections 4(c), (d), (e), (f),
(g), (j), (1), and (m), 7(b)(4), 7(b)(5) and all applicable
federal, state or local laws.
(viii) A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether
construction of the tower will accommodate collocation of
additional antennas for future users.
(ix) Identification of the entities providing the backhaul
network for the tower(s) described in the application and
other cellular sites owned or operated by the applicant in
the municipality.
(x) A description of the suitability of the use of existing
towers, other structures or alternative technology not
requiring the use of towers or structures to provide the
services to be provided through the use of the proposed
new tower.
§ 97-123.12 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.12
1:572
(xi) A description of the feasible locations of future towers or
antennas within the Borough of Waldwick based upon
existing physical, engineering, technological or
geographical limitations in the event the proposed tower is
erected.
(2) Factors Considered in Granting Conditional Use Permits for
Towers. In addition to any standards for consideration of
conditional use permit applications pursuant to § 97-124 of this
chapter, the Planning Board shall consider the following
factors in determining whether to issue a conditional use
permit, although the Planning Board may waive or reduce the
burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if the
Planning Board concludes that the goals of this ordinance are
better served thereby:
(i) Height of the proposed tower;
(ii) Proximity of the tower to residential structures and
residential district boundaries;
(iii) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
(iv) Surrounding topography;
(v) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
(vi) Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or
eliminating visual obtrusiveness;
(vii) Proposed ingress and egress; and
(viii) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures,
or alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers
or structures, as discussed in Section 7(b)(3) of this
ordinance.
(3) Availability of Suitable Existing Towers, Other Structures, or
Alternative Technology. No new tower shall be permitted
unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Planning Board that no existing tower,
structure or alternative technology that does not require the
use of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's
proposed antenna. An applicant shall submit information
requested by the Planning Board related to the availability of
suitable existing towers, other structures or alternative
technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no
existing tower, structure or alternative technology can
accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of
any of the following (although nothing should be construed to
§ 97-123.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.12
1:573
infer that meeting one, some, or all of the following shall entitle
the applicant to approval):
(i) No existing towers or structures are located within the
geographic area which meet applicant's engineering
requirements.
(ii) Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to
meet applicant's engineering requirements.
(iii) Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient
structural strength to support applicants proposed
antenna and related equipment.
(iv) The applicants proposed antenna would cause
electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the
existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the
existing towers or structures would cause interference
with the applicant's proposed antenna.
(v) The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the
owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to
adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are
unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development
are presumed to be unreasonable.
(vi) The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting
factors that render existing towers and structures
unsuitable.
(vii) The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology
that does not require the use of towers or structures, such
as a cable micro-cell network using multiple low-powered
transmitters/receivers attached to a wire line system, is
unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed
new tower or antenna development shall not be presumed
to render the technology unsuitable.
(4) Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all
towers for which a conditional use permit is required;
provided, however, that the Planning Board may reduce the
standard setback requirements if the goals of this ordinance
would be better served thereby:
(i) Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least
seventy-five percent (75%) of the height of the tower from
any adjoining lot line.
(ii) Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum
zoning district setback requirements.
§ 97-123.12 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.12
1:574
(iii) No tower shall exist within required buffer areas, if
adjacent to residential zones and as prescribed under local
ordinance.
(5) Separation. The following separation requirements shall apply
to all towers and antennas for which a conditional use permit is
required; provided, however, that the Planning Board may
reduce the standard separation requirements if the goals of
this ordinance would be better served thereby.
(i) Separation from off -site uses/designated areas.
(a) Tower separation shall be measured from the base of
the tower to the lot line of the off-site uses and/or
designated areas as specified in Table 1, except as
otherwise provided in Table 1.
(b) Separation requirements for towers shall comply with
the minimum standards established in Table 1.
Table 1:
Off-site Use/Designated
Area Separation Distance
Public parks, schools or
house of worship(1)
200 feet or 300% height
of tower whichever is
greater
Vacant single-family
residentially zoned land
which is either platted or
has preliminary
subdivision plan approval
which is not expired
200 feet or 300% height
of tower whichever is
greater
Off-site Use/Designated
Area
Separation Distance
Vacant unplatted
residentially zoned
lands(2)
100 feet or 200% height
of tower whichever is
greater
Non-residentially zoned
lands or non-residential
uses
None; only setbacks
apply
Notes:
(1) Including nursing homes and other similar uses
wherein people are housed or receive care at least 8
hours per day.
§ 97-123.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.12
1:575
(2) Includes any unplatted residential use properties
without a valid preliminary subdivision plan or valid
development plan approval and any multi-family
residentially zoned land greater than duplex.
(ii) Separation distances between towers.
(a) Separation distances between towers shall be
applicable for and measured between the proposed
tower and preexisting towers. The separation
distances shall be measured by drawing or following a
straight line between the base of the existing tower
and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan, of the
proposed tower. The separation distances (listed in
linear feet) shall be as shown in Table 2.
Table 2:
Existing Tower —
Types
Lattice Guyed
Monopole
50 Ft. in
Height
Monopole
Less
Than 30
Ft in
Height
Lattice 5,000 5,000 1,500 1,000
Guyed 5,000 5,000 1,500 1,000
Monopole
50 Ft in
Height
1,500 1,500 1,500 1,000
Monopole
Less
Than 30
Ft
1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000
(6) Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing
not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with
an appropriate anti-climbing device.
(7) Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the
landscaping surrounding towers for which conditional use
permit is required.
(i) Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens the view of the tower
compound from property used for residences or planned
residences. The standard buffer shall consist of a
landscaped strip at least four (4) feet wide outside the
perimeter of the compound.
§ 97-123.12 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.12
1:576
(ii) In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be
minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced.
(iii) Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the
site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In
some cases, such as towers sited on large wooded lots,
natural growth around the property perimeter may be
sufficient buffer.
8. No Tower or alternative tower shall be constructed in any residential
zone.
9. Buildings or other Equipment Storage.
(a) Antennas Mounted on Structures or Rooftops. The equipment
cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall comply
with the following:
(1) The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 100
square feet of gross floor area or be more than 10 feet in
height. In addition, for buildings and structures which are less
than forty (40) feet in height, the related unmanned equipment
structure, shall be located on the ground and shall not be
located on the roof of the structure.
(2) If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building,
the area of the equipment structure and other equipment and
structures shall not occupy more than 10 percent of the roof
area.
(3) Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable building codes.
(b) Antennas Mounted on Utility Poles Light Poles or Towers. The
equipment cabinet or structure used in association with antennas
shall be located in accordance with the following:
(1) In a front or side yard provided the cabinet or structure is no
greater than 6 feet in height or 100 square feet of gross floor
area and the cabinet/structure is located a minimum of 75 feet
from all lot lines. The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an
evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of at least 42-48
inches and a planted height of at least 36 inches.
(2) In a rear yard, provided the cabinet or structure is no greater
than 8 feet in height or 120 square feet in gross floor area. The
cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge
with an ultimate height of eight (8) feet and a planted height of
at least 48 inches.
(3) In all other instances, structures or cabinets shall be screened
from view of all residential properties which abut or are
directly across the street from the structure or cabinet by a
§ 97-123.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.12
1:577
§ 97-123.13. Solar energy systems and wind energy conversion
systems.
solid fence 6 feet in height or an evergreen hedge with an
ultimate height of eight (8) feet and a planted height of at least
72 inches.
(4) Emergency Generators shall be located below grade and
suitably soundproofed so that noise volumes measured at all
property lines do not exceed ambient levels. A nighttime
restriction of 50 decibels measured at all lot lines shall be
imposed.
10. Removal of Abandoned Antennas and Towers. Any antenna or tower
that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall
be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall
remove the same within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the
Borough of Waldwick notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure
to remove an abandoned antenna or tower within said ninety (90) days
shall be grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the owner's
expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this
provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the
tower.
11. Existing Towers. Rebuilding Damaged or Destroyed Nonconforminq
Towers or Antennas. Nonconforminq towers or antennas that are
damaged or destroyed may not be rebuilt without having to first obtain
administrative approval or a conditional use permit and without having
to meet the separation requirements specified in Sections 7 (b) (4) and
7(b)(5). The type, height, and location of the tower on-site shall be of
the same type and intensity as the original facility approval. Building
permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with the then applicable
building codes and shall be obtained within 180 days from the date the
facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if said
permit expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as
specified in Section 9.
A. Purpose. The Borough of Waldwick intends to promote the utilization of
solar energy systems and wind energy conversion systems (WECS) in
order to maximize the utilization of a clean, safe and available energy
source.
B. Solar energy systems.
1. Solar panels shall be permitted as an accessory rooftop installation
in any zoning district. The solar panels shall not exceed a height of
eight inches from the rooftop. In no event shall the placement of
the solar panels result in a total height including building and
panels than what is permitted in the zoning district which they are
located for the principal building.
§ 97-123.12 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.13
1:578
2. Solar panels shall be permitted as accessory ground arrays in
accordance with the following:
(a) All ground arrays shall be set back a distance of 20 feet from
all property lines in a residential zoning district, 25 feet from
all property lines in a commercial zoning district, and 40 feet
from all property lines in an industrial district.
(b) Ground arrays shall not be permitted in a front yard.
(c) Ground arrays shall be located so that any glare is directed
away from an adjoining property.
(d) Ground arrays shall not exceed a height of 15 feet.
C. Wind energy conversion systems (WECS).
1. General Standards:
(a) A WECS (horizontal axis and vertical axis) shall be permitted in
the R-1 and R-2 Single-Family Residential Districts, the R-3
Village Residential District, the R-4 Senior Citizen Residential
District, the AH-1 Affordable Housing District, the C-AH
Commercial Affordable Housing District, and the I Limited
Manufacturing District.
(b) A horizontal axis wind turbine (HAWT) tower is permitted as an
accessory use on the same lot as a principal use.
(c) A vertical axis wind turbine (VAWT) is permitted as an
accessory rooftop installation or as permitted accessory tower
on the same lot as a principal use.
(d) No more than one wind turbine shall be permitted per
property, and it is prohibited to install both a rooftop vertical
axis turbine and a ground level turbine tower on the same lot.
(e) A WECS is not permitted in any front yard.
2. Standards for horizontal axis wind turbines in residential districts
(a) Minimum lot size: 0.5 acres
(b) Maximum height: Ten feet above roof elevation of the principal
structure, including the blades.
(c) Minimum Setbacks:
[1] Property line: A distance equal to 100% of the height of the
structure including the blades.
[2] Principal structure: 20 feet
(d) Wind turbines shall have a nameplate capacity of 10 kilowatts
or less.
§ 97-123.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.13
1:579
3. Standards in nonresidential districts
(a) Minimum lot size: 0.5 acres
(b) Maximum height: Ten feet above roof elevation of the principal
structure, including the blades.
(c) Minimum setbacks:
[1] Property line: A distance equal to 100% of the height of the
structure including the blades.
[2] Principal structure: 20 feet
4. Standards for vertical axis wind turbines:
(a) Residential District Requirements.
(i) A maximum of one (1) VAWT is permitted per lot
(ii) Building mounted VAWTs shall not exceed 20% the
maximum permitted height within the zoning district
measured from the base attached to the structure to the
highest point on the VAWT.
(iii) The maximum tower height for a VAWT tower shall not
exceed fifty (50) feet measured from the base of the tower
to the highest point on the VAWT.
(iv) A VAWT tower shall be setback from the property line a
distance equal to 100% of the height of the structure as
measured from the base to the highest point.
(v) A VAWT tower shall be set back a minimum 20 feet from
the principal structure.
(vi) Every two (2) years the owner of the VAWT shall submit a
structural report to the Building Department attesting to
the structural integrity of the wind generator, tower and/or
support system.
(b) Non-Residential District Requirements
(i) Building mounted VAWTs shall not exceed 20% the
maximum permitted height within the zoning district
measured from the base attached to the structure to the
highest point on the VAWT.
(ii) The maximum tower height for a VAWT shall not exceed
sixty (60) feet measured from the base of the tower to the
highest point on the VAWT.
(iii) A VAWT tower shall be setback from the property line a
distance equal to 100% of the height of the structure as
measured from the base to the highest point.
§ 97-123.13 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.13
1:580
(iv) A VAWT tower shall be set back a minimum 20 feet from
the principal structure.
(v) Every two (2) years the owner of the VAWT shall submit a
structural report to the Building Department attesting to
the structural integrity of the wind generator, tower and/or
support system.
(c) Electromagnetic Interference.
(i) As part of the required site plan submission, the applicant
shall provide sufficient data and documentation from the
manufacturer in order to establish that the installation will
not cause electromagnetic interference to any abutting
property.
(ii) If documentation is provided that indicates that the
installation is causing electromagnetic interference to any
abutting property, the installation shall be deemed a public
nuisance which nuisance shall be corrected within ninety
(90) days of receipt of a notice of violation. If the
electromagnetic interference cannot be remedied, the
installation shall be removed or relocated, as appropriate.
D. Additional Standards for Solar Energy Systems and Wind Energy
Conversion Systems (horizontal axis turbines and vertical axis turbines)
1. Noise.
(a) Between a residential use or residential zone sound levels of
the WECS shall not exceed 55 decibels at a common property
line or at the closest occupied structure of the neighboring lot
or lots.
(b) In all other cases at a common property line sound levels of the
WECS shall not exceed 55 decibels and shall comply with
Chapter 62, the Borough Noise Ordinance.
2. Access to WECS.
(a) All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall be
labeled or secured to prevent unauthorized access.
(b) The tower shall be designed and installed so as to not provide
step bolts or a ladder readily accessible to the public for a
minimum height of eight feet above the ground.
(c) All moving parts of the WECS shall be a minimum height ten
feet above the ground.
3. Electrical wires. All electrical wires associated with a WECS, other
than wires necessary to connect the wind generator to the tower
§ 97-123.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.13
1:581
wiring, the tower wiring to the disconnect junction box, and the
grounding wires shall be located underground.
4. Wind turbines shall be designed with an automatic brake or other
similar device to prevent overspeeding and excessive pressure on
the tower structure.
5. Lighting. A wind tower and generator shall not be artificially
lighted unless such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation
Administration, and is subject to Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment approval as part of the site plan application.
6. Appearance, color, and finish. WECS shall be constructed of
corrosive resistant material. WECS and solar energy panels shall
be painted, finished or screened with landscaping or other
materials to the extent reasonably possible to blend the facility into
existing structures and natural surroundings in order to minimize
potential visual impacts on the surrounding landscape.
7. Signs. WECS and solar energy systems shall not be used for
displaying signage or advertising, other than the manufacturer's or
installer's identification, appropriate warning signs, or owner
identification.
8. Code compliance. A WECS shall comply with all applicable
construction and electrical codes, and the National Electrical Code
adopted by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
9. Utility notification and interconnection. WECS that connect to the
electric utility shall comply with the New Jersey's net metering and
interconnection standards for Class I renewable energy systems.
10. Meteorological towers utilized to monitor the feasibility of a WECS
shall be permitted under the same standards, permit requirements,
restoration requirements, and permit procedures as a WECS.
E. Permit requirements.
1. Site plan approval. Site plan approval from the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment, as appropriate, shall be required for the
installation of a WECS (horizontal axis turbine or vertical axis
turbine) or a ground array solar energy system. The site plan
application shall include the following:
(a) Property lines and physical dimensions of the property;
(b) Location, dimensions, and types of existing structures on the
property;
(c) Location of the proposed WECS tower or ground array solar
energy system;
§ 97-123.13 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.13
1:582
(d) The right-of-way of any public road that is contiguous with the
property;
(e) For WECS applications, the location of any overhead utility
lines;
(f) WECS and ground array solar energy systems specifications,
including manufacturer and model, rotor diameter, tower
height;
(g) Stamped, engineered tower and tower foundation drawings for
WECS;
(h) Noise levels of the proposed WECS at all property lines and at
the closest neighboring inhabited dwelling.
2. A visual site distance analysis must be submitted, including photos
of the subject property, that graphically simulates the appearance
of any proposed WECS and indicating its view from at least five
locations around and within one mile of the proposed tower.
F. Abandonment.
1. A WECS or solar energy system that is out of service for a
continuous twelve-month period will be deemed to have been
presumptively abandoned. The Zoning Officer may issue a notice of
abandonment to the owner of a WECS or solar energy system that
is deemed to have been abandoned. The owner shall have the right
to respond to the notice of abandonment within 30 days from notice
receipt date. The Zoning Officer shall withdraw the notice of
abandonment and notify the owner that the notice has been
withdrawn if the owner provides information that demonstrates the
WECS or solar energy system has not been abandoned. In the event
that the Zoning Officer, after investigation, determines that a
WECS or solar energy system has been abandoned, the Zoning
Officer may issue a notice of abandonment during the presumptive
twelve-month period and the owner shall have the right to respond
to the notice of abandonment.
2. If the WECS or solar energy system is determined to be abandoned,
the owner of the WECS or solar energy system shall remove the
facility at the owner's sole expense within six months of receipt of
notice of abandonment. If the owner fails to remove the facility, the
Zoning Officer may, at the option of the Mayor and Council, have
the facility removed at the owner's expense, and impose a lien on
the property.
G. Violations. It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate
a WECS or solar energy system that is not in compliance with this
section or with any condition contained in a building permit issued
pursuant to this section. Solar energy systems and WECS installed prior
to the adoption of this section are exempt.
§ 97-123.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-123.14
1:583
§ 97-123.14. Home occupation.
§ 97-123.15. Child day care.
A. Home occupations are permitted as an accessory use in all residential
districts of the Borough of Waldwick.
a. Home occupation uses shall be conducted entirely within either the
dwelling or an accessory building, but not both.
b. No more than five hundred (500) square feet of the first floor area
or the equivalent of twenty-five percent (25%) of the floor area of
the building, whichever is smaller,
c. Such an occupation shall be conducted solely by a resident
occupant of the residential building, except that no more than one
(1) person at a time who is not a resident of the building may be
employed therein
d. No sign shall be displayed exceeding a maximum of one (1) square
foot on each side, that
e. Parking shall be provided in accordance with commercial off-street
parking spaces in addition to the residence needs.
f. No occupational sounds are audible outside the building, that and
that no machinery or equipment is used which will cause
interference with radio and television reception in neighboring
residences.
g. No display of products shall be visible from the street, and that no
article is offered for sale on the premises shall be used for such
purposes, so as not to change the residential character of the
property
h. Board of Health, Fire Prevention Bureau and Environmental
Commission approval and a Certificate of Occupancy shall be
required for all "Home Occupations" and "Family Day Care
Homes".
i. Anyone operating a Family Day Care Home shall file with the
Borough Clerk a copy of the Certificate of Registration issued by
the New Jersey Division of Youth and Family Services and shall
submit a certification of the operator setting forth the operator's
name, address and telephone number and the hours of operation.
A. A. Child day care is permitted in all non-residential zones in the
Borough of Waldwick, and subject to the following requirements:
1. Operation of a child day care facility shall be licensed by the
Department of Human Services
2. Minimum lot size is 10,000 square feet.
§ 97-123.14 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-123.15
1:584
§ 97-123.16. Freestanding and roof mounted flagpoles. [Amended
05-27-14 by Ord. No. 13-14]
§ 97-124. Conditional Uses.
§ 97-124.1. Guiding principles.
Recognizing that certain uses, activities and structures are necessary to
serve the needs and conveniences of the borough and, at the same time,
recognizing that such uses may be or become harmful to the public health,
safety and general welfare if located and operated without proper
consideration being given to existing conditions and the character of the
surrounding area, such uses are hereby designated as conditional uses .
The procedures for application, public hearing and notice for special use
permits are set forward under § 97-128.7. The granting of a permit for
conditional uses shall comply with the terms and conditions established by
this section using the following stipulations and guiding principles:
3. Play area requirements:
a. No play area shall be located anywhere but the rear yard.
b. Play areas shall have a minimum fence height of 6 feet
1. The maximum height of a freestanding flagpole shall be 20 feet,
provided that flagpoles on roofs shall be no more than 25% the
maximum permitted height in the district feet in which the structure is
located.
2. One freestanding flagpole shall be permitted per lot.
3. All freestanding flagpoles shall be located no closer than 10 feet from a
front, side or rear property line.
4. All flagpoles shall be equipped with either interior halyards or exterior
halyards with vinyl snap covers.
A. Stipulations. The use for which application is being made is specifically
authorized as a conditional use in the zoning district in which it is
located. (See § 97-119).
B. Principles. The design, arrangement and nature of the particular use is
such that the public health, safety and welfare are protected and
reasonable consideration is afforded to the following:
1. The character of the neighborhood and zone.
2. Conservation of property values and the proposal's impact upon the
orderly development of adjacent properties in accordance with the
zoning classification of such properties.
3. Health and safety of residents or workers on adjacent property and
in the surrounding neighborhood.
§ 97-123.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-124.1
1:585
§ 97-124.2. Automotive service stations.
Automotive service stations may be permitted as a conditional use in all
commercial zones, provided that the following standards and conditions are
met:
4. Potential congestion of vehicular traffic or the creation of undue
hazard.
5. Principles and objectives of the ordinance and the Master Plan of
the Borough.
C. Standards. In addition to the above stipulations and principles, such
permitted conditional uses shall adhere to the minimum standards
specified for the particular use in §§ 97-124.2 through 97-124.13.
[Amended 11-28-89 by Ord. No. 22-89]
A. Lot size. The lot or parcel of land so to be used shall have a street
frontage of at least one hundred (100) feet and an average depth of at
least one hundred twenty-five (125) feet.
B. Setbacks.
1. Buildings. The walls of any building shall be set back at least fifty
feet from any residential zone boundary or existing residential
property, at least twenty-five (25) feet from any adjoining property
line and at least forty (40) feet from a street right-of-way line.
2. Gasoline pumps. All fuel and oil pumps and other apparatus shall
be located as to permit safe and convenient traffic circulation.
Every gasoline or oil tank, pump or other device, appliance or
apparatus shall be located at least forty (40) feet from a street
right-of-way line or property line, and at least fifty (50) feet from a
residential zone boundary or existing dwelling.
3. Paved areas. All paved areas within the property shall be at least
five (5) feet from a property line, ten (10) feet from a street right-ofway
line and twenty-five feet from a residential zone boundary or
existing residential use and shall be bounded by concrete curbing
at least six (6) inches above the surface.
4. Driveways. Entrance and exit driveways shall be at least thirty (30)
feet in width with a three (3) foot radius at the curbline. There shall
be a safety zone between driveways of at least thirty (30) feet, and
the driveway shall be at least ten (10) feet from adjoining property
lines. Driveways shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from an
intersection of street lines. No more than two (2) driveways shall be
permitted for each two hundred (200) feet of street frontage.
C. Location. The nearest boundary line of the lot or parcel of land to be
used as an automobile service station shall be at least three hundred
(300) feet from the boundary line of property which is used as, or upon
§ 97-124.1 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-124.2
1:586
which is erected, a public or private school playground, church or other
place of worship, hospital, public building or place of public assembly,
theater or other building or structure used or intended to be used for
public entertainment, public playground or civic center, firehouse or
fire station. The distance shall be measured in a straight line from the
center line of streets forming the shortest route from a point opposite
the nearest side boundary line of the public entrance to a point opposite
the nearest boundary line of the service station or garage lot. No
automobile service station shall be located within two thousand (2,000)
feet of another service station or existing public garage.
D. Landscaping. A five-foot planted strip, suitably landscaped, shall be
provided between curb cuts and along all property lines. All unpaved
areas shall be attractively landscaped with grass lawns, trees and
shrubs or other vegetation or material deemed suitable. All landscaping
shall be suitably maintained.
E. Parking. Adequate parking for service vehicles and automobiles of
employees and patrons shall be provided. Not more than three (3)
patron parking spaces shall be provided for each service bay. Not more
than six (6) motor vehicles may be located upon any automobile service
station premises, outside of a closed or roofed building, for a period of
time not to exceed forty-eight (48) hours and provided that said motor
vehicles are awaiting repair by the owners thereof.
F. Prohibited uses.
1. No new or used automobile sales shall be conducted on the
premises.
2. No major body work shall take place at automobile service stations.
3. No junked motor vehicle or part thereof or motor vehicle incapable
of normal operation upon the highway shall be permitted on the
premises of any service station. It shall be deemed prima facie
evidence of violation of this ordinance if more than three (3) motor
vehicles incapable of operation are located at any one time upon
any premises not within a closed and roofed building.
G. Repairs. Any repairs of motor vehicles shall be performed in a fully
enclosed building. No parts or partially dismantled motor vehicles may
be stored out of doors.
H. Tanks and Drains:
1. Floor drains shall contain oil and grease traps and shall not be
connected to any sanitary sewer system or storm drain.
2. All storage tanks shall be installed below ground level. Where the
possibility of contamination of underground water resources exists,
the applicant will be required to show that ample precautions
against leakage and seepage have been taken.
§ 97-124.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-124.3
1:587
§ 97-124.3. Funeral parlors; churches; places of worship and
religious instruction. [Amended 7-14-87 by Ord. No. 10-87]
Funeral parlors, Churches, places of worship, and religious instructional
facilities may be permitted in any commercial zone as a conditional use
and are subject to the following conditional use standards to allow use of a
property for said land use:
§ 97-124.4. Restaurants and taverns.
Restaurants and taverns may be permitted as a conditional use in all
commercial zones, provided that the following standards and conditions are
met:
A. Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be thirty thousand (30,000)
square feet; the minimum lot width shall be two hundred (200) feet.
B. Setbacks. The minimum requirements for lot depth, front yard, rear
yard, side yard, setbacks and building height shall conform to those
established for the R-1 Single-Family Residential Zone. However, in no
event shall the front or rear yards be less than the height of the
building, nor shall side yards be less than one-half (1/2) the height of
the building.
C. Parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided on the premises
in the rear and side yards, but not in the front yard, in the ratio and
manner prescribed in § 97-123.7.
D. Driveways. The construction of driveway entrances shall conform to the
requirements set forth in § 97-123.7. Driveways must be at least ten
(10) feet from any side lot lines and twenty-five (25) feet from the side
line of residential property.
E. Landscaping. The site plan shall clearly demonstrate that the location
of buildings and parking and entrance drives shall have been so located
as to minimize any detrimental effects upon adjacent property. It may
require buffers of foliage if necessary to protect surrounding property
from either light or noise generated in connection with the use of the
property.
A. Lot size. The minimum lot or parcel of land so used shall be twenty-five
thousand (25,000) square feet in area, with a minimum street frontage
of at least one hundred (150) feet and an average depth of at least one
hundred fifty (150) feet.
B. Setback. The walls of the building shall be located at least fifty (50) feet
from an adjoining street right-of-way line, twenty-five (25) feet from a
side property line and fifty (50) feet from a rear property line.
C. Building size. The ground floor area of the building shall be at least five
hundred (500) square feet.
§ 97-124.3 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-124.4
1:588
§ 97-124.5. Hospitals; nursing, assisted living facilities.
Hospitals, nursing, assisted living facilities may be permitted as a
conditional use in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District, provided that
the following standards and conditions are complied with:
D. Parking. Off-street parking shall conform to the requirements contained
in § 97-123.7, and, in addition, the following conditions shall be met:
1. Fencing, screening and buffers. Fencing and screening shall be
provided along the side and rear property lines in accordance with
the provisions of § 97-123.7C(11). All applicants shall provide
buffers as defined in the ordinance and per the requirements of
§ 97-119.9E.
2. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be raised and protected from vehicular
traffic, at least five (5) feet in width, and shall be provided along the
front and side building walls.
3. Fire lanes. Appropriate fire lanes adjoining the building shall be
maintained where required.
4. Number of spaces. The ratio, location and quantity of parking
spaces shall be in accordance with the Parking Schedule contained
in § 97-123.7.
E. Driveways. The construction of entrance and exit driveways shall be in
accordance with the provisions contained within § 97-123.7. There shall
be a safety zone of at least twenty-five (25) feet between driveway
openings, and no entrance or exit shall be located within ten (10) feet of
an adjoining property line.
F. Trash.
1. Trash receptacles for customers shall be provided in the parking
area conveniently located for all parking spaces. There shall be at
least one (1) receptacle for each five (5) parking spaces, but in no
event less than four (4) receptacles. Such receptacles shall be of
appropriate design which will not detract from the general
appearance of the site and shall be well secured to the ground
surface.
2. An area shall be provided for the orderly and convenient deposit
and pickup of trash. Said area shall be known as the "refuse
storage" and shall be located in the rear yard, shall be enclosed on
all four (4) sides and shall be designed to conform in appearance to
the principal building. Said area shall be at least fifteen feet from
an adjoining property line.
G. Fire. All restaurants and fast food establishments shall meet or exceed
all applicable fire code regulations.
§ 97-124.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-124.5
1:589
§ 97-124.6. Kennels.
Kennels may be permitted as a conditional use in the I Limited
Manufacturing-Industrial District, provided that the following standards are
complied with:
A. Lot size. The minimum lot area shall be forty thousand (40,000) square
feet; the minimum lot width shall be two hundred (200) feet.
B. Setbacks. The structure or use shall conform to all the yard
requirements set forth in the R-1 Single-Family Residential District.
Under no conditions shall a principal structure be located closer to a
property or street line than the height of the building.
C. Location. The lot or parcel upon which a hospital or hospital use is
located shall have direct access to an arterial street designated on the
Master Plan. The lot or parcel upon which a nursing, rest and
convalescent home is located or said use is located shall have direct
access to a street designated as either arterial or collector, as shown on
the Master Plan. None of said uses shall have access provided to said
site via a local residential street.
D. Parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided on the premises
in the rear, but not in the front or side yard, in accordance with the ratio
and locational requirements contained in § 97-123.7. Hospitals shall be
permitted to have emergency access and parking for access to the
emergency room only, located within their front and/or side yard.
E. Driveways. Driveways shall be located in accordance with the
regulations contained within § 97-123.7 and shall be at least twenty-five
(25) feet from any adjoining property lines.
F. License. Hospitals, nursing homes and assisted living facilities shall
possess and/or secure a license as prescribed under the New Jersey
Hospital Licensing Act and shall conform to all regulations and
standards prescribed by the Bureau of Community Institutions, State of
New Jersey. A certificate of need shall be secured from the New Jersey
Department of Health for the proposed use.
G. Signs. The erection and location of signs shall be in accordance with the
provisions of § 97-123.9.
H. Area impact. The hearing and review of said application shall disclose
that the proposed use in the proposed location will not adversely affect
the value of adjacent properties, that the design of any structures
erected in connection with such use are in keeping with the general
character of the residential area and that sufficient landscaping,
including trees, shrubs and lawn, are provided to serve as a buffer
between said use and the residential properties and to ensure an
attractive appearance of the use.
§ 97-124.5 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-124.6
1:590
§ 97-124.7. Philanthropic, charitable or eleemosynary uses.
Fraternal, social, civic, recreational, philanthropic, charitable or
eleemosynary uses may be permitted as a conditional use in the R-3 Village
Residential District, provided that the following standards and conditions
are complied with:
A. Lot size. The lot or parcel so to be used has an area of at least two (2)
acres. Not more than ten (10) dogs or cats or combination thereof for
each acre of lot area shall be kept at any time.
B. Setbacks. Building, structures, pens or other enclosures in which
animals are kept shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from a
property line.
C. Outdoor runs or pens. Outdoor runs and pens shall be located within
the rear yard and shall be screened from view of the adjoining
properties by fencing and planting.
D. Animals outside. Dogs and cats shall be contained in buildings, pens or
other enclosures at all times and shall be kept within the confines of a
building between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
E. Sanitation. Any such kennels shall be approved by the Board of Health
to ensure proper sanitation and compliance with applicable state and
local health codes.
A. Lot size. The lot or parcel so to be used shall have area and lot
requirements in accordance with the district in which it is located.
B. Setbacks. All buildings shall comply with the setback requirements for
the zone in which it is located. No building or structure shall be located
closer to any property line than the height of said building.
C. Location. The property so proposed for this use shall have direct access
to an arterial or collector street as defined within the Master Plan.
D. Parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided on the premises
in the rear and side yards, but not in the front yard, in the ratio, location
and quantity prescribed in § 97-123.7.
E. Driveways. Driveways must be at least twenty-five (25) feet from any
side or rear property lines.
F. Screening. Fencing and screening shall be provided alongside and rear
property lines in accordance with § 97-123.7C(11).
G. Area impact. The hearing and review of said application shall disclose
that the proposed use in the proposed location will not adversely affect
the value of adjacent properties, that the design of any structure
erected in connection with such use are in keeping with the general
character of the residential area, and that sufficient landscaping,
including trees, shrubs and lawn, are provided to serve as a buffer
§ 97-124.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-124.7
1:591
§ 97-124.8. Private preschools and private schools. [Amended
7-8-86 by Ord. No. 16-86]
Private schools, but not trade schools, business schools, high schools or
institutions of higher learning, may be permitted as a conditional use within
residential and commercial districts as provided for in § 97-119 of this
ordinance:
between said use and residential properties and to ensure an attractive
appearance for the use.
A. Lot size. The minimum lot area for a nursery school shall be two (2)
acres, plus one (1) additional acre for each one hundred (100) pupils.
The minimum lot area for an elementary school shall be five (5) acres,
plus one (1) additional acre for each one hundred (100) pupils. The
minimum lot area for an intermediate school, high school or institution
of higher learning shall be ten (10) acres, plus one (1) additional acre
for each one hundred (100) pupils. No more than ten percent (10%) of
the site shall be covered by a building.
B. Setbacks. The buildings proposed to be erected on the lot shall comply
with the yard and height requirements set forth for the zone district in
which they are located.
C. Driveways. No driveway shall open onto a public street or road within
one hundred fifty (150) feet of an intersection of such street or road
with another public street or road. In determining the suitability of
proposed or existing driveways upon the site, the Planning Board shall
consider such factors as grade and site distances, the number and
pattern of driveways designed for ingress and egress points within the
area, the volume of traffic which may be anticipated on the site and
upon adjoining roads and the condition and width of the pavement of
the adjoining roads.
D. Lighting. Illumination for night athletic activity shall be shielded from
view from adjoining streets and residential areas.
E. Use statement. In addition to the use statement required in Article IX
for site plan review, the applicant shall include a statement indicating
the grade level of the pupils to be in the building or buildings, the
planned pupil capacity of each building or buildings and the
contemplated eventual enrollment of the school.
F. State certification. The curriculum of the proposed school shall be
approved by the New Jersey Department of Education.
G. Screening. Fencing and screening shall be provided alongside and rear
property lines in accordance with § 97-123.7C(11)where outdoor
athletic fields or play spaces are proposed within one hundred (100)
feet of a residential property line.
§ 97-124.7 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-124.9
1:592
§ 97-124.9. Family day care homes. [Added 3-23-93 by Ord. No.
3-93]
Family Day Care Homes shall be deemed to be a home occupation use and
shall be subject to the same conditional use standards as all other home
occupations in the particular zone in which the family day care home is
located.
§ 97-124.10. Public utilities.
Public utility uses intended to be regulated by this section apply to utility
installations such as power-generating stations, electric substations, power
transmission lines, radio or television signal towers, telephone exchanges
and similar facilities, but shall not apply to telephone, gas, water, sewer,
electric or community antenna television facility distribution lines and
similar facilities intended to provide direct service to properties, may be
permitted in any zone district by conditional use, provided that the following
are complied with:
§ 97-124.11. Satellite dish antennas and amateur radio antennas.
[Added 8-9-83 by Ord. No. 15-83; amended 4-12-94 by Ord. No.
7-94]
The intent and purpose of this section is to establish a procedure and
criteria to avoid the installation of amateur radio and satellite reception
antennas in a manner that would create an aesthetically unpleasant or
A. Lot size. The lot shall conform with the lot area requirements of the
zone in which it is located.
B. Setbacks. All structures shall meet the yard and height requirements of
the zone in which it is located.
C. Parking. Adequate provision shall be made for off-street parking in
accordance with § 97-123.7.
D. Appearance. Any such building, structure or use shall be designed and
arranged so as not to detract from the appearance of the general
neighborhood nor have a detrimental effect on the value of adjoining
properties.
E. Location. The utility shall provide proof that the proposed installation in
its specific location is necessary and essential for the efficiency of the
public utility system or the satisfactory and convenient provision of
service by the utility to the neighborhood or area in which the
particular use is to be located, provided that the design of any building
in connection with the facility conforms to the general character of the
area and will in no way adversely affect the safety and comfortable
enjoyment of property rights of the zone in which it is located, that
adequate and attractive fences and other such safety devices will be
provided and that sufficient landscaping including shrubs, trees and
lawns are provided and will be periodically maintained.
§ 97-124.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-124.11
1:593
unsafe condition. There shall be permitted in all zoning districts of the
Borough, as a conditional use accessory to the principal building.
(1) Exemption of certain antennas from regulations. Pursuant to the 1996
ruling of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), the following
antennas are exempt from the provisions of this article:
(a) A transmission satellite dish no greater than one meter (39.37
inches) in diameter.
(b) A receive-only satellite dish greater than one meter (39.37 inches)
and less than or equal to two meters (78.74 inches) in diameter and
located in a nonresidential zone district.
(c) A transmission satellite dish no greater than two meters (78.74
inches) in diameter and located in a nonresidential zone district.
(2) Limited applicability of regulations involving certain antennas.
Pursuant to the 1996 ruling of the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC), the provisions of this article shall apply to the
following antennas only to the extent such provisions do not impair the
installation, maintenance or use of such antennas. The determination
regarding such impairment shall be made by the Zoning Officer and
may be appealed in accordance with the procedures of the Borough of
Waldwick.
(a) Antennas designed to receive direct broadcast satellite service
(DBS), including direct-to-home satellite service, and no greater
than one meter (39.37 inches) in diameter.
(b) Antennas designed to receive video programming services via
multipoint distribution services, including multichannel multipoint
distribution services (MMDS), instructional television fixed
services and local multipoint distribution services, and no greater
than one meter (39.37 inches) in diameter or diagonal
measurement, provided that, if such antennas are located on a
mast, the mast is 12 feet or less in height.
(c) Antennas designed to receive television broadcast signals (TVBS),
provided that, if such antennas are located on a mast, the mast is
12 feet or less in height.
(3) Freestanding satellite and amateur radio antennas.
(a) Freestanding antennas shall only be permitted in the rear yard.
(b) Freestanding antennas shall be effectively screened by a special
planting screen or fence as determined by the reviewing authority
to be necessary to minimize the view of the antenna from any
adjacent property or public street.
(c) Freestanding antennas shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet from
all lot lines.
§ 97-124.11 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-124.11
1:594
§ 97-124.12. Supportive and special needs housing for the
developmentally disabled and community shelters for victims of
domestic violence. [Added 4-24-84 by Ord. No. 6-84]
A building or structure may be used, erected or converted for use as
supportive and special needs housing for the developmentally disabled or a
community shelter for victims of domestic violence (as defined by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-66.1), subject to the following conditional use requirements:
(d) The height of an amateur radio freestanding antenna shall not
exceed 60 feet above the ground at the base of the antenna
(e) The height of freestanding satellite dish antennas shall not exceed
15 feet above the ground.
(f) The diameter or diagonal dimension of freestanding satellite dish
antennas shall not exceed one meter (39.37 inches) in any
residential zone district or two meters (78.74 inches) in any
nonresidential zone district.
(4) Roof-mounted antennas and satellite dishes.
(a) If mounted on the roof of the principal building, the antenna and
supporting structures shall be set back from the building facade a
distance equal to or greater than the height of such antenna and
related structures above the elevation of the building where the
antenna and related structures are mounted, or as required by the
Construction Code, whichever is more restrictive. The antenna and
supporting structures shall also be located so as to minimize the
view of the same from any street, as determined by the Zoning
Officer.
(b) The height of any roof-mounted antenna shall not exceed the height
of the roof by more than 12 feet.
A. No building or structure shall be used, erected or converted for the use
of community residences for the developmentally disabled or
community shelter for victims of domestic violence unless said building
or structure complies with the minimum requirements for fire safety,
sanitary facilities, structural safety as established by the current edition
of New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, and the requirements of the
American's with Disabilities Act (ADA).
B. No building or structure shall be erected or converted for use of
community residences for the developmentally disabled or community
shelter for victims of domestic violence unless it complies with the
minimum current requirements of the barrier-free design regulations
as established by the State of New Jersey, Department of Community
Affairs.
C. No community residence for the developmentally disabled or
community shelter for victims of domestic violence shall be located
§ 97-124.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-124.12
1:595
§ 97-124.13. Amusement machine arcades. [Amended 11-28-89 by
Ord. No. 22-89]
within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of an existing community
residence or shelter.
D. No community residence shall be considered for establishment within
the municipality when the number of persons other than resident staff,
resident at existing such community residences or community shelters
within the municipality, exceeds fifty (50) persons or five-tenths (0.5) of
the population of the municipality, whichever is greater.
E. Signs shall not be permitted on the premises.
F. Fencing and screening shall be provided along the side and rear
property lines.
G. Any such building, structure, or use shall be designed and arranged so
as not to detract from the appearance of the general neighborhood nor
have a detrimental effect on the value of adjoining properties.
H. A set of building plans and specifications, along with a plot plan and
statement setting forth the full particulars on the operation of the
structure or use, shall be filed with the application.
I. Any application shall not adversely affect the health, safety and welfare
of the residents of the district. Furthermore, the proposed use shall be
in keeping with the general character of the residential area, and
sufficient landscaping, including trees, shrubs and lawn, shall be
provided to serve as a buffer.
A. An amusement machine arcade shall be permitted to be located only in
the "I" Limited Manufacturing-Industrial zoning district of the Borough
of Waldwick and such amusement machine arcade shall be allowed in
such "I" district only upon approval by the Planning Board under a
conditional use procedure. An amusement machine arcade shall not be
permitted in any other zone even though such zone might permit those
uses permitted in the "I" Limited Manufacturing-Industrial Zone.
B. An applicant shall submit a site plan and an amusement machine arcade
room layout in sufficient detail to allow such determination by the
Planning Board.
C. The following specific requirements shall apply to the location, layout
and operation of an amusement machine arcade:
1. A building within which an amusement machine arcade is the
principal use or that portion of any building used as an amusement
machine arcade shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet
from any premises used as a public, parochial or private
elementary, middle, junior high, high school, or premises upon
which is located a place of worship. A building within which an
§ 97-124.12 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-124.13
1:596
amusement machine arcade is the principal use or that portion
of any building used as an amusement machine arcade shall be
located at least eight hundred (800) feet from another building or
portion of a building used as an amusement machine complex.
2. Adequate space shall be provided to reach a machine so as to allow
its use without overcrowding. A minimum width between
amusement machines of one and one-half feet shall be provided.
The depth of the space in front of the machine shall be at least five
(5) feet.
3. Off-street parking in addition to that otherwise required for the
users on the premises shall be provided in the amount of one space
per two amusement game machines or the minimum required offstreet
parking for a retail use in the "I" District, whichever is
greater. Adequate parking shall be provided per the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA).
4. Readily visible signs shall be installed, with their location, size and
text, shown on the plans submitted to the Planning Board
indicating the hours of operation and that persons under the age as
specified in the licensing ordinance of Chapter 30 shall not be
permitted during school hours to play such amusement game
machine or amusement machine.
5. A building or portion thereof used as an amusement machine
arcade shall comply with requirements for a non-residential
building in an "I" Zoning District as specified in this ordinance.
6. To prevent obstruction of the public sidewalk and entry and exits to
an amusement machine arcade, a special on-site area shall be set
aside and designated for bicycle parking. Bicycle racks shall be
provided at the rate of one bicycle space for every three
amusement machines. Bicycle racks shall not be located in any
required landscaped areas, walkways to buildings, driveways,
required vehicular parking space nor shall such bicycle racks be
spaced so as to obstruct any entrance or exit to any premises.
7. An amusement machine arcade shall be designed to minimize noise
emanating beyond the boundaries of such building or room
containing amusement game machines or amusement machines.
8. An amusement machine arcade shall at all times have at least one
supervisory adult employee in attendance during operating hours.
Between 3 p.m. and closing in addition to the supervisory adult
employee, there shall be an additional adult employee to act as a
security person whose sole responsibility is to maintain good order
and compliance with all regulations.
9. An amusement machine arcade shall maintain an operating
telephone or other device to alert police, fire and ambulance
services in the event of an emergency.
§ 97-124.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-124.13
1:597
§ 97-124.14. Banks.
§ 97-124.15. Mixed-use developments.
10. At least two (2) bathroom facilities shall be provided for the
exclusive use of the patrons. One bathroom facility shall be
designated for use by members of the female sex and one for use by
members of the male sex.
11. There shall be at least two (2) emergency exit doors.
12. All requirements of the Fire Underwriters Code and the Uniform
Construction Code of the State of New Jersey shall be complied
with.
A. Banks are permitted as a conditional use in the C-2 Turnpike
Commercial District or C-3 Neighborhood Commercial District,
provided that the following standards and conditions are met:
1. Minimum lot size shall be 18,000 square feet, and the minimum
street frontage of such lot shall be 120 feet. If a bank is located on a
corner lot, the minimum street frontage on each street shall be 120
feet.
2. No part of any building or structure shall be located within 100 feet
of any residential use or residential zone district boundary line.
3. Minimum distance between driveways shall be 50 feet measured
from the two closest driveway curbs.
4. Trash areas shall be fully enclosed and at least 15 feet from any
property line.
5. Fencing, screening and buffers. Fencing and screening shall be
provided along the side and rear property lines in accordance with
the provisions of § 97-123.7C(11). All applicants shall provide
buffers as defined in the ordinance and per the requirements of
97-119.9E.
6. Stacking facilities to accommodate a queue of eight (8) vehicles
shall be provided for each drive-through lane proposed in a drivethrough
bank. Each drive-through bank shall provide at least one
(1) bypass lane to allow customers to exit the queue and depart the
premises.
A. Mixed-use developments shall be permitted as a conditional use in the
VC-2 Village Center District, VC-3 Village Center District and the C-1
Village Commercial District, provided that the following standards and
conditions are met:
1. Permitted uses on the ground floor of a mixed-use development
shall include the following permitted uses in the C-1 District as
listed in § 97-119.9A1, 2, 3, 4 and 13: retail trade stores, service
§ 97-124.13 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-124.15
1:598
§ 97-124.16. Animal hospitals. [Added 05-27-14 by Ord. No. 12-14]
uses, business and professional offices, personal services and child
day care centers.
2. One or more dwelling units shall be permitted on the upper floor(s)
above any of the permitted ground floor uses in § 97-124.15A1.
Access to upper floor uses shall be provided by means of a separate
entrance than provided for ground floor uses.
3. Minimum lot size shall be 10,000 square feet, and the minimum
street frontage of such lot shall be 100 feet.
4. Trash areas shall be fully enclosed and at least 15 feet from any
property line.
5. Fencing, screening and buffers. Fencing and screening shall be
provided along the side and rear property lines in accordance with
the provisions of § 97-123.7C(11). All applicants shall provide
buffers as defined in the ordinance and per the requirements of
97-119.9E.
A. Animal Hospitals are permitted as a condition use in the C-1 Village
Commercial District, C-2 Turnpike Commercial District, C-3
Neighborhood Commercial District, or I - Industrial District, provided
the following standards and conditions are met:
1. Minimum lot size shall be 25,000 square feet, and the minimum
street frontage of such lot shall be 120 feet. If an animal hospital is
located on a corner lot, the minimum street frontage on each street
shall be 120 feet.
2. No part of any building or structure shall be located within 100 feet
of any residential use or residential zone district boundary line.
3. Minimum distance between driveways shall be 50 feet measured
from the two closest driveway curbs.
4. Trash areas shall be fully enclosed and at least 15 feet from any
property line.
5. Fencing, screening and buffers. Fencing and screening shall be
provided along the side and rear property lines in accordance with
the provisions of § 97-123.7C(11). All applicants shall provide
buffers as defined in the ordinance and per the requirements of
§ 97-119.9E.
6. Parking requirements shall comply with "Hospital" standards as
stated in § 97-123.7.
7. All such facilities must be licensed by and meet the requirements of
any county, state or federal regulatory agency.
§ 97-124.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-124.16
1:599
§ 97-125. Nonconforming Uses and Nonconforming Structures.
[Amended 12-12-00 by Ord. No. 22-00]
§ 97-125.1. Continuance.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, the lawful use of land,
structures or buildings existing at the date of the adoption of this ordinance
may be continued, although such use, building or structure does not
conform to the regulations specified by this ordinance for the zone in which
such land, structure, or building is located.
§ 97-125.2. Nonconforming lots.
No nonconforming lot shall be further reduced in size.
§ 97-125.3. Extensions, enlargements and discontinuance of
nonconforming uses.
§ 97-125.4. Extensions, enlargements and discontinuance of
nonconforming structures.
8. Sufficient space shall be provided indoors for all animals kept at the
facility, and no animals shall be kept outside between 9:00 pm and
8:00 am.
A. No nonconforming use may be enlarged or expanded. In addition, a
building or structure in which a nonconforming use is carried on may
not be enlarged or expanded.
B. The abandonment or discontinuance of a nonconforming use shall
result in its termination. A nonconforming use shall be considered
abandoned when there occurs a cessation of any use or activity by an
apparent act or failure to act on the part of the tenant or owners to
reinstate such use within a period of one (1) year from the date of
cessation or discontinuance.
C. The total destruction of a nonconforming use, or the total destruction of
a building or structure in which a nonconforming use is carried on shall
terminate the use.
A. The total destruction of a nonconforming structure or building shall
terminate the right to maintain the nonconforming structure or
building.
B. No nonconforming building or structure shall be enlarged, extended or
increased, except that in residential zones, a nonconforming singlefamily
dwelling or a single family dwelling on a nonconforming lot may
be enlarged, extended or increased if:
1. Said enlargement, extension or increase by itself conforms with all
requirements of the zoning and site plan requirements of the
Borough of Waldwick Land Use and Development Code and the
§ 97-124.16 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-125.4
1:600
§ 97-125.5. Certificate of nonconformity.
A prospective purchaser, a prospective mortgagee or any other person
interested in any land upon which a nonconforming use or structure exists
may apply in writing for the issuance of a certificate certifying that the use
or structure existed before the adoption of the ordinance which rendered
the use or structure nonconforming. The application may be made to the
zoning officer within one (1) year of the adoption of the ordinance which
rendered the use or structure nonconforming or at any time to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
§ 97-125.6. Conversion to permitted use.
No nonconforming use or structure shall, if once changed into a conforming
use or structure, shall be changed back again into a nonconforming use or
structure.
§ 97-125.7. Lots appearing on filed maps.
Lots appearing on maps which have been approved for filing and which
have been filed in the office of the Registrar of the County of Bergen
since the effective date of the Land Subdivision Ordinance of the Borough
of Waldwick are hereby exempted from the minimum lot and yard
requirements as provided in this ordinance. The minimum area of all
contiguous lots in single ownership shall be those shown on said filed maps.
§ 97-125.8. Prevailing lot setbacks.
The minimum front and rear yard setback shall conform to the established
set back of existing buildings within one hundred (100) feet of either side
of said lot. If there are no existing buildings within one hundred (100) feet
on either side of said lot, front and rear yard setbacks shall comply with the
existing setback established in this ordinance. When the average lot width
is less than as prescribed in the current zone district requirements, the side
yard may be reduced by the percentage that the average lot width bears to
the zone district requirements, but in no event shall a side yard be less than
five (5) feet. Off-street parking requirements shall be complied with.
§ 97-126. Relief and Supervision.
dimensions and setback of said enlargement, extension or increase,
when aggregated with the existing building, do not create or
increase any yard, area, height, dimensional, bulk, parking or
setback violation of Article XI, Zoning; and,
2. The area of said enlargement, extension or increase, when
aggregated with the area of the existing building, does not exceed
the maximum lot coverage standard permitted in that zone.
§ 97-125.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-126.1
1:601
§ 97-126.1. Board of Adjustment.
All necessary elements permitted by the New Jersey Municipal Land Use
Law regarding establishment, powers and function of the Board of
Adjustment; conduct of hearings; notices; and appeals are thoroughly
covered in Articles II through IV, (§§ 97-4 through 97-37) of the Land Use
and Development Ordinance of the Borough of Waldwick.
§ 97-127. Fees.
§ 97-127.1. Review and hearings. [Amended 4-23-96 by Ord. No.
5-96]
(See § 48:56A-27.)
§ 97-127.2. Certified court reporter.
If an applicant desires a certified court reporter, the cost of taking testimony
and transcribing it with a copy of the transcription available to the Borough
shall be at the expense of the applicant who shall also arrange for reporter's
attendance.
§ 97-127.3. Appeals to the governing body. [N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17]
(See § 48:97-83 of the Code of the Borough of Waldwick.)
§ 97-127.4. Signs.
(See § 48:97-84 of the Code of the Borough of Waldwick.)
§ 97-127.5. Building permits.
§ 97-127.6. Certificates of occupancy.
Before any person shall occupy a building or structure which has been
constructed, he/she shall first apply for and obtain from the Building
Inspector a certificate of occupancy and shall pay to the Building Inspector
the fees as provided for in Chapter 39.
§ 97-127.7. Zoning permits.
(See § 48:97-87 of the Code of the Borough of Waldwick.)
§ 97-127.8. Conditional use permits.
Following the review called for in § 97-128.7 for conditional use applications
and approval of the application by the Planning Board, the Building
A. Before any person shall commence to construct, erect, raise, alter or
repair any building or structure, he/she shall first apply for and obtain
from the Building Inspector a permit signed by him/her, and shall pay to
the Building Inspector such fees as established by this ordinance.
§ 97-126.1 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-127.8
1:602
Inspector shall be notified of the Planning Board's review and findings, and,
if approved, said Inspector shall be instructed to issue a conditional use
permit. No additional fee will be required other than that specified in §
97-127.1.
§ 97-128. Administration and Enforcement.
§ 97-128.1. Zoning Administrator.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator of the Borough of Waldwick
to administer and enforce this ordinance. The Borough Building Inspector
may be appointed Zoning Administrator. In no case shall a permit be
granted for the construction or alteration of any building where the
proposed construction, alteration or use would be in violation of any
provision of this ordinance. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator
to cause any new buildings, plans or premises to be inspected or examined
and to order in writing to the owner that any condition be remedied which is
found to exist in violation of any provisions of this ordinance. He shall have
the right to enter any building or premises during the daytime in the course
of his/her duties.
§ 97-128.2. Building permit required; procedure for issuance.
No building in any district shall be erected, reconstructed, restored or
structurally altered that is not in compliance with the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code (UCC), and that has not also been issued a building
permit upon application to the Building Inspector. No building permit shall
be issued unless the proposed construction or use is in full conformity with
all the provisions of this ordinance. Any building permit issued in violation
of the provisions of this ordinance shall be null and void and of no effect,
without the necessity for any proceedings or revocation and nullification
thereof, and any work undertaken or use established pursuant to any such
permit shall be unlawful.
A. Submission. Every application for a building permit shall contain the
following information and be accompanied by the required fee and a
plot plan drawn to scale and signed by the person responsible for such
drawing. All dimensions shown on these plans relating to the location
and size of the lot to be built upon shall be based upon an actual survey
of the lot by a licensed land surveyor in the State of New Jersey.
1. The actual shape, dimensions, radii, angles and area of the lot on
which the building is proposed to be erected or of the lot on which
it is situated, if an existing building.
2. The block and lot numbers as they appear on the latest tax records.
3. The exact location, size and height of the buildings and accessory
buildings existing and proposed, or alterations of existing buildings
or accessory buildings on the same lot.
§ 97-127.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-128.2
1:603
4. The dimension of all yards in relation to the subject building and
the distance between such buildings and any other existing
building on the same lot.
5. The existing and intended use of all buildings, existing or proposed,
the use of land and the number of families or dwelling units the
building is designed to accommodate.
6. The number and location of off-street parking spaces and off-street
loading areas, existing and proposed, designed to accommodate
the use proposed on such lot.
7. Such topographic or other information with regard to the building,
the lot or neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine that
the proposed construction will conform to the provisions of this
ordinance.
B. Street access. No building permit shall be issued for the construction or
alteration of any building upon a lot without access to a street or
highway as stipulated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-35 and 55D-36.
C. Site plan approval. No building permit shall be issued for any building
to be constructed or altered where such building is subject to the site
plan review and approval of the Planning Board except in conformity
with the plans approved by the appropriate municipal agency.
D. Conditional use approval. No building permit shall be issued for a
building to be used for any conditional use in any district where such
use is allowed, except by approval of the Planning Board.
E. Subdivision approval. No building permit shall be issued for any new
building located in a subdivision unless that subdivision is duly
approved by the Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of
Article VIII, Subdivision of Land.
F. Application. The building permit application and all supporting
documents shall be made in triplicate. On the issuance of a building
permit, the Building Inspector shall return one (1) copy of all filed
documents to the applicant.
G. Time of approval. The Building Inspector shall, within twenty (20) days
after the filing of a complete and properly prepared application, either
issue or deny a building permit. If a building permit is denied, the
Building Inspector shall state in writing to the applicant the reasons for
such denial.
H. Expiration of permit. Every building permit shall expire if the work
authorized has not been commenced within twelve (12) months after
the date of the issuance, or construction has not been completed within
eighteen (18) months from such date of issuance.
§ 97-128.2 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-128.2
1:604
§ 97-128.3. Zoning permit requirements.
Zoning permits shall be secured from the Zoning Administrator prior to the
issuance of a building permit or construction, erection or alteration of any
structure or part of a structure or sign or upon a change in the use of the
land or a structure.
§ 97-128.4. Certificate of occupancy required; procedure for
issuance.
The occupancy and use of a building or part of a building hereafter erected,
structurally altered or moved, the change in use of an existing building,
the change in use of land or the change in use of a nonconforming use or
building shall be unlawful until a certificate of occupancy shall have been
applied for and shall have been issued by the Building Inspector.
I. Building to be staked out. The lot and the location of the building
thereon shall be staked out on the grounds before construction is
started.
J. Certified foundation survey. As soon as the foundation of a new building
or alteration to an existing building is completed, and before the first
story framing or wall construction is begun, there shall be filed with the
Building Inspector a certified survey prepared by a licensed New Jersey
land surveyor, showing the exact location of such foundation with
respect to the street and other property lines on the lot.
A. Application requirements. Application for a certificate of occupancy
shall be made for a new building, or an existing building which has been
altered, on a form furnished by the Building Inspector. Such certificate
shall show that the building or part of a building and the proposed use
thereof conforms to the requirements of this ordinance. Such
application shall be applied for when all construction is completed and
a final inspection is desired certifying that the use and all improvements
on the property meet the requirements of this and other applicable
ordinances and codes of the Borough of Waldwick. It shall be the
responsibility of the Building Inspector to notify all appropriate
departments and agencies, including the Engineer and Sewer
Authority, that an application has been made for a certificate of
occupancy and that all final inspections should be made on the
premises within five (5) days of notice and, where necessary, that they
shall include their endorsement stipulating that all work has been
complied with.
B. Variance information. Every certificate of occupancy in connection with
which a variance has been granted shall contain a detailed statement of
such variance and of any conditions to which the same is subject.
C. Time of approval. The Building Inspector shall, within ten (10) days
after the filing of a complete and properly prepared application, either
issue or deny a certificate of occupancy. If a certificate of occupancy is
§ 97-128.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-128.4
1:605
§ 97-128.5. Certificate of compliance. [Added 2-10-87 by Ord. No.
1-87; amended 2-25-03 by Ord. No. 6-03; 9-11-12 by Ord. No. 15-12]
A certificate of compliance is a document certifying that a general
inspection of the visible parts of the building has been made and that there
are no apparent violations of regulations.
denied, the Building Inspector shall state in writing to the applicant the
reasons for such denial.
D. Duration. A certificate of occupancy shall be deemed to authorize, and
is required for, both initial and continued occupation and use of the
building or land to which it applies.
E. More than one use in a building. In a building containing more than one
(1) use a certificate of occupancy shall be required for each use. Upon
the vacation of any building or use a new certificate of occupancy shall
be required prior to reestablishment of a new use in such buildings.
F. Owner's request. Upon written request by the owner, the Building
Inspector shall, after inspection, issue a certificate of occupancy for any
building or use thereof or of land existing at the time of the adoption of
this ordinance or of any applicable amendment thereto, certifying that
such use, including the number of employees, and whether or not the
use and/or building conforms to the provisions of this ordinance.
G. Violation and revocation. The Building Inspector shall serve notice upon
the owner of the property of a violation of any of the provisions or
requirements with respect to any building or use thereof or of land, as
specified within this ordinance. The certificate of occupancy shall
become null and void and the owner of the property shall be deemed to
be in violation of this ordinance and subject to the penalties prescribed
in § 97-129. A new certificate of occupancy shall be required for any
further use of such building or land.
H. Records. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept in the
office of the Building Inspector, and copies shall be furnished on
request to any agency of the Borough or to any person having a
proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected.
I. Monthly reports. A monthly report of all certificates of occupancy
issued shall be filed with the Tax Assessor.
A. When required. A certificate of compliance shall be required in the
following occurrences:
1. Change of occupancy of the building or premises.
2. Transfer of title to real property in the Borough of Waldwick
containing a building or structure of any kind.
B. Exceptions. The following transactions are exempt from obtaining a
certificate of compliance:
§ 97-128.4 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-128.5
1:606
1. A transfer of title which confirms or corrects a deed previously
recorded.
2. A title which is eligible to be recorded as an ancient deed pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 46:16-7.
3. Transfer of title between husband and wife.
C. Application for certificate of compliance. The applicant shall apply for a
certificate of compliance on the form provided by the Borough of
Waldwick. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file at the office of
the Construction Code Official, and copies shall be furnished upon
request to any person having proprietary or tenancy interests in the
building affected.
D. Fees. The following fees shall be charged for the issuance of a
certificate of compliance: (See§ 48:97-92-1D of the Code of the Borough
of Waldwick).
E. Time limitations for approval. All certificates of compliance shall be
issued or denied within ten (10) days of the filing of the application. A
certificate of compliance shall be deemed valid for one (1) year from the
date of issuance. If a certificate of compliance is denied, the
Construction Official shall state the reasons for the denial.
An appeal of denial must be filed within ten (10) calendar days of
receipt of the denial. Such appeal shall be filed with the Board of
Adjustment if the basis of the denial involves violation or interpretation
of Article XI, Zoning. If the basis of the denial involves a violation of
the Uniform Construction Code the appeal shall be taken to the Bergen
County Construction Board of Appeal. If the basis of the denial involves
a violation of the Health Code the appeal shall be filed with the Board
of Health. [Added 3-23-93 by Ord. No. 3-93]
F. Inspections. The applicant shall permit the building to be inspected by
the following Borough officials: Construction Official, who will be
responsible for the inspection and who can recommend further
inspection by the construction sub-code officials, Tax Assessor, Water
Department, and Board of Health. Refusal to permit one (1) or more
inspections shall result in the denial of the application. In addition to
determining that the premises is in compliance with the property
maintenance, Land Use and Development Ordinance, and all other
applicable Municipal ordinances and State laws. A certificate of
compliance inspection shall include a determination of compliance with
the following:
1. Installation of Smoke and Carbon Monoxide detectors in
accordance with § 51-11 of the code of the Borough of Waldwick.
2. Handrails shall exist for all stairways having three or more risers.
§ 97-128.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-128.5
1:607
§ 97-128.6. Procedure for issuance of temporary use permits.
3. No sump pump connections are to be connected to the sanitary
sewer piping.
4. All open construction permits are to be closed.
5. All newly installed (within ten years) items such as a furnace, hot
water heater, roof, siding, finished basement and electrical or
plumbing work have all received the necessary and required
permits.
6. Sidewalks are in good repair in accordance with Chapter 76.
7. Garages converted to other uses without permit or Municipal
approval (written proof required) shall be restored to a usable
garage.
8. House numbers are to be visible from the street.
9. The required number of water laterals and/or curb stops servicing
the structure as required by Chapter 94 of this Code.
G. Responsibility for obtaining certificates. The responsibility for
obtaining a certificate of compliance rests with the current owner of the
property. No owner shall permit the occurrence of any event requiring a
certificate of compliance under this section unless the requisite
certificate has been issued, nor shall a tenant or occupant occupy any
premises unless the requisite certificate has first been issued. Owners,
tenants and occupants shall be jointly and separately responsible for
failure to obtain the requisite certificate and are subject to penalties
under § 97-129.1, entitled "Penalties". Transfer of title to real property
may be permitted by the Construction Official provided the purchaser
certifies in writing to the Construction Official that the purchaser shall
correct all violations upon which the denial of the Certificate of
Compliance was based in a reasonable time and further provided the
purchaser and seller have established a reasonable escrow for the
repair work. [Amended 8-10-99 by Ord. No. 11-99]
H. Notification. To assist in the enforcement of this section, a notice shall
be included on all tax searches and added assessment searches
prepared by the Tax Collector of the Borough of Waldwick, stating that
a certificate of continuing occupancy is required for a change in use and
occupancy, sale or the vacation of any building or portion thereof used
for a residential purpose within the Borough of Waldwick; provided,
however, that a failure to affix such notice shall not constitute a defense
for the failure to obtain a certificate of continuing occupancy in
violation of this section.
(See § 48:97-92.1 of the Code of the Borough of Waldwick.)
§ 97-128.5 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-128.6
1:608
§ 97-128.7. Procedure for issuance of conditional use permits.
The Planning Board, in reviewing conditional use applications shall use the
guiding principles and standards set forth in § 97-124 to determine that
the proposed use will not be detrimental to the health, safety and general
welfare of the Borough and is deemed necessary for its convenience.
A. Eligibility. It is recognized that it may be in accordance with the
purpose of this ordinance to permit temporary activities for a limited
period of time, which activities may be prohibited by other provisions of
this ordinance, if such uses are of such a nature and are so located that
at the time of petition, they will:
(1) In no way exert a detrimental effect upon the uses of land and
activities normally permitted in the zone.
(2) Contribute materially to the welfare of the Borough, particularly in
a state of emergency, under conditions peculiar to the time and
place involved.
B. Procedure. Then the Board of Adjustment may subject to all regulations
of this ordinance specified, direct the Zoning Administrator to issue a
permit for a period not to exceed six (6) months. Such a period may be
extended no more than once for an additional period of six (6) months.
A. Application for permits. Application for permit for any conditional use
shall be made to the Planning Board by filing an application with the
Zoning Administrator. Such application shall set forth and be
accompanied by the following:
(1) A site plan, drawn in accordance with Article IX, which site plan
shall, in addition, show the location, type or kind of structure and
present use of all buildings within two hundred (200) feet of any
boundary line of the lot.
(2) Where the applicant is a person other than the owner of the lot, the
written consent of the owner or owners authorizing the filing of the
application.
B. Planning Board review. The Planning Board shall evaluate the proposed
conditional use and its relationship and conformity to the goals,
objectives and policies established by the Master Plan. In making its
recommendations, the Planning Board may suggest any revision to the
site plan, landscaping plan or other plans as will, in its opinion, cause
the proposed conditional use to be in substantial conformance with the
Master Plan and its principles of land use and development. The
findings, conclusions and recommendations of the Planning Board shall
be included in the record.
C. Public hearing and notice. Within forty-five (45) days after the receipt of
a complete application, the Planning Board shall schedule a public
§ 97-128.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-128.7
1:609
§ 97-128.8. Interpretation.
In the application and interpretation of this ordinance, all provisions hereof
shall be held to be minimum standards or requirements adopted for the
promotion of the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of
the Borough. Whenever the requirements of this ordinance are at variance
with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or
ordinances, the most restrictive or that imposing the highest standards shall
govern.
§ 97-128.9. Appeal to governing body.
An appeal to the Borough Council from a decision of the Board of
Adjustment approving an application for development pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d shall be made by serving the Borough Clerk, in person or by
certified mail, a notice of appeal specifying grounds in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17. Such appeal shall be made within ten
(10) days of the date of publication of such final decision. Appellant shall
within five (5) days of service of the notice of appeal arrange for copies of
the transcript from the hearing below to be made. Notice of the meeting
to review the record shall be given to the applicant and those entitled to
notice, by personal service or certified mail, at least ten (10) days prior to
the date of the meeting. The Borough Council shall conclude a review of
the record not later than forty-five (45) days from the date of receipt of
the transcript of the hearing unless the appellant consents in writing to an
extension of such period.
hearing on the application. At the time of the hearing the applicant shall
present to the Planning Board:
(1) Certification of public notice in the local official newspaper of the
time, date, location and purpose of the public hearing on the
application at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing as required by
law.
(2) Proof of service to all owners of record within two hundred (200)
feet of the site of the application.
D. Planning Board actions. The Planning Board shall, within ninety-five
(95) days of the date of a complete application, approve or deny such
application. In approving any such application the Planning Board may
impose any modifications or conditions it deems necessary to carry out
the intent of this ordinance or to protect the health, safety or general
welfare of the community. If an application is approved the Zoning
Officer shall be instructed to issue a conditional use permit upon
request of the applicant in accordance with the terms and conditions of
the Planning Board's approval. The Planning Board may respectively
deny any such application that complies with the minimum standards
contained in § 97-124 of this ordinance but would in its judgment be
deemed detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the Borough.
§ 97-128.7 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-128.10
1:610
§ 97-128.10. Concurrent jurisdiction of Planning Board and Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
In connection with powers exercisable hereunder, the designation "Zoning
Board of Adjustment" shall be deemed to include "Planning Board" to the
extent that the Planning Board has concurrent jurisdiction of power by
virtue of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 or the Zoning, Land Use and Development
Ordinance of the Borough of Waldwick, and the designation "Planning
Board" shall be deemed to include "Zoning Board of Adjustment" to the
extent that the Zoning Board of Adjustment has concurrent power or
jurisdiction by virtue of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76 or the Land Use and
Development Ordinance of the Borough of Waldwick".
§ 97-129. Violations and Penalties.
§ 97-129.1. Penalties.
See § 1:14.1 of the Code of the Borough of Waldwick.
§ 97-129.2. Action instituted by Borough Attorney.
In case any building or structure is or is intended to be erected, constructed
or reconstructed, altered or converted, or any building or structure is or
is intended to be used in violation or contrary to the provisions of this
ordinance, the Borough Attorney shall, after authorization by the governing
body and in addition to other remedies set forth in the statutes of the
State of New Jersey and in this ordinance, institute an action to enjoin,
or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, such erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion or use.
§ 97-130. Amendment Procedures; Severability; Repealer; When
Effective.
§ 97-130.1. District changes; ordinance amendments.
The Borough Council may from time to time amend or change, by ordinance,
the number, shape or area of the districts established on the Zoning Map
and the regulations set forth in this ordinance in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-62.
§ 97-130.2. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of this ordinance
shall be adjudged by the courts to be invalid, such adjudication shall apply
only to the section, paragraph, subdivision, clause so adjudged, and the
remainder of this ordinance shall be deemed valid and effective.
§ 97-130.3. Repealer.
Any and all other ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent with the
provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed to such extent as they
§ 97-128.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-130.3
1:611
are so deemed to be in conflict or inconsistent; provided, however, that
the adoption of this ordinance shall not prevent or bar the continuance or
institution of any proceedings for offenses heretofore committed in violation
of any existing ordinance of the Borough of Waldwick.
§ 97-130.4. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
in the manner provided by law.
§ 97-130.3 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § 97-130.4
1:612
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. DISPOSITION OF LEGISLATION.
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Description Supp. No.
01-2016 2-23-16 Bond, Special 12-31-2016
02-2016 2-23-16 Bond, Special 12-31-2016
03-2016 3-8-16 Capital Ordinance, Special 12-31-2016
04-2016 3-8-16 Amend Ch. 48 Fees, § 48:66;
Ch. 66 Peddling, Soliciting
and Canvassing
§§ 66-1—66-6
12-31-2016
05-2016 3-22-16 Salary, Special 12-31-2016
06-2016 3-22-16 Amend Ch. 48 Fees,
Municipal Pool Fees § 48-87
12-31-2016
07-2016 3-22-16 COLA Ordinance, Special 12-31-2016
08-2016 4-12-16 Amend Ch. 91 Vehicles and
Traffic, Parking Restrictions
§§ 91-12, 91-13, 91-14
12-31-2016
09-2016 4-26-16 Amend Ch. 48 Uniform
Construction Code Fees
§ 48:39.2
12-31-2016
10-2016 5-10-16 Amend Ch. 91 Vehicles and
Traffic, Parking Restrictions
§ 91-12, Loading Zones
§ 91-27, Speed Limits
§ 91-31
12-31-2016
11-2016 5-24-16 Amend Ch. 48 Fees,
Increase Parking Meter
Fees § 48:91-12.2
12-31-2016
12-2016 6-14-16 Amend Ch. 91 Vehicles and
Traffic, Handicapped
Parking § 91-34
12-31-2016
13-2016 6-28-16 Amend Ch. 91 Vehicles and
Traffic, Handicapped
Parking § 91-34
12-31-2016
14-2016 7-12-16 Amend Ch. 48 Fees, Games
of Chance § 48:53
12-31-2016
§ 97-130.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:613
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Description Supp. No.
15-2016 7-26-16 Grad Ball Lease, Special 12-31-2016
16-2016 Bond, Special 12-31-2016
17-2016 8-23-16 Amend Ch. 48 Fees,
Limousine Fees § 48:70-17
12-31-2016
18-2016 9-27-16 Amend Ch. 48 Fees, Park
and Ride Fees § 48:63-3
12-31-2016
19-2016 9-27-16 Amend Ch. 91 Vehicles and
Traffic, Bus Stops § 91-28
12-31-2016
20-2016 10-11-16 Amend Ch. 91 Vehicles and
Traffic, Time Limit Parking
§ 91-12(8)
12-31-2016
21-2016 12-13-16 Amend Ch. 64 Parks,
Prohibited Activities
§ 64-20, Charging Fees to
Public for Attending Special
Events; § 64-4 Permits for
Special Events removes A,7
regarding fees for persons
attending
12-31-2016
22-2016 12-27-16 Amend Ch. 48 Fees, Escrow
for Off-Duty and Outside
Employment of Police
Officers § 48:1-10.3
12-31-2016
01-2017 2-14-17 Bond, Special 12-31-2017
02-2017 2-14-17 Bond, Special 12-31-2017
03-2017 2-14-17 Capital, Special 12-31-2017
04-2017 2-14-17 Capital, Special 12-31-2017
05-2017 3-28-17 Ch. 91 Vehicles and Traffic,
Stop Intersection § 91-22
12-31-2017
06-2017 4-11-17 Ch. 84 Street Excavations,
Certificate of Completion
§ 84-4
12-31-2017
07-2017 4-11-17 CAP Bank, Special 12-31-2017
08-2017 4-25-17 Salary, Special 12-31-2017
09-2017 4-25-17 Ch. 71 Recycling,
Aluminum, Bi-Metal,
Corrugated Cardboard,
Mixed Paper and Glass Food
and Beverages Containers
§ 71-5
12-31-2017
§ DL-1 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § DL-1
1:614
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Description Supp. No.
10-2017 Not Received 12-31-2017
11-2017 6-27-17 Ch. 2A Third Party Payroll
Disbursement §§ 2A-1—2A-9
12-31-2017
12-2017 7-25-17 Ch. 48 Fees, § 48:64-4.2
Summer Recreation
Program, Yoga in the Park
12-31-2017
13-2017 8-8-17 Lease, Special 12-31-2017
14-2017 8-8-17 Ch. 66 Peddling, Soliciting
and Canvassing, Definitions
§ 66-2, General Regulations
§ 66-4
12-31-2017
15-2017 8-22-17 Ch. 91 Vehicles and Traffic,
Residential Permit Parking
§ 91-13, Parking Prohibited
at All Times § 91-14
12-31-2017
16-2017 10-10-17 Ch. 64 Parks, Prohibited
Activities § 64-2, Permit for
Special Event § 64-4
12-31-2017
17-2017 10-10-17 Ch. 96 Yard/Garage Sales,
Signs § 96-6
12-31-2017
18-2017 10-24-18 Bond, Special 12-31-2017
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
01-2018 2-27-2018 Bond NCM 3
02-2018 2-27-2018 Bond NCM 3
03-2018 Tabled 3
04-2018 3-13-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 91 3
05-2018 2-27-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 91 3
06-2018 3-13-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 91 3
07-2018 3-13-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 3
08-2018 3-13-2018 Salaries NCM 3
09-2018 4-10-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 97 3
10-2018 5-22-2018 Salaries NCM 3
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:615
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
11-2018 6-12-2018 Police Department
Amendment
Ch. 20 3
12-2018 7-10-2018 Appropriation NCM 3
13-2018 8-14-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 91 3
14-2018 8-14-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 91 3
15-2018 8-28-2018 Salaries NCM 3
16-2018 8-28-2018 Snow and Ice
Removal
Amendment
Ch. 79 3
17-2018 10-9-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 97 3
18-2018 10-9-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 97 3
19-2018 9-11-2018 Animals Amendment Ch. 32 3
20-2018 9-11-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 91 3
21-2018 9-25-2018 Towing and Storage
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 89 3
22-2018 10-23-2018 Appropriation NCM 3
23-2018 11-20-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 91 3
24-2018 12-18-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 48 3
25-2018 12-18-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 48 3
2019-01 2-12-2019 Commercial
Solicitation
Ch. 66 3
2019-02 2-26-2019 Appropriation NCM 3
2019-03 2-26-2019 Bond NCM 3
2019-04 2-26-2019 Bond NCM 3
2019-05 2-26-2019 Salaries NCM 3
2019-06 3-12-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 3
2019-07 3-26-2019 Appropriation NCM 3
2019-08 3-26-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 97 3
2019-09 3-26-2019 Salaries NCM 3
2019-10 4-23-2019 Salaries NCM 3
2019-11 4-23-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 48 3
§ DL-1 WALDWICK BOROUGH CODE § DL-1
1:616
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
2019-12 5-28-2019 Salaries NCM 3
2019-13 5-28-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 48 3
2019-14 5-28-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 91 3
2019-15 5-28-2019 Acceptance of
Property
NCM 3
2019-16 6-11-2019 Salaries NCM 3
2019-17 7-23-2019 Lease NCM 3
2019-18 8-13-2019 Flood Damage
Prevention
Ch. 52 3
2019-19 8-13-2019 Swimming Pool,
Municipal
Amendment
Ch. 87 3
2019-20 9-24-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 97 3
2019-21 9-24-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 97 3
2019-22 8-27-2019 Recycling
Amendment; Solid
Waste Disposal
Ch. 71; Ch.
80
3
2019-23 9-24-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 91 3
2019-24 10-22-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 91 3
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:617