Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of West Milford
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Township Council of
the Township of West Milford, as revised, codified and consolidated into
chapters and sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1
through 500, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Township of West Milford,"
hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force. The 1976 Revised General Ordinances of the Township
of West Milford, as amended, is hereby specifically superseded by the Code
of the Township of West Milford.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Township Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Township
of West Milford by impressing thereon the Seal of the Township, as provided
by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk
of the Township, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the
same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of West
Milford" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Township of West Milford, pursuant to law, shall cause
this Adopting Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Sufficient copies of the
Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the
public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee
authorized by the Township. The Clerk shall also arrange for procedures for
the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township of
West Milford to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more
of the following: a fine of not more than $2,000, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-6 WEST MILFORD CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 9-26-2007.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Township's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Township Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith,
to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter
and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-14B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 12-5-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-030." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in
the Township offices.
§ 1-13 WEST MILFORD CODE § 1-14
1:6
ARTICLE II
Definitions
[Adopted as Secs. 1-2 and 1-3 of the 1976 Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 1-15. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Code, and in the interpretation and application
of all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the
context may otherwise require, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATOR — The Municipal Administrator appointed pursuant to
the charter, or any Deputy Administrator or Acting Administrator
temporarily serving in place of an Administrator pursuant to charter or
ordinance.[Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
CHARTER — Mayor - Council - Administrator Plan, Article 16A of the
Optional Municipal Charter Law (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-149.1 et seq.), as
amended.[Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6; 12-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-030]
CLERK or TOWNSHIP CLERK — The municipal clerk duly appointed
pursuant to law.
COUNCIL — The governing body of the Township, constituted and elected
pursuant to law.[Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
DEPARTMENT — An organization unit of the Township government
established or designated by ordinance or this Code as a department,
together with any agency or instrumentality of the Township government
assigned to such organization unit by the Township Council.
MONTH — A calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided.
ORDINANCE — Any act of local legislation heretofore or hereafter adopted,
and including the Code, so long as it shall have been adopted by the
procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it shall
remain in force and effect pursuant to law.
PERSON — Any corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization or
other entity, as well as an individual.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of West Milford in the County of Passaic and
State of New Jersey.
YEAR — A calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-16. Construction.
For the purpose of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
A. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future,
the present.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:7
B. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
C. The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
D. "Shall" is mandatory, and "may" is permissive.
E. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first and including the last day, and if the last day be a
Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
F. "Writing" and "written" includes printing, typewriting, and any other
mode of communication using paper or similar material which is in
general use, as well as legible handwriting.2
2. Editor's Note: Original paragraphs concerning use of "chapter," "section," "subsection"
and "paragraph," which previously followed this subsection, were deleted 12-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-030.
§ 1-16 WEST MILFORD CODE § 1-16
1:8
ARTICLE III
General Penalty
[Adopted as Sec. 5-9 of the 1976 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 1-17. Maximum penalty. [Amended 9-2-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-22;
6-1-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-12; 12-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-25;
8-23-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-012]
For violation of any provision of any chapter of this Code, or any other
ordinance of the Township where no specific penalty is provided by statute
or regulation regarding the section or sections violated, the maximum
penalty, upon conviction, shall be one or more of the following: a fine not
exceeding $2,000; imprisonment not exceeding 90 days; or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
§ 1-18. Separate violations.
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any provision of this chapter or any other ordinance of the Township exists
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 1-19. Application of maximum penalty.
The maximum penalty stated in the general penalty clause of this article is
not intended to state an appropriate penalty for each and every violation.
Any lesser penalty, including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be
appropriate for a particular case or a particular violation.
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-19
1:9
Chapter 10
TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles, skates, skateboards and
scooters — See Ch. 84.
Parking restrictions — See Ch. 250.
Snow and ice removal from private
roads — See Ch. 332, Art. IV.
Motor-driven and recreational vehicles — See
Ch. 379.
§ 10-1. Words and phrases defined.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in N.J.S.A. 39:1 shall be deemed to apply to
these words and phrases used herein.
§ 10-2. Official time standard.
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern standard time or Eastern daylight saving time, as may be in current
use in the Township.
§ 10-3. Parking.
10-3.1. Regulations not exclusive. The provisions of this chapter imposing a
time limit on parking shall not relieve any person of the duty to observe
other more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any
other New Jersey statute or as hereinafter provided.
10-3.2. Parking prohibited during state of emergency.
a. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking
upon streets or sections of streets where temporary EMERGENCY
NO PARKING signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his
absence, the ranking police officer is authorized to declare an
emergency and to direct the posting of EMERGENCY NO PARKING
signs when weather conditions, accidents, fires, public
celebrations, etc., dictate or require the avoidance of hazards or
other conditions which interfere with the free flow of traffic.
Notification that EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs are being or will
be posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle
which has been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
b. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this
section shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and
proper regulation of traffic, and any police officer may provide for
the removal of the vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable
§ 1-19 WEST MILFORD CODE § 10-3
1:10
costs of removal and storage which may result from the removal,
before regaining possession of the vehicle.
c. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon signs being
erected as required by law.
10-3.3. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets. No person shall
park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule I attached to and made a part of this chapter.
10-3.4. Parking prohibited for snow plowing and snow removal. [Amended
11-3-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-37]
a. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it
covers the street or highway, an emergency shall exist, and no
vehicle shall be parked on any Township public/private or county
roadway in their entirety.
b. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this
subsection shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe
and proper regulation of traffic, and any police officer may provide
for the removal of such a vehicle. The owner shall pay the
reasonable costs of the removal and storage which may result from
such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
c. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon signs being
erected as required by law, i.e., permanent signs bearing the
message NO PARKING ON ANY ROAD WHEN SNOW COVERED at
all Township entrances, including Route 23, Warwick Turnpike,
Cannistear Road, Otterhole Road, Greenwood Lake Turnpike, Oak
Ridge Road, Longhouse Drive, Lakeside Road, Westbrook Road,
Macopin Road and Eastshore Road.
d. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey
statute, every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this
subsection or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of
not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15
days, or both.
10-3.5. Parking time limited on certain streets. No person shall park a
vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in Schedule II upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described in the schedule attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
10-3.6. Exits and entrances to parking lots and parking places. Exits and
entrances to parking lots and parking places, as provided under N.J.S.A.
39:4-197(1)h, are hereby designated as described in Schedule VI.
10-3.7. Special parking privileges for physically handicapped persons.
a. Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
§ 10-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-3
1:11
PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PERSON — A person with physical
impairment; one who has lost the use of one or more limbs as a
consequence of paralysis, amputation or other permanent disability
or who is permanently disabled as to be unable to ambulate without
the aid of an assisting device or whose mobility is otherwise limited
as certified by a physician with a plenary license to practice
medicine and surgery in this state or bordering state.
PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PERSONS PARKING AREA — Such
geographical area or parking place which has been specifically
designated for the parking of vehicles owned or operated by
individuals hereinabove defined as "physically handicapped
persons."
SPECIAL VEHICLE CERTIFICATE LICENSE PLATE INSIGNIA OR
MARKER — Such identification issued by the Director of the
Division of Motor Vehicles of the State of New Jersey, in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 39:4-205 and 39:4-206 of the Revised Statutes of the
State of New Jersey, which shall be affixed to the vehicle indicating
that a special vehicle identification card has been issued for the
motor vehicle designated therein.
SPECIAL VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION CARD — The identification
card issued by the Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-205 of the Revised Statutes of the
State of New Jersey, which, among other things, identifying the
physically handicapped person and the vehicle owned and operated
by him or her, stating that he or she is a physically handicapped
person validly qualified to receive such card.
b. Parking areas for physically handicapped persons. Upon the
posting of the sign described in Subsection 3.7d in the parking
areas of any public or private property within the Township, no
person shall stand, park, or cause to be parked any vehicle which
does not have a special vehicle certificate or license plate insignia
issued by the State of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-204 et
seq. in any parking space designated for physically handicapped
persons. [Amended 12-19-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-46]
c. Physically handicapped persons; parking spaces. Except for
parking areas supervised by the West Milford Township Board of
Education, physically handicapped persons parking spaces shall be
designated and maintained as follows:
1. The said parking space shall consist of a minimum of 1% of the
total number of parking spaces but not less than two parking
spaces in the area of the parking facility.
2. Each parking space shall be 12 feet wide to allow room for
persons in wheelchairs or on braces or crutches to get in and
out of either side of an automobile onto a level, or paved,
surface suitable for wheeling and walking.
§ 10-3 WEST MILFORD CODE § 10-3
1:12
3. Where possible, such parking spaces shall be located so that
persons in wheelchairs or using braces or crutches are not
compelled to wheel or walk behind parked cars.
4. N.J.S.A. 39:4-197 confers upon the Township the right to
establish handicapped parking spaces in order to preserve and
safeguard the public health, safety, morals and welfare.
Handicapped parking spaces shall be those areas so
designated on maps adopted by resolution of the Township
Council which shall be retained in the Township Clerk's office.
Handicapped parking spaces shall be so marked by signs in
conformance with the current "Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices for Streets and Highways" and shall have a
minimum width of 12 feet and minimum length of 22 feet.
Handicapped parking spaces shall be for the exclusive use of
persons who have been issued special vehicle identification
cards by the Division of Motor Vehicles and whose vehicles are
properly identified in accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-206. No
other person shall be permitted to park in these spaces.
[Added 12-21-1983 by Ord. No. 1983-34; amended
12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030]
d. Physically handicapped persons sign; contents.
1. The owner, occupant, lessee or licensee of any area or parking
space which has been specifically designated as a parking
place for vehicles of physically handicapped persons shall be
responsible for the purchase, installation and maintenance of
signs and parking spaces designated herein.
2. The sign designating the parking space shall not be less than
18 inches by 24 inches upon which there shall be written the
words, "Parking for Physically Handicapped Persons Only."
Such sign may contain a statement that vehicles without
special vehicle identification as designated hereafter
constitutes a violation of this section and are subject to the
penalties herein.
3. The sign shall be posted at the parking area or parking place so
designated for the parking of vehicles of physically
handicapped persons by the owner, occupant, lessee or
licensee; and upon posting, the provisions of this section shall
apply thereof.
e. State special vehicle identification insignias. Pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:4-206 of the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey, the
special identification certificates shall be pasted on the lower righthand
corner of the windshield of the motor vehicle for which it is
issued, and metal insignia or marker, or both, of such design as has
been determined by the Director of Motor Vehicles shall be
attached to the license plate or plates of the motor vehicle for
§ 10-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-3
1:13
§ 10-4. Through streets; stop intersections.
which such identification card and certificate has been issued.
In lieu of the metal insignia or marker, the Director of Motor
Vehicles may issue license plates bearing the national wheelchair
symbol which shall be attached to the motor vehicle for which such
identification card and certificate have been issued.
f. Penalty. Any person who commits a violation of this section shall,
upon conviction, pay a fine of $250 for the first offense and a fine of
at least $250 and up to 90 days' community service on such terms
and in such form as the court deems appropriate, or any
combination thereof, for each subsequent offense. [Amended
12-19-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-46; 10-9-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-43]
10-3.8. Parking, Bald Eagle Village. [Added 9-7-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-26]
a. All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
b. Tow-away zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways,
loading zones, oil fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or
present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by
towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
c. Restricted parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described:
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
All roads Both All Entire length
d. Special parking privileges for physically handicapped persons. All
stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the attached site plan and
signed with R7-8 (reserved sign and penalty plate), in the
designated parking areas for persons who have been issued the
handicapped parking permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
10-3.9. Parking prohibited where bike lanes are present. No person shall
park a vehicle at any time upon any streets or portions thereof where
bike lanes are present. [Added 3-20-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-007]
10-4.1. Through streets. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule III attached to and
made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as through streets.
Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the through street except where yield signs are provided
for in the designations.
§ 10-3 WEST MILFORD CODE § 10-4
1:14
§ 10-5. Speed limits.
The speed limits for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule V attached to and made a part of the chapter
are hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
§ 10-6. Penalty.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter shall be liable
to a penalty of not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding
15 days, or both.
Any vehicle which is disabled to the extent that the operator cannot move
it, or any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this section,
shall be deemed a nuisance and menace to the safe and proper regulation
of traffic, and any peace officer or member of the Department of Police may
provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner or operator shall pay the
reasonable costs of the removal and storage which may result from such
removal, before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 10-7. No-passing zones.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-86, no-passing zones along the
streets described in Schedule VII attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated in accordance with the appropriate nopassing
zone drawings.
§ 10-8. No left turn.
No person shall make a left turn at any of the locations described in
Schedule VIII attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 10-9. Yield intersections. [Added 4-6-1983 by Ord. No. 1983-6]
In accordance with the provisions set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the
intersections described in Schedule X attached to and made part of this
chapter are hereby designated as yield intersections.
10-4.2. Stop intersections designated. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
39:4-140, the intersections described in Schedule IV attached to and
made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as stop intersections.
Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
10-4.3. Stopping or standing prohibited during specified times on certain
streets. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle for the times specified in
Schedule IX, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in
Schedule IX, attached hereto and made a part of this chapter.
§ 10-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-9A
1:15
§ 10-9A. Limiting the use of streets to certain classes of vehicles.
[Added 9-19-1984 by Ord. No. 1984-29; amended 10-2-1985 by Ord.
No. 1985-25; 12-21-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-42]
§ 10-10. (Reserved)
§ 10-11. Mid-block crosswalks. [Added 8-31-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-13]
§ 10-12. (Reserved)
§ 10-13. One-way streets. [Added 2-15-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-5]
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XIII attached to and
made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated.
Chapter 15
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 21.
Length of service awards program — See Ch.
26.
Personnel — See Ch. 33.
Rules of Council — See Ch. 42.
10-9A.1. Trucks over six tons or 10 tons excluded from certain streets.
Trucks with a registered weight in excess of six or 10 tons are hereby
excluded from the streets or part of the streets as described in
Schedule XI except for the pickup and delivery of materials on such
streets. [Amended 9-17-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-38]
10-9A.2. Trucks over 13 tons excluded from certain streets. Trucks with a
registered weight in excess of 13 tons are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XII except for the
pickup and delivery of materials on such streets.
10-11.1. Mid-block crosswalks. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
39:4-140, the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XVI
attached to and made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as
mid-block crosswalks. Warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the mid-block crosswalk as established in this section as
authorized by the New Jersey Department of Transportation.
§ 10-9A WEST MILFORD CODE § 10-13
1:16
ARTICLE I
Short Title
§ 15-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Administrative Code
of the Township of West Milford" and is herein referred to as the "code."
§ 15-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-1
1:17

ARTICLE II
Mayor and Council3
§ 15-2. Organization; election; terms.
The Township Council shall consist of the Mayor and six Council members.
The Mayor and Council shall be elected at large at the general election to
be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November. Except
as otherwise provided by law for Council members first elected, the Mayor
shall serve for a term of four years, and the Council members for a term of
three years, beginning on January 1 next following their election.
§ 15-3. Vacancies.
Vacancies on the Council shall be filled in accordance with the Municipal
Vacancy Law, P.L. 1979, c. 83.4
§ 15-4. Powers; quorum.
The legislative power of the municipality shall be exercised by the Council,
except as may be otherwise provided by general law. The Mayor shall
preside over all meetings of the Council except as herein provided, but shall
not vote except to give the deciding vote in case of a tie. Three Council
members and the Mayor, and in the absence of the Mayor four Council
members, shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a
smaller number may meet and adjourn from time to time. The Council shall
annually select from among the Council members a President of the Council
who shall serve in place of the Mayor in the event of the Mayor's absence,
disability or refusal to preside. The Mayor shall, when necessary, call special
meetings of the Council. In case of the Mayor's neglect or refusal, any four
Council members may call a special meeting upon due notice of the time
and place to the Mayor and all Council members.
§ 15-5. Compensation.
The compensation of each member of the Council and Mayor shall be fixed
from time to time by Salary Ordinance.
§ 15-6. Selection of Council President.
The Council shall select, each January 1, from its members a Council
President. If the members shall be unable, within five ballots to be taken
within two days of the organization meeting, to elect a Council President,
then the member who in the election for members of the Municipal Council
received the greatest number of votes shall be the Council President.
Should such person decline to accept the office, then the person receiving
the next highest vote shall be the Council President, and so on until the
office is filled.
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
4. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:16-1 et seq.
§ 15-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-7
1:19
§ 15-7. Powers and duties of Mayor.
The executive power of the municipality shall be exercised by the Mayor. He
shall enforce the Charter and ordinances of the municipality and all general
laws applicable thereto, and shall recommend such actions to the Council as
he may deem in the public interest. All bonds, notes, deeds, contracts and
written obligations of the Township shall be executed on its behalf by the
Mayor or, in the event of his inability to act, the Council President.
§ 15-8. Meetings and procedure. [Amended 2-10-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-03]
The Council shall meet regularly on dates set by resolution adopted by the
Council at the reorganization meeting held at the beginning of each year as
designated by statute and code. When the time for any regular meeting of
the Council falls on a day of a convention of municipalities, such meeting
shall be held at the same hour on a day prescribed by the Council for such
meeting by resolution and after public notice of such day has been given.
§ 15-9. Council to act as a body.5
The Township Council shall act in all matters as a body. No Council member
shall seek individually to influence the official acts of any officer, nor shall
the Council or any of its members direct or request the appointment of
any person to or his removal from office or interfere in any way with
the performance by such officers of their duties. The Council or any of
its members may direct or request the appointment of any person to,
or his removal from, office; but may not interfere in any way with the
performance by such officers of their duties. Nothing contained herein shall
prevent the Council from appointing committees or commissions of its own
members or of citizens to conduct investigations into the conduct of any
officer or department, or any other matter relating to the welfare of the
Township. The Council may delegate to such committees or commissions
such powers of inquiry as it may deem necessary. Any Councilman violating
the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof in a court of
competent jurisdiction, be disqualified as Councilman.
§ 15-10. Ordinances; approval by Mayor.
Each ordinance adopted by the Council shall be submitted to the Mayor,
and he shall within 10 days after receiving it either approve the ordinance
by affixing his signature thereto or return it to the Council by delivering it
to the Municipal Clerk, together with a written statement of his objections
thereto or to any item or part thereof. No ordinance, or any item or part
thereof, shall take effect without the Mayor's approval unless the Mayor
fails to return an ordinance to the Council within 10 days after it has been
presented to him, or unless the Council, upon reconsideration thereof on
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 15-7 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-10
1:20
or after the third day following its return by the Mayor, shall resolve to
override the Mayor's veto by a vote of at least 2/3 of the members.
§ 15-11. Appointment of officers and department heads; department
supervision.
§ 15-12. Appointment of other officers and employees.7
All officers and employees whose appointment or election is not otherwise
provided for in this article or by general law shall be appointed by the
Mayor.
§ 15-13. Confirmation of prior administrative ordinances; condition.
Any ordinance heretofore adopted by a municipality governed by § 36 of P.L.
1981, c. 465 (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-149.1 through 40:69A-149.16) which provides
for the establishment of municipal departments, and any actions taken by
a municipality pursuant to that ordinance, are validated and confirmed;
provided that the ordinance shall be amended to conform to the provisions
of the amendatory and supplementary act within 90 days after its effective
date.
A. The Mayor shall nominate, and with the advice and consent of the
Council appoint, a Municipal Administrator, an Assessor, a Tax
Collector, an Attorney, a Clerk, a Director of Finance and such other
officers as may be provided by ordinance. Except where otherwise
prohibited by general law, one person may be appointed to two or more
such offices, except that one person shall not be simultaneously the
Assessor and Treasurer, or Assessor and Collector. All such officers
shall be annually appointed unless another term is provided by this
article or by general law.6
B. The municipality may provide by ordinance for the establishment of
municipal departments, not to exceed six in number. Each department
shall be headed by a director, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council. Each department head shall
serve during the term of office of the Mayor appointing him, and until
the appointment and qualification of a successor. The Mayor may
remove any department head upon written notice to the Council. The
Council may remove department heads for cause after hearing.
C. The Municipal Administrator shall supervise the administration of each
of the departments established by ordinance. For this purpose, the
Municipal Administrator shall have the power to investigate the
organization and operations of any department, to prescribe standards
and rules of administrative practice and procedure, and to consult with
the heads of departments.
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 15-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-13
1:21

ARTICLE III
Township Administrator8
§ 15-14. Appointment; term of office; removal.
The Township Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Township Council. The Administrator shall hold
office for the term of the Mayor but may be removed by a vote of at least 2/
3 of the members of the Council, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:69A-149.9.
§ 15-15. Qualifications; residency requirements; compensation.
§ 15-16. Absence or disability of Administrator.
The Mayor may, with the advice and consent of the Council, designate a
qualified administrative officer of the Township to perform duties of the
Administrator during his temporary absence or disability. In the event of his
failure to make such a designation, the Council may, by resolution, appoint
an officer of the Township to perform the duties of the Administrator during
such absence or disability, until he shall return or his disability shall cease.
§ 15-17. Functions, general powers and duties.
The Township Administrator shall administer the business affairs of the
municipality and shall, as provided by ordinance, have such powers and
perform such duties that are not required to be exercised by the Mayor,
Council or other officer, board or body. The Township Administrator shall be
the chief administrative officer of the Township, responsible to the Mayor
and Council for the administration of all Township affairs and with the
following powers and duties:
A. The Township Administrator shall be appointed solely on the basis of his
executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to
his actual experience in, or his knowledge of, accepted practice in
respect to the duties of his office as hereinafter set forth.
B. At the time of his appointment, the Township Administrator need not be
a resident of the Township or state, but during his tenure he may reside
outside the Township only with the approval of the Council.
C. The Township Administrator shall receive such compensation as may be
provided ordinance.
A. Represent the Township and assert its proper interests in relation to the
state and other political subdivisions and negotiate contracts, subject to
the approval of the Council.
B. Attend all meetings of the Township Council with the right to take part
in discussions but not to vote.
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 15-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-17
1:23
§ 15-18. Appointment and personnel powers.
C. Keep the Mayor and Council advised of the financial condition of the
Township, make reports to the Mayor and Council as requested by them
and at least once a year make an annual report on the administration of
the Township government for the benefit of the Mayor, Council and the
public.
D. See that all laws and acts of the Council subject to enforcement by him
or by officers and employees subject to his direction and supervision
are faithfully executed.
E. Assist the Council in preparing the annual budget and capital program
and administer the budget after adoption by the Mayor and Township
Council.
F. Study the governmental and administrative operations and needs of the
Township government and prepare and recommend to the Mayor and
Council necessary and desirable plans and programs to meet present
and foreseeable needs.
G. Conduct assessments and analysis of budget operations, work
programs, operations and cost of services.
H. Approve or prescribe the internal organization of each department and
assign and transfer administrative functions, powers and duties among
and within departments, subject to the Charter and Administrative
Code.
I. Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and
agencies of the Township, except as otherwise provided by law.
J. Investigate at any time the affairs of any officer or department of the
Township.
K. Delegate to other employees such of his powers as he may deem
necessary for efficient administration.
L. Serve as purchasing officer and contracting agent for the municipality
and execute such contracts not required to be executed by the Mayor.
M. Perform such other duties as may be required by the Mayor and
Council.
A. The Administrator shall recommend to the Mayor and Council
appointment and removal of all department heads and other employees.
B. The Administrator shall, as necessary for the efficient administration of
government, make or cause to have made other personnel actions,
including evaluations, transfers, reclassifications, promotions and
discipline, in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
§ 15-17 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-18
1:24
§ 15-19. Deputy Township Administrator.
There may be a Deputy Township Administrator who shall be appointed by
the Mayor, upon recommendation of the Township Administrator and with
the advice and consent of Council. The Deputy Township Administrator shall
have such functions and duties as are assigned by the Administrator.
C. The Administrator shall act as hearing officer in proceedings conducted
under the civil service laws and for which no outside hearing officer is
retained.
D. The Administrator shall establish, maintain and enforce sound
personnel and administrative polices, procedures and management
practices, including the maintenance of appropriate records and
reports in accordance with law.
E. The Administrator shall administer and negotiate all labor contracts on
behalf of the Township, and subject to the final approval of the
Township Council.
§ 15-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-19
1:25

ARTICLE IV
Township Clerk
§ 15-20. Appointment; qualifications.9
There shall be an office of the Clerk, the head of which shall be the
Township Clerk. The Township Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council and shall, prior to his appointment,
be qualified by training and experience to perform the duties of his office.
§ 15-21. Clerk of Council; term; compensation.10
The Municipal Clerk shall serve as clerk of the Council, perform such
functions as may be required by law of municipal clerks generally, and
have such other powers and duties as the Council may prescribe. He shall
maintain the records and minutes of the governing body. The Municipal
Clerk shall be qualified by previous training or experience to perform
the duties of his office. He/she shall serve for such term as is generally
provided by law and shall receive such compensation as shall be provided
by ordinance.
§ 15-22. Ordinances and resolutions.
§ 15-23. Custodian of records.
The Clerk shall have custody of and shall safely keep all records, books
and documents of the Township, except those committed by charter or
ordinance to any other office or transferred thereto by the Mayor. He shall,
upon request and upon the payment of the fees prescribed therefor by
resolution of the Council for the use of the Township, furnish a certified copy
of any such paper in his custody, under the corporate Seal of the Township.
A. The Clerk shall record all ordinances and all resolutions of a permanent
character in books to be provided for that purpose. After each
ordinance he shall also record and certify the proof of publication
thereof as required by law. Each ordinance and resolution so recorded
shall be signed by the Mayor and the Clerk who shall attest that it was
duly adopted upon a date stated, and when so signed the recorded copy
shall be deemed to be a public record of the ordinance or resolution.
Any omission by the Clerk or the Mayor to record, sign or certify as
herein required shall not impair or affect the validity of any ordinance
which has been duly adopted.
B. At the close of each year, the Clerk, with the advice and assistance of
the Township Attorney, shall bind, compile or codify all the ordinances
and resolutions, or true copies thereof, which then remain in full force
and effect. He shall also properly index the record books, compilation or
codification of ordinances and resolutions.
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 15-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-24
1:27
§ 15-24. Corporate Seal.
The Clerk shall cause the corporate Seal of the Township to be affixed to
instruments and writings when authorized by ordinance or resolution of
the Council or when necessary to exemplify any document on record in his
office, or to certify any act or paper, which from the records of his office
shall appear to have been a public act of the Township or a public document.
He shall not affix the Seal or cause or permit it to be affixed to any other
instrument or writing or other paper, unless required by law or ordinance.
§ 15-25. Certifier as to liability for assessments for municipal
improvements.
The Clerk shall perform the duties as Township improvement searcher,
certifying as to liability for assessments for municipal improvements,
collecting and reporting such fees therefor, as fixed by law.
§ 15-26. Insurance, surety bonds and contracts.
The Clerk, subject to the supervision of the Mayor, shall:
§ 15-27. Administrative rules and regulations; filing and
publication.
No rule or general regulation made by any department, officer, agency
or authority of the Township, except such as relates to the organization
or internal management of the Township government or a part thereof,
shall take effect until it is filed with the Township Clerk. The Clerk shall
A. Be the depository and custodian of all official surety bonds furnished by
or on account of any officer or employee, except his own bond which
shall be placed in the custody of the Treasurer; of all insurance policies
upon or with respect to risks insured for the benefit of the Township or
to protect it against any claim, demand or liability whatsoever; and all
formal contracts for work, labor, services, supplies, equipment and
materials to which the Township may be a party.
B. Be the depository for and have custody of all performance bonds
running to the Township as oblige, or any other form of security, given
by any contractor, subdivision developer or other persons on account of
work done or to be done in or for the Township. Cash securities shall be
delivered to the Township Treasurer to be deposited in the appropriate
account.
C. Have custody of all leases of property, deeds, easements and like
instruments for property, owned or held by the Township.
D. Report to the Council annually, or at such other time as the Council may
require, on the coverage, expiration date and premium of each surety
bond and contract of insurance; the nature and terms of outstanding
leases, the rent reserved by each and their respective expiration date.
§ 15-24 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-27
1:28
maintain a current compilation of all such rules and regulations which shall
be available for public inspection in his office during business hours.
§ 15-28. Other laws and ordinances.
In addition to such other functions, powers and duties as may be prescribed
by the charter and ordinances and subject to the supervision and direction
of the Mayor, the Clerk shall:
§ 15-29. Deputy Township Clerk.
There may be a Deputy Township Clerk who shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council and who shall serve at the
pleasure of the Council.
A. Perform all of the functions required of municipal clerks by the General
Election Law (N.J.S.A. 19:1-1 et seq.) and other law or ordinance.
B. Administer the provisions of the Township ordinances with reference to
the licensing of occupations and activities for which licenses are
required by law or ordinance to be obtained from the Clerk.
C. Have such other, different and additional functions, powers and duties
as may be prescribed by law or ordinance, or delegated to him by the
Council and Mayor.
§ 15-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-29
1:29

ARTICLE V
Township Attorney
§ 15-30. Appointment; term; residency.
The Township Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor with advice and
consent of Council for the term of one year, from January 1, of the year of
his appointment and until his successor has been appointed and qualified.
He shall be an attorney at law of New Jersey, but need not be a resident of
the Township.
§ 15-31. Powers and duties.
The Attorney shall have such powers and perform such duties as are
provided for the office of Township Attorney by general law or ordinances
of the Township. He shall represent the Township in all judicial and
administrative proceedings in which the Township or any of its officers
or agencies may be a party or have an interest. He shall give all legal
counsel and advice where required by the Mayor, Administrator, Council
or any member thereof, and shall in general serve as the legal advisor to
the Council and Mayor on all matters of Township business. In furtherance
of such general powers and duties, but without limitation thereto, the
Township Attorney shall:
A. Draft or approve as to form and sufficiency all legal documents,
contracts, deeds, ordinances and resolutions made, executed or
adopted by or on behalf of the Township.
B. With the approval of Council, conduct appeals from orders, decisions or
judgments affecting any interest of the Township as he may in his
discretion determine to be necessary or desirable, or as directed by the
Council.
C. Subject to the approval of the Council, have power to enter into any
agreement, compromise or settlement of any litigation in which the
Township is involved.
D. Render opinions in writing upon any question of law submitted to him
by the Mayor, Council, or any member thereof with respect to their
official powers and duties, and shall perform such duties as may be
necessary to provide legal counsel to the Council and Mayor in the
administration of Township affairs.
E. Supervise and direct the work of such additional attorneys and
technical and professional assistants as the Council may authorize for
special or regular employment in or for the Township.
F. Attend all public meetings of the Council and all other meetings when
directed by the Council.
§ 15-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-32
1:31
§ 15-32. Records and papers.
All papers, documents, memoranda, reports and all other materials relating
to the administration of the legal duties of the Township Attorney shall
be and remain the property of the Township. Upon the termination of
his services with the Township, the Township Attorney shall forthwith
surrender to any successor all such property, together with a written
consent to substitution of any successor in all legal actions and proceedings
then pending in which the Township is a party.
§ 15-32 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-32
1:32
ARTICLE VI
Administrative Organization
§ 15-33. Departments, boards and commissions.
There shall be the following departments, boards, commissions or
committees in the Township.
A. Departments. [Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030;
5-18-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-009]
(1) Department of Finance.
(2) Department of Health.
(3) Department of Land Use Administration.
(4) Department of Public Safety.
(5) Department of Public Works.
(6) Department of Community Services & Recreation.
(7) Office of Administration, which shall include the Division of
Engineering.
(8) Office of the Township Clerk.
(9) Municipal Court.
B. Boards, commissions or committees.
(1) Municipal Court.
(2) Planning Board.
(3) Board of Adjustment.
(4) Municipal Utilities Authority.
(5) Local Assistance Board.
(6) Advisory Board of Health.
(7) Parks and Recreation Committee (Advisory).
(8) Insurance Committee (Advisory).
(9) Environmental Commission.
(10) Senior Citizen's Committee (Advisory).
(11) Library Board of Trustees. [Added 12-5-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-030]
(12) Tourism and Economic Revitalization Commission. [Added
12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030]
§ 15-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-33
1:33
§ 15-34. Powers and duties of department heads. [Amended
12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030]
The head of a department, subject to the charter and administrative code
and the approval or direction of the Township Administrator, shall:
(13) Building Standards Board. [Added 12-5-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-030]
A. Prescribe the internal organization of the work of his department.
B. Direct and supervise the subordinate officers and employees of the
department, and make, alter and enforce individual work assignments.
C. Approve or disapprove payrolls, bills and claims chargeable to the
departmental appropriations.
D. Maintain such records of work performance and unit costs thereof as
may be approved or required by the Mayor, the Council or any Council
member.
E. Provide such information and reports on the work of the department as
may from time to time be required by the Mayor.
F. Exercise such other or different powers of administrative supervision
and direction as the Mayor may delegate to or require of him.
G. Any additional duties and responsibilities as may be required by the
Administrator or may be established by ordinance.
§ 15-33 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-34
1:34
ARTICLE VII
Office of Administration
§ 15-35. Supervision.
The Mayor shall head the Office of Administration.
§ 15-35.1. Division of Engineering. [Added 5-18-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-010]
§ 15-36. Purchasing procedures.
A. Within the Office of Administration there shall be a Division of
Engineering, the head of which shall be the Township Administrator.
B. Within the Division of Engineering there shall be a licensed engineer
who shall be retained annually in accordance with the local public
contracts law, specifically the provisions governing the engagement of
one who provides professional services. He shall be a duly licensed
professional engineer of the State of New Jersey.
C. The Township Administrator shall have complete and full authority over
the Division of Engineering, subject to approval of the Mayor. He shall
ensure that the duly appointed Township Engineer and the staff in the
Engineering Division perform such duties as are prescribed by general
law, charter and ordinance and, in addition, shall:
(1) Cause to be prepared plans, designs and specifications for public
works and improvements undertaken by the Township, either on
force account or by public contract.
(2) Maintain surveys, maps, plans and specifications and control
records with respect to public works and facilities owned or
operated by the Township.
(3) Supervise the provision of technical and engineering advice and
assistance to other Township departments, divisions, boards or
agencies, and specifically to ensure that the duly appointed
Township Engineer or his designated staff furnish the necessary
engineering services to the Planning Board and the Council in
routine work covering subdivisions, site plans, and road
improvement programs under state or federal aid or assessment
programs.
D. All papers, documents, memoranda, reports and other materials
relating to the administration of engineering duties of the Township
Administrator shall be and remain the property of the Township. Upon
the termination of his services with the Township, the Township
Administrator shall forthwith surrender to any successor all such
property.
§ 15-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-36
1:35
§ 15-37. Pay to play policy; awarding contracts. [Added 12-6-2006
by Ord. No. 2006-020]
A. Requisition. Purchases other than those requiring competitive bidding
shall be authorized by the Administrator as purchasing or contracting
agent. All purchases made and contracts awarded for any supplies,
materials or equipment, or contractual services, shall be pursuant to a
written requisition from the head of the department against which the
appropriation will be charged and the certification of the Treasurer that
a sufficient balance of appropriation is available to pay therefor. All
such purchase contracts in excess of $2,500 shall conform to applicable
requirements of state statutes for competitive bidding. The
Administrator may, at his option, in cases where competitive bidding is
not required, submit a proposed purchase to competitive bidding or
quotes, open the bids or quotes obtained and make recommendation to
the Council as to award of contract. In emergency situations, individual
purchases not exceeding $500 may be made by the Administrator
without the approval of the Council.
B. Award of contracts; execution. Where contracts are by law required to
be let to competitive public bidding, the Council may, upon
recommendation of the Administrator, let the contract in the manner
prescribed by law. The Mayor, or in the event of his inability to act, the
Council President, shall execute and sign contracts let and authorized
pursuant thereto, and their respective signatures shall be attested by
the Clerk.
C. Standards and tests. The Administrator shall establish and approve
uniform standards for requisitions and purchases; shall control the
delivery of all supplies, materials and equipment and other items
purchased; and shall make or cause to be made proper test checks and
inspections thereof. He shall ascertain whether the supplies, materials,
equipment and other items purchased comply with the specifications
and shall cause laboratory or other tests to be made whenever in his
opinion it is necessary to determine whether the materials or supplies
furnished are of the quality and standard required, and shall accept or
reject the deliveries in accordance with the results of his inspection.
D. Storerooms, stockrooms, or storage places. The Administrator shall
control any general storerooms, stockrooms, or storage places, which
the Council may authorize. He may make transfers of supplies,
materials and equipment between departments, officers and agencies;
sell surplus, obsolete, unused or waste supplies, materials and
equipment; and make any other sales authorized by Council.
A. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
AGREEMENT FOR PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — An agreement for
the rendering of professional services to or on behalf of the Township,
as defined herein, and without regard to whether the said agreement
§ 15-36 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-37
1:36
or contract is awarded pursuant to and in accordance with the fair
and open procedures as established in the Pay-to-Play Law, N.J.S.A.
19:44A-20.4 et seq.
AGREEMENT TO PURCHASE GOODS OR SERVICES — An agreement
for the purchasing of goods to or on behalf of the Township and any
vendor contracts for the procurement of goods or services not
considered "professional" as defined in the Local Public Contracts Law,
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq., above the public bid threshold that may be
established from time to time by the State of New Jersey, and without
regard to whether the said agreement or contract is awarded pursuant
to and in accordance with the fair and open procedures as established
in the Pay-to-Play Law, N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20.4 et seq.
CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION — West Milford campaign contribution,
county campaign contribution and/or pass-through campaign
contribution as defined herein.
COUNTY CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION — Any contribution, whether in
the form of money, free service or pledge, including without limitation
any in-kind contributions, or purchases of tickets, advertisements or the
like, directly or indirectly, to any county level political organization or
county level campaign committee or fund within the County of Passaic;
the term "directly or indirectly" as used herein shall further mean
and include any campaign contributions made through intermediaries
or third parties for the purpose of concealing the source of the
contribution(s).
ENTITY — Any corporation, professional corporation, joint venture,
general or limited partnership, trust or limited liability company, or
subsidiary or parent of any of the foregoing.
INELIGIBLE VENDOR — Any vendor who has during the preceding
three-year period made campaign contributions in excess of the limits
set forth in § 15-37C of this chapter.
INELIGIBLE VENDOR LIST — A list of ineligible vendors maintained
by the Township Administrator or his designee of the Township in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
PASS-THROUGH CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS — Any contribution,
whether in the form of money, free service or pledge, including without
limitation any in-kind contributions, or purchases of tickets,
advertisements or the like, directly or indirectly, to any campaign
committee or election fund of any candidate for, or holder of the office
of, Mayor or Council of the Township, or to any municipal or party
committee or political club or organization within the Township, that
is received from the election fund or other campaign account of any
elected official or candidate for any office other than Mayor or Council
of the Township, or from any county political organization, county
campaign committee or political action committee or fund within or
without the County of Passaic.
§ 15-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-37
1:37
TOWNSHIP — The Township of West Milford as a municipal entity,
and any elected official, officer, employee, agent, department, board or
commission of the Township of West Milford.
VENDOR — Any individual person or entity who either negotiates,
bids or otherwise seeks to enter into an agreement to purchase goods
or services as defined herein. In the case of any vendor who is an
individual person, the term shall also include the individual's spouse, if
any, and any child living at home, as well as any entity by whom any of
them are employed or in which any of them have an ownership interest
in excess of 10%. In the case of any vendor who is an entity, the term
shall also include each and every principal of the said entity who has
an ownership interest in excess of 10% in the entity, or any parent or
subsidiary of the entity, and their spouses, if any, and any child living at
home.
VENDOR'S CERTIFICATION OF ELIGIBILITY — A certification in lieu
of affidavit pursuant to which each vendor shall list each and every West
Milford campaign contribution and each county campaign contribution
the vendor has made during the preceding year.
WEST MILFORD CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTION — Any contribution,
whether in the form of money, free service or pledge, including without
limitation any in-kind contributions, or purchases of tickets,
advertisements or the like, directly or indirectly, to any campaign
committee or election fund of any candidate for, or holder of the office
of, Mayor or Council of the Township, or to any municipal or party
committee or political club or organization within the Township; the
term "directly or indirectly" as used herein shall further mean and
include any campaign contributions made through intermediaries or
third parties for the purpose of concealing the source of the
contribution(s).
B. Prohibition on awarding contracts for goods or services to certain
campaign contributors. [Amended 6-4-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-028]
(1) The Township shall not enter into any agreement for any
professional service or for the purchase of goods or other services
with any vendor that has made any campaign contribution in excess
of the limits specified in § 15-37C of this chapter during the oneyear
period immediately preceding the date of the agreement or
during the term of any such agreement.
(2) This section shall apply to all professional services contracts, with
the exception of Subsection B(2)(d), (e), (h) and (i) below, and to all
contracts for the purchase of goods and other services with the
exception of the following items: [Amended 9-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-017]
(a) Contracts that are awarded as a result of open public bidding
as set forth under the Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A.
40A:111 et seq.;
§ 15-37 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-37
1:38
(b) Contracts that are offered to the lowest, responsible, qualified
bidder after public advertising for bids and quotes, pursuant to
the provisions of the competitive contracting requirement of
the Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:111 et seq.;
(c) Contracts with an anticipated aggregate value less than
$17,500;
(d) Contracts that are awarded due to certain public exigencies
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 19:44A20.12;
(e) Contracts with any New Jersey government and/or federal
government agencies;
(f) Contracts with banking institutions, insurance and public
utility companies that are regulated by state restrictions on
political contributions;
(g) Contracts the Township enters into for the purchase and
acquisition of open space;
(h) Contracts for professional services, if such professional has
already been appointed or retained by the Township and has
provided such professional service to the Township
continuously for a period of at least 10 years or greater.
However, if any professional who has provided such service to
the Township for a period of 10 consecutive years or greater
has a break in his representation for any period of time, this
exception shall not apply, and such individual shall be subject
to the provisions of this section; and
(i) Contracts for professional services, if such professional is a
Governmental Affairs Agent as defined in N.J.S.A. 52:13C20(g)
of the New Jersey Legislative and Governmental Process
Activities Disclosure Act who is validly registered with the New
Jersey Election Law Enforcement Commission ("NJELEC") and/
or files with the NJELEC a notice of representation with
respect to the services to be performed on behalf of the
Township within 30 days after the award of the said
professional services contract as required by law.
C. West Milford and county contribution limits affecting vendor eligibility
and conflicts of interest. Campaign contribution limits affecting the
eligibility of vendors, pursuant to Subsections B and D, to enter into or
be paid pursuant to agreements for the purchase of goods or services
are as follows:
(1) The maximum amount of West Milford campaign contributions that
may be made by a vendor to each political organization or
campaign committee or fund during any election cycle shall not
exceed $300.
§ 15-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-37
1:39
(2) The maximum amount of county level campaign contributions that
may be made by a vendor to each political organization or
campaign committee or fund during any election cycle shall not
exceed $300.
D. Limits on political campaign contributions by vendors to the Township.
No vendor shall knowingly solicit on behalf of, or make any campaign
contribution in excess of the limits specified in § 15-37C herein during
the pendency of any such negotiations for, or during the term of, any
agreement to purchase goods or services.
E. Vendors to certify their compliance with the Township's restrictions on
campaign contributions; obligation is continuing. Prior to issuing any
purchase order or awarding to any vendor an agreement for the sale of
goods and services, or making any payment pursuant to the same, or
granting any change order in connection therewith, the Township's
Administrator, or his designee, shall require that the vendor submit the
required forms adopted by the State of New Jersey in conjunction with
the state's existing Pay-to-Play Law, in which the vendor shall verify that
it has not knowingly made any campaign contribution in excess of the
limits set forth in § 15-37C of this chapter. The Township Administrator
or his designee shall keep the original of each such certification of
vendor eligibility on file. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to
the contrary, the vendor shall have a continuing duty to report
immediately to the Township Administrator or his designee any
campaign contributions made in violation of this section that occur
during any time that an agreement for the sale of goods or services is in
effect, or that occur during the pendency of any negotiations or bidding
by the vendor to enter into such an agreement.
F. Vendor who refuses to certify its eligibility or knowingly submits a false
certification of eligibility shall be declared to be an ineligible vendor. In
addition to such other penalties as may be provided by law, any vendor
who, after 10 days' notice of the consequences thereof, refuses or
otherwise fails to provide the certification required herein, or who
knowingly files a false vendor's certification of eligibility, shall be
designated by the Township Administrator or his designee as an
ineligible vendor, and shall be promptly included on the ineligible
vendor list maintained pursuant to § 15-37G hereof and shall thereafter
be prohibited from entering or continuing any agreement for the sale of
goods or services with the Township, and from receiving any payment
pursuant to such an agreement for a period of three years from the date
the vendor is designated as ineligible.
G. Township Administrator to maintain a list of ineligible vendors. The
Township Administrator or his designee shall prepare and at all times
maintain a list of vendors who are, by virtue of the provisions of this
section, ineligible to enter into an agreement for the sale of goods or
services with the Township. The Administrator or his designee shall
prepare this list based upon information obtained from the submission
of the required forms from the vendors pursuant to § 15-37E. The
§ 15-37 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-37
1:40
§ 15-38. Budget.11
The Township budget shall be prepared by the Council with the assistance
of the Municipal Administrator and the Director of Finance, and the
following shall apply:
Township Administrator or his designee shall update the list of
ineligible vendors within 10 business days of the receipt of any
certifications or information as required in this section.
H. Contributions made prior to the effective date. Notwithstanding any
term contained herein to the contrary, this section shall not consider
campaign contributions made prior to January 1, 2007, and no such
campaign contributions shall be considered by the Township
Administrator or his designee in determining a vendor's eligibility
pursuant to this section.
I. Curing violations; return of excess contributions. Any vendor may cure
a campaign contribution made in excess of the limits set forth in
§ 15-37C of this section if the said vendor notifies the Administrator or
his designee of the Township in writing that it has received a
reimbursement of a contribution in excess of that allowed in § 15-37C
and by attaching a true and correct copy of the check received in
reimbursement within 60 days of making such contribution.
A. Budget requests. During the month of November in each year the
Administrator shall require all department heads to submit requests for
appropriations for the ensuing budget year, and to appear before him at
public hearings which shall be held during that month on the various
requests.
B. Budget document. Upon the basis of the department requests, the
budget hearings, his analysis of the needs and resources of the
Township and such policy guides as may be prescribed by resolution of
the Council, the Administrator shall prepare his recommended budget
in the form required by general law for Township budgets. On or before
January 15 in each year, the Administrator, Mayor and Council shall
present to the Council his budget document consisting of:
(1) The recommended budget.
(2) A budget message.
C. Budget message. The budget message shall consist of such explanatory
comments, exhibits and schedules concerning the budget as the
Administrator may deem desirable, together with:
(1) An outline of the proposed financial policies for the ensuing budget
year, including explanations of the important features of the budget
and of any major changes in policy.
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 15-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-38
1:41
(2) An analysis of revenue and costs, and of work performance
contemplated by the budget so far as appropriate units of
measurement may have been developed and installed.
(3) A statement of pending capital projects and proposed new capital
projects relating the amounts required for capital purposes to the
down payments and other expenditures financed from current
appropriations and to the amounts of bonds to be issued during the
budget year.
D. Budget operation. The Mayor and Council shall control the expenditure
programs of each department through the application of work
programs and periodic allotments of budgeted appropriations. No
department shall incur any expenditure in excess of the amount so
allotted. Whenever it shall appear to the Mayor and Council that the
amount appropriated for any department or for any purpose within a
department is in excess of the amount required to be expended to
provide the quantity and quality of services authorized by the budget,
the Mayor may by administrative order with the approval of the Council
reduce the amount available for expenditure by any department during
the remainder of the year. If at any time during the budget year the
Mayor shall ascertain that the Township government is faced with the
probability of incurring a cash deficit for the current year, he shall
reconsider the work programs and allotments of the several
departments. Upon such reconsideration he may by administrative
order with the approval of the Council revise budget allotments so as to
forestall, so far as possible, the making of commitments and
expenditures in excess of the revenues to be realized during the fiscal
year.
§ 15-38 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-38
1:42
ARTICLE VIII
Department of Finance
§ 15-39. Director of Finance.12
There shall be a Department of Finance, the head of which shall be the
Director of Finance. He shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice
and consent of the Council and shall be qualified by training and experience
in Township budgeting, accounting and finance. The Director of Finance
shall be the chief financial officer of the municipality and shall keep and
maintain books and records of all financial transactions of the municipality
in accordance with the standards and requirements of the Division of Local
Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs. The Director
of Finance shall have custody of all public moneys of the municipality. He
shall make monthly reports to the Council of all receipts, expenditures,
commitments and unencumbered appropriation balances.
§ 15-40. Division of Tax Assessments.
A. Within the Department of Finance there shall be a Division of
Assessments, the head of which shall be the Municipal Tax Assessor. He
shall have, perform and discharge all the functions, powers and duties
prescribed for assessors by general law and municipal ordinance. Prior
to his appointment, the Assessor shall be qualified by training or
experience or a combination thereof in the valuation and assessment of
real and personal property. He shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Township Council. He shall serve for the term
of the Mayor and shall receive such compensation as shall be provided
by ordinance.
B. There may be an Assistant Tax Assessor who shall assist the Tax
Assessor. Under the direction and supervision of the Director of
Finance, the Division shall:
(1) Have, perform and discharge all the functions, powers and duties
prescribed by law for a municipal assessor and such duties as may
be assigned by the Township Mayor.
(2) Make assessments for benefits for local improvement, and for that
purpose have and exercise the powers and duties of a board of
assessment for local improvement as provided by law.
(3) Maintain adequate assessment records of each separate parcel of
real property assessed or exempted.
(4) Maintain a current Tax Map of the Township as a public record and
cause to be recorded thereon all changes in ownership or character
of the real property assessed, employing for that purpose the
facilities of other departments as provided by the code.
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 15-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-41
1:43
§ 15-41. Division of Tax Collections.
Within the Department of Finance there shall be a Division of Tax
Collections. The head of the division shall be the Township Tax Collector.
The Municipal Tax Collector shall receive and collect all moneys assessed
or raised by taxation or assessment for any purpose. The Collector shall
enter in suitable books or other records to be kept by him the sums received
each day together with the account to which each receipt is credited. Within
48 hours after the receipt of any moneys of the municipality, or on the
first banking day thereafter, the Collector shall deposit such moneys in
the authorized public depository of the municipality to the credit of the
appropriate account. He shall report to the Council, at least once each
month at the same time as the Treasurer is required to report, all receipts
and deposits and cash on hand belonging to the municipality. Within 60
days after the end of the fiscal year, and at such other times as may be
required by the Council, the Collector shall make and furnish a detailed and
true list of all delinquent taxpayers for the next preceding year or for such
period as the Council may require. He shall keep a current record of all tax
title liens, advising the Treasurer and Administrator promptly as such liens
become subject to foreclosure under the law. He shall enforce the payment
of delinquent taxes by the means provided by law as soon as same become
delinquent. The Tax Collector shall also serve as the Township tax searcher
and perform such duties as are prescribed by general law and Township
ordinance.
§ 15-42. Division of the Treasury; Division of Accounts and
Control.13
A. Appointment of Tax Collector. The Tax Collector shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council, shall serve for
the term of the Mayor, and shall receive such compensation as shall be
provided by ordinance.
B. Assistant Township Tax Collector. The Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council may appoint an Assistant Township Tax
Collector, who shall receive such compensation as shall be provided by
ordinance. The duties of the Assistant Township Tax Collector shall be
to assist the Tax Collector in the performance of his duties, herein
stated, and in accordance with general law and local ordinance, and to
act as the Acting Tax Collector during the absence of a Tax Collector.
C. Treasurer and Collector bond. The Treasurer and the Collector shall
each give bond, at the expense of the municipality, in accordance with
general law.
A. Division of the Treasury. Within the Department of Finance there shall
be a Division of the Treasury, the head of which shall be the Township
Treasurer.
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 15-41 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-42
1:44
(1) Powers and duties of the Treasurer. The Treasurer shall have,
perform and exercise all the functions, powers and duties as
provided by general law and Township ordinance. He shall:
(a) Keep and maintain books and records of all financial
transactions of the Township in accordance with the standards
and requirements of the Division of Local Government in the
Department of the Treasury of the State of New Jersey.
(b) Have custody of all public moneys of the Township and shall
make monthly reports to the Director of Finance and
Administrator, Mayor and Council of all receipts, expenditures,
commitments and unexpended appropriations. All monies
received from any source by or on behalf of the Township or
any department, division, board, office or agency thereof,
commission or committee, except as otherwise provided by
Township ordinance, shall be paid to the Treasurer who shall,
by the next ensuing bank day after their receipt, deposit them
to the credit of the Township in the authorized public
depositories of the Township to the credit of the proper
account.
(c) Be the certifying agent for the Public Employees Retirement
System of New Jersey; Police and Firemen's Retirement
System of New Jersey; Old Age and Survivors Insurance
System; hospitalization, medical, surgical and major medical
group insurance plan for employees; withholding taxes; U.S.
savings bonds; employees unions; and United Fund Appeals.
(d) Supervise and perform the work involved in the negotiation of
loans and the sale of bonds.
(e) Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the
Township or in its possession in a fiduciary capacity except as
otherwise provided by law and have the safekeeping of all
bonds and notes for transfer, registration or exchange. He shall
invest or deposit all moneys not required for current operation
in interest-bearing accounts, certificates of time deposit, and in
other investments permitted by law, as may be approved by the
Division of Accounts and Control.
(2) Disbursements. Disbursements in payment of bills and claims
against the Township shall be made by the Treasurer upon preaudit
and warrant, approved by the Council, except that payment
from the payroll account shall be made pursuant to Subsection
A(3), below. The Treasurer shall not make payment of any of the
funds of the Township unless the person claiming or receiving the
same shall first present a written detailed bill of the items or claims
specifying particularly the nature of the bill, claim or demand, with
the certification of the party claiming payment that the bill, claim
or demand is correct. All such bills, claims or demands shall be
§ 15-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-42
1:45
certified by the Township Administrator or any other Township
employee having knowledge that the goods or merchandise have
been received by, or the services rendered to, the Township. All
bills, claims or demands which have met these requirements shall
then be set forth in and annexed to a bill resolution which shall be
presented to the Council for approval or disapproval at a regular
or special public meeting of the Township Council. Every warrant
shall be in the form of a warrant-check payable to the order of
the person entitled to receive it and shall specify the purpose for
which it is drawn and the account or appropriation to which it
is chargeable. Each warrant-check shall bear the signature of the
Mayor or Council President and the Treasurer or Acting Treasurer.
(3) Payroll Account. There shall be an account to be designated as the
Township of West Milford, Payroll Account; and, from time to time,
the Township Treasurer, upon receipt of a warrant or an amount
due such payroll account, shall deposit the same to the credit of the
payroll account, charging the appropriate budgetary accounts
therewith. Disbursements from the payroll account may be made
by payroll checks signed by the Mayor or Council President and
Treasurer upon pre-audit and warrant of the Director of Finance
and approval by the Council of the entire payroll.
(4) Travel expenses. Itemized claims supported by receipts where
available should be presented in order to obtain reimbursements
for expenses incurred by officials or employees when authorized to
travel by the Township Council or Mayor. Travel expenses will be
reimbursed only in accordance with the travel regulations of the
Township.
B. Division of Accounts and Control. Within the Division of the Treasury
there shall be a Division of Accounts and Control. Under the supervision
and direction of the Director of Finance, the Division shall:
(1) Develop, maintain and enforce a uniform system of accounts,
including forms, standards and procedures for all departments of
the Township government. Any uniform system of accounts shall
include appropriate provision for such records and reports as may
be prescribed or approved by the Administrator for the
determination of the cost of performance of each functioning
program or activity, measured in such work units as may be
appropriate thereto, and for such data, records and reports as may
be prescribed or approved by the Administrator for the preparation
and execution of a budget for the expenditure of public funds to
give effect to general improvement programs.
(2) Maintain and operate the Township's central bookkeeping and
accounting records according to sound accounting principals and
in accordance with the requirements of the Director of the State
Division of Local Government Services.
§ 15-42 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-42
1:46
(3) Audit all receipts and disbursements of the Township government
and of each of its departments and divisions and preaudit all bills,
claims and demands against the Township, including payrolls, and
require each department head to certify that any materials,
supplies or equipment have been received and accepted as
specified and that the services have been duly rendered.
(4) Control all expenditures to assure that budget appropriations are
not exceeded and maintain such books and records as may be
required for the proper exercise of such budgetary control.
(5) Review each proposed expenditure and commitment to be made on
behalf of any department or division for conformity with state law,
the charter and ordinances of the Township, and authorize only
such expenditures and commitments as conform with all the
requirements of the Administrative Code.
(6) Install, operate and maintain a certain payroll system and all social
security pension and insurance records for personnel of all
departments.
(7) Devise, install and supervise a perpetual inventory of unissued
store of the Township, and install an accounting system whereby
the status of such inventories will be maintained currently.
Supervise a physical inventory periodically. Supervise the making
of inventory lists of furniture and equipment by every officer,
department, division or other agency having possession of
Township-owned property. Devise a system of inventory records to
account for all furniture and equipment and supervise a periodic
counting of such furniture and equipment.
(8) Submit a monthly report of expenditures and balances to the
Township Council and Mayor.
C. Qualified Purchasing Agent. [Added 10-23-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-020]
(1) Creation of position. Within the Division of the Treasury there shall
be the position of Qualified Purchasing Agent. "Qualified
Purchasing Agent" shall mean a purchasing agent who is the holder
of a Qualified Purchasing Agent certificate and serves pursuant to
the Qualified Purchasing Agent Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-9 to
40A:11-9.1, and the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto,
N.J.A.C. 5:34-5.1 to 5:34-5.5.
(2) Compensation. The Qualified Purchasing Agent will be paid a
salary that will be fixed by the Mayor and Council in the Salary
Ordinance that is adopted from time to time.
(3) Qualifications. The Qualified Purchasing Agent is required to
possess and maintain a valid Qualified Purchasing Agent certificate
issued by the New Jersey Division of Local Government Services,
§ 15-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-42
1:47
§ 15-43. Chief Financial Officer.
The position of Chief Financial Officer who shall also be designated as
the Treasurer is hereby created in and for the Township of West Milford
pursuant to P.L. 1988, c. 100 (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq.) and in
accordance with the provisions of this section. He shall have, perform and
discharge all the functions, powers and duties prescribed for chief financial
officers by general law and municipal ordinance. The Director of Finance or
the Township Treasurer may serve as Chief Financial Officer, and he shall
serve in such capacity without any additional compensation.
§ 15-44. Disbursement of municipal funds. [Amended 12-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-030]
No municipal funds shall be disbursed except pursuant to and within the
limits of appropriations made in accordance with law. All disbursements
shall be by bank check or draft signed by the Mayor and countersigned by
the Director of Finance, upon warrant of the Council.
Department of Community Affairs, and satisfy all of the
requirements of the applicable statutes and regulations then in
effect for the position.
(4) Vacancies and temporary appointments. If the position becomes
vacant, a temporary appointment may be made pursuant to
§ 15-42C(2) and the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-9g.
(5) Duties. The Qualified Purchasing Agent will have, on behalf of the
Mayor and Township Council, the authority, responsibility and
accountability for the purchasing activity pursuant to the Local
Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) to prepare public
advertising for and to receive bids and requests for proposals for
the provision or performance of goods, services, and construction
contracts; to award contracts pursuant to New Jersey law in
accordance with the regulations, forms, and procedures
promulgated by state regulatory agencies; and to conduct any
activities as may be necessary or appropriate to the purchasing
function of the Township.
A. Appointment. The Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed by the
Township Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council and shall
serve for the term of the Mayor and shall be certified as a municipal
finance officer in accordance with the provisions of P.L. 1988, c. 110
(N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq.).
§ 15-42 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-44
1:48
ARTICLE IX
Department of Public Safety
§ 15-45. Divisions. [Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030;
3-21-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-003]
§ 15-46. Director of Public Safety. [Amended 3-21-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-003; 6-27-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-008]
A. There shall be a Department of Public Safety which shall include the
Division of Fire Suppression, Division of Fire Prevention, Division of
Police, Office of Emergency Management, First Aid and Rescue Squads
and Domestic Violence Response Team. The Chief of Police may serve
as the Director of Public Safety.
B. The Director of Public Safety shall be responsible for the coordination
of all of the safety divisions as described above. He shall prepare a
budget, oversee the orderly operations of each unit and perform such
other duties as directed to from time to time by the Mayor and Council.
A. Be the executive head of the Department of Public Safety, subject to the
direction and supervision of the Mayor, and shall be responsible for the
proper and efficient operation of divisions within the Department of
Public Safety and the supervision of its activities.
B. Formulate and administer such rules and regulations for all divisions of
the Department of Public Safety subject to the approval of the Township
Council.
C. Be responsible for the observation and enforcement of all laws of the
state and ordinances within the jurisdiction of the Department of Public
Safety, the enforcement of the rules and regulations of all divisions of
the Department of Public Safety, and shall perform such other duties as
shall be prescribed by ordinance of the Township Council.
D. See that all persons connected with the Department are properly
instructed in their duties and shall give particular attention to the
training and instruction of new members thereof.
E. Have under his control all records and property of the Department of
Public Safety and designate any member of the division to prepare
these reports and keep the records in such manner as he may prescribe,
as well as take charge of such property and any other property coming
into the custody of the division.
F. Furnish to the Township Council complete monthly and yearly reports
of police matters of public safety.
G. Perform such other duties as set forth in ordinances relating to the
Department, as hereinafter referred to, and not inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 15-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-46
1:49
§ 15-47. Division of Fire Suppression.
H. Qualifications:
(1) Is currently the Chief of Police for the Township of West Milford, or,
in the alternative, all of the following:
(a) Is a high school graduate and holds United States citizenship;
(b) Possesses a minimum of a two-year degree with four-year
degree preferred in criminal justice, fire science or related
field;
(c) All standard employee qualifications of the Township of West
Milford and appropriate background check performed and
cleared;
(d) Possesses a minimum of 10 years' experience in professional
law enforcement with at least five of those years at supervisory
level;
(e) Experience in the fire department or emergency management
field preferred.
(f) EMT and CPR certification is preferred;
(g) Has a satisfactory knowledge of the principles, practices and
methods of New Jersey criminal, police, fire, emergency
medical and emergency management laws, rules, regulations
and services;
(h) Possesses knowledge and basic skills in the operation of
various fire and emergency medical apparatus;
(i) Possesses the knowledge and ability to prepare memoranda
and written reports that may be used in a court of law;
(j) Possesses the knowledge and ability to prepare and administer
an annual budget for the Department of Public Safety; and
(k) Possesses the ability to enact and enforce Departmental
policies, rules, regulations, procedures and employee-related
functions.
A. Fire Commissioner. There shall be a Division of Fire Suppression, the
head of which shall be the Fire Commissioner, who shall be appointed
by the Mayor, on recommendation of the Fire Chief's Association, to
serve for a term of two years, effective January 1 of odd-numbered
years and who shall report to the Director of Public Safety.
B. Deputy Fire Commissioner. A Deputy Fire Commissioner shall also be
appointed by the Mayor, on recommendation of the Fire Chief's
Association. The Deputy Fire Commissioner shall assist the Fire
Commissioner in all his duties and shall serve in the absence of the Fire
§ 15-46 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-47
1:50
Commissioner. He shall be appointed for a term of two years, effective
January 1 of even-numbered years.
C. Qualifications. The Fire Commissioner or Deputy Fire Commissioner
shall:
(1) Be an ex-chief of one of the six member companies, and not
currently serving as the chief officer.
(2) Be active in the affairs of the Fire Chief's Association and an
attendee of at least 60% of their meetings during the year
preceding appointment.
(3) Have been recommended by the Fire Chief's Association with the
support of at least four of the six member companies. In the event
that no person has the support of four of the six member
companies, this qualification shall not apply, and the Mayor shall
make the appointment without benefit of the recommendation of
the Fire Chief's Association, solely upon the submission of personal
resumes, by the Fire Chief's Association, of all persons seeking the
position.
(4) Vacancies in an office shall be filled for the remainder of the
current term by the Mayor with the recommendation of the Chiefs
in accordance with the Bylaws of the Fire Chief's Association.
D. Duties of Fire Commissioner. The Fire Commissioner shall:
(1) Be a liaison officer between the Fire Chief's Association, Mayor and
Director of Public Safety.
(2) Give advice to and coordinate activities with each of the Township
fire companies. He shall exercise control at a company fire or other
emergency only if requested to do so by the company officer in
charge of the emergency. He may act on behalf of a company in the
event that at a fire or other emergency no officer or other member
of the company capable of exercising control is present.
(3) In an emergency, be responsible for coordinating personnel and
equipment to provide adequate fire protection in each district.
(4) Serve as the fire coordinator under emergency management. The
Deputy Fire Commissioner shall assist the Fire Commissioner in
the discharge of all his duties. In the absence of the Fire
Commissioner, the Deputy Fire Commissioner shall act in his place
with all the powers and duties of the Fire Commissioner.
(5) Report to the Mayor and Council on the conditions and location of
all Township-owned property which is assigned to the fire
companies.
(6) Maintain a record of all fire company owned property for which the
Township has assumed the responsibility of maintenance.
§ 15-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-47
1:51
(7) Research those fires and other related problems not ordinarily
within the scope of the local company.
E. Removal of Fire Commissioner.
(1) The Fire Chief's Association may rescind its approval of the Fire
Commissioner, or Deputy Fire Commissioner, by a vote of four of
the six member companies, for just cause, and make such
recommendation to the Mayor.
(2) If the appointment of the Fire Commissioner or Deputy Fire
Commissioner was made without benefit of a recommendation of
the Fire Chief's Association pursuant to Subsection C(3), the
Association, by a vote of four of the six member companies, for just
cause, may recommend removal of such Commissioner to the
Mayor.
(3) The Mayor shall not be obligated to act on a recommendation
pursuant to Subsection E(2) of this section unless he has reason to
believe that another person has the support of at least four member
companies.
F. Fire Chief's Association. The Fire Chief's Association shall be
recognized in the Township as the fire board of directors to coordinate
the six volunteer fire companies in the Township. The bylaws of the Fire
Chief's Association shall be on file in the Township Clerk's office.
G. Volunteer fire companies.
(1) Districts. The operation of the Division of Fire Suppression shall be
as set forth below, and in accordance with a map attached hereto
and on file in the Township Clerk's office.
(a) District No. 1. As set out on the map, District No. 1 is hereby
entrusted to Apshawa Volunteer Fire Company, Inc., which
shall have jurisdiction within the territorial limits delineated on
the map for District No. 1.
(b) District No. 2. As set out on the map, District No. 2 is hereby
entrusted to Community Fire Company No. 2 of Newfoundland
and Oak Ridge, New Jersey, Inc., which shall have jurisdiction
within the territorial limits delineated on such map for District
No. 2.
(c) District No. 3. As set out on the map, District No. 3 is hereby
entrusted to Greenwood Forest Volunteer Fire Company, Inc.,
which shall have jurisdiction within the territorial limits
delineated on such map for District No. 3.
(d) District No. 4. As set out on the map, District No. 4 is hereby
entrusted to Macopin Volunteer Fire Company, Inc., which
shall have jurisdiction within the territorial limits delineated on
the map for District No. 4.
§ 15-47 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-47
1:52
(e) District No. 5. As set out on the map, District No. 5 is hereby
entrusted to Upper Greenwood Lake Volunteer Fire Company,
Inc., which shall have jurisdiction within the territorial limits
delineated on the map for District No. 5.
(f) District No. 6. As set out on the map, District No. 6 is hereby
entrusted to West Milford Volunteer Fire Company, Inc., which
shall have jurisdiction within the territorial limits delineated on
such map for District No. 6.
(2) Membership; organization. The members and officers in the fire
companies shall be respectively members and officers of the
Division of Fire Suppression of the Township of West Milford. In
order to remain active members in good standing, members and
officers shall faithfully perform the duties as firemen, obey the
bylaws of their respective companies, and satisfy the attendance
requirements of the company to which they belong. The officers of
each volunteer fire company shall be elected by the company, and
their names shall be submitted to the Mayor for confirmation of
appointment. These elections and appointments shall take place
annually. Upon completion of seven years of service under
municipal control, with attendance at 60% of all fires and drills in
the company in which the member belongs, the member shall be
issued a Township exempt certificate.
(3) New member qualifications. New members in the Division of Fire
Suppression shall make formal application to the company in
whose area or district they live or work. An applicant must meet the
following qualifications:
(a) Be at least 18 years of age.
(b) Be a citizen of the United States.
(c) Shall pass a physical examination.
(d) Must meet Fire Fighter I requirements as set forth in
Subsection G(4).
(4) Fire Fighter I requirements.
(a) Newly appointed fire fighters must meet the Fire Fighter I
training and certification requirements as set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:73-4.2, 5:73-4.3 and 5:73-4.4. Any applicant who does not
meet this requirement may only be appointed as a
probationary fire fighter until the completion of a Fire Fighter I
course approved by the Bureau of Fire Safety. The
probationary period must not exceed two years.14
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 15-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-47
1:53
(b) Exemptions. An individual applying to the Division of Fire
Suppression who has prior fire-fighting experience in another
jurisdiction may be exempted from the above requirement if:
[1] The applicant provides certificates and course objectives
from previous training.
[2] The courses meet the content requirement of the New
Jersey Fire Fighter I program.
[3] The fire company to which the individual is applying
approves the training course as meeting Fire Fighting I
requirements.
[4] The Fire Commissioner approves the training courses
meeting Fire Fighter I requirements.
(c) Junior fire fighters must complete Fire Fighter I prior to being
appointed to active fire fighter status.
(d) Only active fire fighters as defined in this chapter may be
appointed as an officer within the West Milford Division of Fire
Suppression.
(e) Responsibilities.
[1] It shall be the responsibility of the Fire Company Chief to
assure that all fire fighters in their respective fire company
comply with this chapter.
[2] It shall be the responsibility of the Fire Company Chief to
assure that paper and course certificates of probationary
fire fighters are forwarded to the Fire Commissioner.
[3] Upon receiving the appropriate paperwork from the
Company Chief, the Fire Commissioner will assure that the
probationary fire fighter is appointed as an active fire
fighter.
[4] Any applicant who does not attend or successfully
complete Fire Fighter I may be assigned by the Chief of
the prospective company to nonfirematic duties such as
fire police or the photo unit.
H. Widows' pension.
(1) Any widow or minor child or children of a volunteer fireman who
dies as a result of injuries sustained in the course of performance of
duty as a member of the West Milford Township Division of Fire
Suppression shall receive a pension in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 43:12-28.1 et seq.
(2) The pension shall be in the amount of $5,000 annually to be paid to
the widow of the deceased fireman during her widowhood, or to the
§ 15-47 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-47
1:54
legal guardian or trustee, if one is appointed, of the minor child
or children if he leaves no widow surviving, or to the guardian of
the minor child or children after the death of the widow during the
child's or children's minority.
(3) The minor child or children of the deceased fireman shall be
determined to be minors if under the age of 18, unless legally
emancipated prior thereto.
(4) The $5,000 annual pension shall be included in the annual budget
and tax levy of the Township and shall be raised by taxation and
shall be paid in the same manner as municipal employees are paid.
(5) The recipient of the above pension shall submit or have submitted a
certified statement to establish her, his or their eligibility for such
pension. This written certification should be submitted to the
Township Administrator at the municipal building. Failure to
establish or renew eligibility shall be sufficient reason for the
Township to refuse or discontinue payments pursuant to this
subsection.
I. Junior firemen's auxiliary.
(1) Within the Division of Fire Suppression there shall be a junior
firemen's auxiliary. The purpose of the auxiliary shall be to provide
training for eventual membership in the Township's volunteer fire
companies. Each fire company may have a maximum of eight
auxiliary members to be appointed by the Mayor upon
recommendation of the Fire Commissioner. Any applicant denied
membership shall have the right to appeal pursuant to Subsection
J. Each auxiliary member shall:
(a) Be between the ages of 16 and 18 years.
(b) Present permission of the applicant's parents or guardian.
Such permission shall be in writing and acknowledged or
proved in the manner required by law.
(c) Pass a physical examination establishing the physical
capability to perform the duties of an auxiliary member.
(2) General rules. An auxiliary member shall be required to observe
the rules and regulations of the Township volunteer company to
which he is assigned and shall be expected to demonstrate an
active interest in the fire company and its functions. Such member
shall be required to observe the discipline and direction of the
officers and members of the fire company.
(3) Training rules. An auxiliary member shall be required to learn the
basics of fire operations, including, but not limited to, the
following:
(a) Fire pump operations.
§ 15-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-47
1:55
(b) Ladder operations.
(c) Rescue procedures.
(d) Use of breathing apparatus.
(e) Fire suppression.
(f) Fire ground tactics.
(g) Use of fire-fighting equipment.
(4) Safety rules. Auxiliary members shall not be allowed to perform
duties which would expose the fire auxiliary members to the same
degree of hazard as a regular member of a volunteer fire company.
Prohibited activities include, but shall not be limited to, the
following activities:
(a) Participating in the fighting of fires or remaining in the vicinity
of a fire so as to risk injury or interfere with fire-fighting
activities.
(b) Riding on the outside of any fire truck or fire equipment.
(c) Performing any functions or work details which would place
any auxiliary member or volunteer fireman in any hazardous
situation or condition.
J. Appeal of aggrieved firemen.
(1) Each volunteer fire company shall have the right to discipline its
members pursuant to the rules and regulations that have been
adopted by that company, and approve membership pursuant to
Subsection G(2). Any member aggrieved by any disciplinary action
or denial of membership by a volunteer fire company shall be
entitled to an appeal from that decision, which must be filed within
30 days of the action taken by the fire company to the Fire Chief's
Association. On appeal, the aggrieved party shall be entitled to a
full due process hearing, with said hearing being stenographically
transcribed. Within 45 days of said hearing, the Fire Chief's
Association shall make a written recommendation with regard to
said appeal to the Mayor. The Mayor shall, based upon the record
of the hearing and the recommendation of the Fire Chief's
Association, make a determination on the appeal.
(2) The term "member," when used herein, shall also mean junior
firemen's auxiliary member.
K. First aid and rescue squads.
(1) Establishment. There shall be two first aid and rescue squads
recognized and eligible for assistance from the Township as
follows: [Amended 10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-09]
§ 15-47 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-47
1:56
(a) The West Milford First Aid Squad, Inc.
(b) The Upper Greenwood Lake Volunteer Ambulance Corps, Inc.
(2) Accountability. Each first aid and rescue squad shall be responsible
for and accountable to the Township for the custody, care,
maintenance and repair of all Township-owned property in their
possession, control and use. The president of each first aid and
rescue squad shall be the person designated for all communication
and contact with the Township Administrator with respect to such
matters.
(3) Widows' pension.
(a) Any widow or minor child of such first aid or rescue squad
worker who dies as a result of injuries sustained in the course
of performance of duty as a member of such first aid and
rescue squad shall receive a pension in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 43:12-28.1 et seq.
(b) A pension in the amount of $5,000 shall be paid annually to the
widow of the deceased first aid or rescue squad member,
during her widowhood, or to the legal guardian or trustee, if
one is appointed, of the minor child or children, if he leaves no
widow surviving, or to the guardian of the minor child or
children after the death of the widow during the child's or
children's minority. [Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-030]
(c) The minor child or children of the deceased first aid and rescue
squad member shall be determined to be minors if under the
age of 18, unless legally emancipated prior thereto.
(d) The $5,000 annual pension shall be included in the annual
budget and tax levy of the Township and shall be raised by
taxation and shall be paid in the same manner as municipal
employees are paid. [Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-030]
(e) The recipient of the above pension shall submit or have
submitted a certified statement to establish her, his or their
eligibility for such pension. This written certification shall be
submitted to the Township Administrator at the municipal
building. Failure to establish or renew eligibility shall be
sufficient reason for the Township to refuse or discontinue
payments, pursuant to this subsection.
L. Auxiliary members. Within the Division of Fire Suppression there shall
be auxiliary members, who shall be subject to the following provisions:
[Added 7-9-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-017]
§ 15-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-47
1:57
§ 15-48. Division of Fire Prevention. [Added 12-5-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-030; amended 3-26-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-012]
Within the Department of Public Safety there shall be a Division of Fire
Prevention. The Division of Fire Prevention is comprised of the Fire Marshal
and any fire inspectors.
(1) The purpose of establishing the position of auxiliary members
within the Division of Fire Suppression shall be to supplement and
administratively assist the West Milford Township Volunteer Fire
Companies in the performance of their duties.
(2) Each auxiliary officer shall be at least 18 years old and assigned to
one of the six fire companies in the Township.
(3) Each fire company within the Township may have auxiliary
members to be appointed by the Mayor upon recommendation of
the Fire Commissioner. Any applicant denied membership shall
have the right to appeal pursuant to Subsection J.
(4) Auxiliary members shall receive no clothing allowance or LOSAP
and shall have no voting powers. Auxiliary members shall not be
allowed to hold any offices within the Division of Fire Suppression,
except that members shall be permitted to hold a civil position if no
other individual shows interest or is qualified to hold such office
within such individual fire company.
(5) The status, administrative assignment and supervision of auxiliary
members shall be under the control of the applicable fire company
Chief.
(6) Auxiliary members will have no seniority and will have no line
number in the Fire Suppression Division.
(7) Auxiliary members shall provide their respective volunteer fire
company, to which they are assigned or appointed, assistance in the
administrative functions and operations of the fire company.
(8) Any auxiliary member who wishes to move to active membership in
the volunteer fire company must complete all requirements
established by the applicable fire company bylaws and Township
Code provisions.
A. The duties of the Division of Fire Prevention shall be to enforce the Fire
Prevention Code15 of the Township and to work in conjunction with the
Fire Chief's Association and the Department of Public Safety towards
better fire prevention and safety from fire and/or explosion. Pursuant to
Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206
and 52:27D-208, any person aggrieved by any order of the local
enforcing agency shall have the right to appeal to the Passaic County
15.Editor's Note: See Ch. 152, Fire Prevention.
§ 15-47 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-48
1:58
§ 15-49. Division of Police.
Construction Board of Appeals. The applications for the hearing shall
be filed with the Construction Board of Appeals by the 15th day after
the receipt by the person of notice of the ruling, action, order or notice
complained of.
B. Appointments; term of office; removal.
(1) Appointment of Fire Marshal. The Mayor shall appoint, with advice
and consent of Council, the Fire Marshal. The Fire Marshal shall
report to the Township Administrator in the course of day-to-day
responsibilities.
(2) Inspectors and employees. Such inspectors and other employees as
may be necessary for the local enforcing agency to properly carry
out its responsibilities shall be appointed by the Mayor pursuant to
Title 11, Civil Service, of the Revised Statutes.16
(3) Removal from office. The Fire Marshal, inspectors and other
employees of the enforcing agency shall be subject to removal by
the Township Administrator for inefficiency or misconduct. Each
inspector or employee to be so removed shall be afforded an
opportunity to be heard by the appointing authority or designated
hearing officer, pursuant to Title 11, Civil Service, of the Revised
Statutes.
C. Fire Marshal.
(1) The Fire Marshal shall be the supervisor of the Division of Fire
Prevention and shall supervise the enforcement of the Uniform Fire
Safety Act17 and the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
(2) The Fire Official may be the Subcode Official.
A. Powers and duties of Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall:
[Amended 3-21-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-003]
(1) Be the executive head of the Division of Police (hereinafter referred
to as the "West Milford Police Department" or the "Department"),
subject to the direction and supervision of the Director of Public
Safety, and shall be responsible for the proper and efficient
operation of the Division and the supervision of its activities.
(2) Formulate and administer such rules and regulations for the
Division of Police subject to the approval of the Council and Mayor.
(3) Be responsible for the observation and enforcement of all laws of
the state and ordinances within the jurisdiction of the Police
Department, the enforcement of the rules and regulations of the
16.Editor's Note: See now Title 11A, Civil Service.
17.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
§ 15-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-49
1:59
Police Department, and shall perform such other duties as shall be
prescribed by ordinance of the Township Council.
(4) See that all persons connected with the Department are properly
instructed in their duties and shall give particular attention to the
training and instruction of new members thereof.
(5) Have under his control all records and property of the Police
Department and designate any member of the Police Department to
prepare these reports and keep the records in such manner as he
may prescribe, as well as take charge of such property and any
other property coming into the custody of the Police Department.
(6) Furnish to the Mayor and Council complete monthly and yearly
reports of police matters.
(7) Perform such other duties as set forth in ordinances relating to the
Police Department, as hereinafter referred to, and not inconsistent
with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Qualifications of police members. Each applicant for a position as an
officer or member of the Department of Police of the Township shall:
[Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030; 3-21-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-003]
(1) Be a citizen of the United States, a resident of the State of New
Jersey, and live within such proximity of the Township as to fulfill
the requirement of being reasonably available for duty at all times.
(2) Be more than 18 and less than 35 years of age.
(3) Be sound in body and of good health sufficient to satisfy the Board
of Trustees of the Police Retirement System of New Jersey and of
the New Jersey State Civil Service Commission, that such person is
not only eligible to membership in the retirement system, but also
able to meet the civil service requirements.
(4) Be able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently.
(5) Be of good moral character and must not have been convicted of
any crime involving moral turpitude.
(6) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:17B-66 et al., serve a probationary
period pending his successful completion of a basic course for
police officers approved by the New Jersey Police Training
Commission.
(7) Fulfill such other qualifications as set forth in existing ordinances
relating to the West Milford Township Department of Police as
hereinafter referred to, and not inconsistent with the provisions of
this chapter. All applicants for the position of patrolman shall make
written application therefor to the Chief of Police and at the same
§ 15-49 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-49
1:60
time submit such proof as shall be required with respect to the
qualifications for such position, both as listed above and in local
ordinances.
C. Powers and duties of members. [Amended 3-21-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-003]
(1) The rights, privileges, powers and duties of the members of the
Department of Police, including regular police officers, dispatchers,
special police officers, domestic violence response team members
and such nonuniformed personnel as may be appointed to this
Department, shall be those prescribed by the laws of the State of
New Jersey, governing municipal police departments generally, by
the charter and ordinances and resolutions of the Township of West
Milford, and such rules and regulations which may, from time to
time, be established by the Mayor, Chief of Police or the Council.
Rules, regulations and policies as set forth in ordinances relating to
the Police Department, as hereinafter referred to, and not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Code, are continued, but
such rules, regulations and policies may be amended or revised by
the Mayor, Chief of Police or Council.
(2) The Department through its Chief shall:
(a) Preserve the public peace, protect life and property, prevent
crime, detect and arrest offenders against the penal laws and
ordinances effective within the Township, suppress riots, mobs
and insurrections, disperse unlawful or dangerous
assemblages and preserve order at all elections and public
meetings and assemblages.
(b) Administer and enforce laws and ordinances to regulate,
direct, control and restrict the movement of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, and the use of the streets by vehicles and
persons, to protect the safety and facilitate the convenience of
motorists and pedestrians, and to make and enforce rules and
regulations not inconsistent with the ordinances of the
Township for such purposes.
(c) Remove or cause to be removed all nuisances in the public
streets, parks and other public places of the Township, inspect
and observe all places of public amusement or assemblage and
all places of business requiring any state or municipal license
or permit and report thereon to the appropriate department.
(d) Respond to all fire alarms and assist the fire companies in the
protection of life and property, in regulating traffic,
maintaining order, and in enforcing observance of the fire
prevention code. The chief of the volunteer fire company at a
fire may request the Mayor or the officer in charge at the time
of any emergency to provide police assistance in emergencies.
§ 15-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-49
1:61
(e) Provide for the attendance of its members in court as
necessary for the prosecution and trial of persons charged with
crimes and offenses, and cooperate fully with the law
enforcement and prosecuting authorities of federal, state and
county governments.
(f) Operate a training program to maintain and improve the police
efficiency of the members of the Department.
(g) Perform such other duties as are recited in ordinances relating
to the Police Department, as hereinafter referred to, and not
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.
D. Discipline. Under the supervision of the Township Administrator, the
Chief of Police shall promulgate, and from time to time, revise and
enforce a manual of police discipline, practices and procedures for the
better administration of the work of the Department, and for the
discipline and efficiency of the Department. Rules, regulations and
provisions as outlined in the ordinances relating to the West Milford
Township Police Department, as hereinafter referred to, and not
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, are continued in full
force and effect. [Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-03;
03-21-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-003]
E. Suspension. The Chief of Police shall have the power to relieve from
duty any member of the Department for the violation of any provision of
this section or any rule governing the Department until such time as
complaint and charge against such member shall have been disposed of
by formal hearing in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147, this
provision to be subject to the rules and regulations of the Civil Service
Commission. The Township Administrator or his/her designee shall be
the hearing officer in such hearings. [Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-03; 03-21-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-003]
F. Division of Communications. Within the Department there shall be a
Division of Communications. The Chief of Police shall assign one or
more superior officers to this Division, who, under his direction and that
of the Mayor, shall be responsible for the police desk alarm system,
police radio, fire alarm system, and any and all other systems of
communication between the Department and other police departments,
fire departments, state, county and other local public safety units.
[Amended 03-21-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-003]
G. Division of Special Policemen, Special Policewomen and Special Police
Matrons. [Amended 03-21-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-003]
(1) Appointment. Special police officers shall be appointed by the
Council, pursuant to this chapter, for a term of one year.
(2) Qualifications.
§ 15-49 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-49
1:62
(a) No person shall be appointed a special police officer unless
they meet the following qualifications:
[1] Is a resident of New Jersey during the term of appointment
and a resident of the Township of West Milford at the time
of appointment.
[2] Is able to read, write and speak the English language well
and intelligently and has a high school diploma or its
equivalent.
[3] Is sound in body and of good health.
[4] Is of good moral character.
[5] Has not been convicted of any offense involving dishonesty
which would make them unfit to perform the duties of their
office.
[6] Has successfully undergone the same psychological
testing that is required of all full-time police officers in the
Township.
(b) No person shall be appointed to serve as a special police officer
in the Township of West Milford and any other municipality at
the same time, nor shall any permanent, regularly appointed
full-time police officer of any municipality be appointed as a
special police officer. No public official with responsibility for
setting law enforcement policy or exercising authority over the
budget of the local unit or supervision of the Police Department
of a local unit shall be appointed as a special police officer.
(c) Every applicant for the position of special officer appointed
pursuant to this chapter shall have fingerprints taken, which
fingerprints shall be filed with the Division of State Police and
the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
(d) No person shall commence serving as a special police officer
unless he has been certified by the Police Training Commission
as provided for in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.11.
(e) Before any special police officer is appointed, the Chief of
Police or, in the absence of the Chief, other chief law
enforcement officers of the local unit shall ascertain the
eligibility and qualifications of the applicant and report these
determinations in writing to the Council.
(3) Classification; powers. Persons appointed as special police officers
shall, upon appointment, be designated as either a Class One or
Class Two special police officer. The classifications shall be based
upon the following standards, and the appointees shall have the
following powers:
§ 15-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-49
1:63
(a) Class One. Officers of this class are authorized to perform
routine traffic detail, spectator control and similar duties as
may be assigned by the Chief of Police or, in the absence of the
Chief, another law enforcement officer in a supervisory
capacity designated by the Chief to act in his stead. Said Class
One officers are also authorized to issue summonses for
disorderly persons and petty disorderly persons offenses,
violations of municipal ordinances and violations of Title 39 of
the Revised Statutes. The use of firearms by said Class One
officers is strictly prohibited, and no Class One officer shall be
assigned any duties which may require the carrying or use of a
firearm.
(b) Class Two. Officers of this class are herewith authorized to
exercise full powers and duties similar to those of a permanent
regularly appointed full-time police officer. They shall be
assigned such powers and duties by the Chief of Police or, in
the absence of the Chief, another law enforcement officer in a
supervisory capacity designated by the Chief to act in his
stead. The use of a firearm by an officer of this class may be
authorized only after the officer has been fully certified as
successfully completing training as prescribed by the Police
Training Commission established within the Department of
Law and Public Safety of the State of New Jersey.
(4) Carrying of firearms. The carrying of firearms by special police
shall be strictly governed by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.14b.
(5) Work hours. No special police officer may work more than 20 hours
per week, except as provided as follows:
(a) Without limitation as to hours during period of emergency.
(b) A special police officer may be assigned for not more than 20
hours per week to provide public safety and law enforcement
services to a public entity, in addition to not more than 20
hours per week performing the duties pursuant to this section.
(c) For hours to be determined by the Chief of Police while
assigned to public safety duties for a private entity, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.14b.
(6) Number of officers. The number of special police employed by the
Township of West Milford shall not exceed:
(a) Class One. Not more than the number of regular police officers
employed by the Township.
(b) Class Two. Not more than 25% of the number of regular police
officers employed by the Township.
§ 15-49 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-49
1:64
§ 15-50. Office of Emergency Management. [Amended 3-26-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-012]
(7) Compliance with rules governing Police Department. All duly
appointed special police officers shall be subject to the rules and
regulations governing the Police Department.
(8) Removal. The appointment of special police officers may be
revoked for cause after an adequate hearing. Nothing herein shall
be construed to require reappointment after the expiration of the
term.
H. Division of Detective Bureau. Within the Department of Police there
shall be a Division called the "Detective Bureau," which shall be under
the supervision of the Chief of Police. This Bureau shall consist of such
members of the Department as may from time to time be assigned
thereto by the Chief of Police. The duties and responsibilities of the
Detective Bureau shall be those assigned by the Chief. [Amended
12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030; 3-21-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-003]
I. Police ordinance. It is the intent that an ordinance entitled "An
Ordinance to Establish and to Provide Rules and Regulations for the
Government, Maintenance and Control of a Police Department in the
Township of West Milford, in the County of Passaic, New Jersey,"
adopted December 15, 1964, shall remain in full force and effect,
excepting, however, where any one or more provisions thereof might
conflict with provisions of this chapter, in which case the provisions of
this chapter shall prevail. Further, that where reference is made to
"Township Committee," same shall mean "Township Council"; and
except further that the position of Director of Public Safety mentioned
therein shall be deemed to have been abolished, any duties of such
office to be assigned to the Mayor. General law, the charter and local
ordinance, not repealed or amended, shall govern the Department.
J. Composition of Police Department. [Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-030; 2-22-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-001; 3-21-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-003]
(1) One Chief.
(2) One Captain.
(3) Three Lieutenants.
(4) Six Sergeants.
(5) Patrol officers as assigned by the Chief.
(6) Detectives as assigned by the Chief.
(7) Domestic Violence Team members (volunteers) as assigned by the
Chief.
§ 15-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-50
1:65
A. Emergency Management Council. An Emergency Management Council,
with powers and duties prescribed by general law, is hereby created in
the Township and, within the limits of appropriation, shall establish an
adequate organization to assist in supervising and coordinating the
civilian defense and disaster control activities of the Township. The
Council shall consist of no more than 15 persons, who shall be
appointed by and who shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. They
shall receive no compensation.
B. Emergency Management Coordinator.
(1) Appointment; term; compensation. A Municipal Emergency
Management Coordinator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council and serve as a member of the
Emergency Management Council and as its Chairman. The
Emergency Management Coordinator shall serve for a term of
three years. The Emergency Management Coordinator shall
receive such compensation as provided by ordinance.
(2) Qualifications. The Emergency Management Coordinator shall be a
resident of West Milford and shall have a minimum of two years'
experience in the planning, development and administration of
emergency response activities such as those provided by police,
fire, rescue, medical or emergency management units either in the
public or private sector or in the military service.
(3) Training. As a condition of his appointment and his right to
continue for the full term of his appointment, each Emergency
Management Coordinator appointed shall have successfully
completed at the time of his appointment or within one year
immediately following his appointment the current approved Home
Study Course and the basic Emergency Management Workshop.
The failure of any appointed Emergency Management Coordinator
to fulfill such requirement within the period prescribed shall
disqualify the Coordinator from continuing in the office of
Coordinator, and thereupon a vacancy in said office shall be
deemed to have been created.
C. Deputy Emergency Management Coordinator. The Emergency
Management Coordinator may appoint a Deputy Emergency
Management Coordinator with the approval of the Mayor and the
advice and consent of the Council. The Deputy Coordinator shall be
appointed from among the full-time salaried employees or elected
officials of the Township.
§ 15-50 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-50
1:66
ARTICLE X
Department of Health
§ 15-51. Health Officer.
There shall be a Department of Health, the head of which shall be the
Health Officer, to be known also as the "Director," to be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. He shall possess a valid
health officer license issued by the New Jersey Department of Health and
Senior Services or the Department of Environmental Protection, whichever
shall be the licensing agency, and shall possess such qualifications as are
outlined by civil service. He shall administer the work of the Department
of Health under the direction of the Administrator in accordance with
the policies established or approved by the Township Council and
recommendations of the Advisory Board of Health and shall be in charge
of all divisions of the Department. He shall have the power to decide
all variance requests as permitted by code or statute. He shall render a
decision not later than 45 days after a request for a variance. Failure to
render a decision within such forty-five-day period or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant shall constitute an approval of
such variance request.
§ 15-52. Division of Health.
Within the Department of Health there shall be a Division of Health, the
head of which shall be the Health Officer. Under the supervision of the
Director, the Division shall:
§ 15-53. Division of Environmental Health.
Within the Department of Health and under the direction of the Health
Officer there shall be a Division of Environmental Health, which shall
include sanitary inspectors and such civil service titles as may be
appropriate, and who shall receive such compensation as shall be provided
by ordinance. They shall enforce the various sewer and water codes of
the Township, as well as general law, public health codes, and rules and
regulations of the State Department of Health and Senior Services in
A. Have all the functions, powers and duties of a local board of health
under Title 26 of the Revised Statutes, except that, as required by the
charter, the Council shall have and exercise all local legislative powers
under that Title.
B. Plan and administer a comprehensive public health program, including,
without limitation thereto, environmental sanitation, communicable
disease control, child and adult health, and health education, laboratory
services, public health nursing, and such other services as may be
authorized by general law, charter or local ordinances.
C. Administer and enforce the local health ordinances and any and all
other ordinances heretofore adopted.
§ 15-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-53
1:67
connection with sewer and water installations. This Division shall keep in
close contact with the West Milford Township Municipal Utilities Authority
in connection with sewer and water programs in and for the Township,
including regional programs, and particularly as to sewer and water
programs in all subdivisions.
§ 15-54. Division of Vital Statistics.
Within the office of the Mayor there shall be a Division of Vital Statistics, the
head of which shall be a person serving as the Registrar of Vital Statistics.
He shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall receive such compensation as
shall be provided by ordinance. This Division shall maintain and administer
matters concerning vital statistics, including births, deaths and marriages
in accordance with state law, and receive applications for and issue
marriage licenses pursuant to law.
§ 15-55. Division of Animal Control.
Within the Department of Health, there shall be a Division of Animal
Control, the head of which shall be the Animal Control Officer, who shall
be appointed by the Council, for a term of one year, commencing with July
1 of the year in which such appointment is to be effective, and until his
successor is appointed and qualified. He shall receive such compensation
as shall be provided by ordinance. This Division shall perform all the duties
and have such powers as provided by general law, charter and code for
animal control officers. The Animal Control Officer shall act as the dog
warden of the Township. This Division in conjunction with the Division of
Health shall cooperate in any program which relates to animals, dogs and
cats in accordance with general law, ordinances, code and state regulations.
§ 15-53 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-55
1:68
ARTICLE XI
Department of Public Works
[Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030; 5-18-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-011]
§ 15-56. Director of Public Works.
§ 15-57. (Reserved)
§ 15-58. Division of Public Property.
Within the Department of Public Works there shall be a Division of Public
Property. Under the direction and supervision of the Director of Public
Works, the Division of Public Property shall:
A. There shall be a Department of Public Works headed by a Director of
Public Works.
B. The Director, subject to the direction and supervision of the Mayor,
shall be responsible for the proper and efficient conduct of public works
functions of the Township government and shall supervise and direct
the work of the Public Works. He shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council for the term of the Mayor.
C. The Department shall consist of road foremen, equipment operators,
truck drivers, repairmen and laborers; considered as part of the road
department; and of building maintenance workers. Their appointments
shall be by the Mayor; their duties shall be as prescribed by general
law, charter and ordinance; and they shall receive such compensation
as shall be negotiated and provided by ordinance. The Department
shall:
(1) Be responsible for all matters relating to the construction,
management, maintenance and operation of the physical
properties of the Township, other than office supplies, furniture
and equipment.
A. Operate, maintain and repair Township-owned buildings and properties
and provide custodial and janitorial services therefor.
B. Control the care, use and disposition of motor vehicles and automotive
equipment, and shall:
(1) Operate or supervise the operation of a garage or garages, road
depots, and other convenient places for the storage, servicing,
repair and maintenance of Township-owned motor vehicles and
equipment.
(2) Supervise any work done by contract for the storage, repair,
servicing and maintenance of Township-owned motor vehicles or
equipment.
§ 15-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-58
1:69
§ 15-59. Division of Streets and Roads.
Within the Department of Public Works there shall be a Division of Streets
and Roads. Under the direction and supervision of the Director of Public
Works, the Division shall:
§ 15-60. Division of Storm Sewers and Drains.
Within the Department of Public Works there shall be a Division of Storm
Sewers and Drains. Under the direction and supervision of the Director of
Public Works, this Division shall operate, maintain and repair the storm
sewers and drainages, on, off, or along the roads and streets in the
Township.
§ 15-61. Division of Recycling and Solid Waste.
Within the Department of Public Works there shall be a Division of
Recycling and Solid Waste. Under the direction and supervision of the
Director of Public Works, this Division shall oversee the collection of
municipal garbage and recycled materials and ensure successful
compliance with Township ordinances and state laws.
(3) Control the maintenance of motor vehicles or equipment owned by
the Township by maintaining individual vehicle records of mileage,
costs of operation and maintenance and replacement schedules.
A. Maintain and repair all streets and roads under Township jurisdiction.
B. Construct and reconstruct streets and roads, tract road surfaces and
resurface streets and roads according to such standards and schedules
as directed or approved by the Township Administrator in consultation
with a licensed engineer appointed by the Township Council.
C. Maintain all Township streets or roads in a clean and safe condition,
free of obstruction and hazards, and remove snow and ice therefrom as
required, including the sanding of such streets or roads.
§ 15-58 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-61
1:70
ARTICLE XII
Department of Community Services and Recreation
[Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030; 3-26-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-012]
§ 15-62. Community Services and Recreation Director.
A. Under the Department of Community Services and Recreation, there
shall be a Director to be known as the "Director of Community Services
and Recreation." The Community Services and Recreation Director
shall be appointed by the Mayor with advice and consent of Council.
The Director of Community Services and Recreation shall be in charge
of recreation programs, park programs, senior services, veteran
services, recreation building maintenance, park maintenance,
transportation services and will be responsible for the planning,
promoting, organizing, and administering of a comprehensive
community services and recreation service for the entire community,
doing related work as required. He shall serve for the term of the Mayor
and until his successor has been appointed and shall receive
compensation as provided by ordinance. He shall have and perform all
the powers and duties prescribed by general law, charter and
ordinances of the Township and shall administer the work of the
Department. Subject to the above, the Director shall:
(1) Administer and operate Township parks, playgrounds, playing
fields, recreational areas, and facilities for indoor and outdoor
sports, athletic and recreational programs and activities for
children and adults.
(2) Sponsor and administer cultural, social and recreational programs
and activities in cooperation with other public and private agencies
and organizations.
(3) Utilize and instruct the maintenance personnel with respect to the
maintenance and repair of public buildings and grounds used,
controlled or managed for recreational purposes by the
Department.
(4) Administer and operate recreational programs for senior citizens,
support services for veterans and transportation services for
seniors, the disabled and the general public.
B. The Department shall enforce rules and regulations adopted for the
safety and conduct of persons using recreational facilities and for the
preservation of public peace and order at public events, and any person
who shall violate such rules or regulations may be adjudged a
disorderly person. The Department may charge and collect for the use
of the Township a reasonable fee for admission to or use of facilities,
programs or activities provided under this section.
§ 15-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-63
1:71
§ 15-63. Division of Recreation Administration.
Within the Department of Community Services and Recreation, there shall
be a division called "Recreation Administration," which shall be under the
supervision of the Director of Community Services and Recreation. This
Division shall consist of members who shall oversee all aspects of the
Community Services and Recreation Department operations.
§ 15-64. Division of Recreation Program Services.
Within the Department of Community Services and Recreation, there shall
be a division called "Recreation Program Services," which shall be under
the supervision of the Director of Community Services and Recreation. This
Division shall consist of members who provide recreation programs, events
and services to all age groups.
§ 15-65. Division of Senior Services.
Within the Department of Community Services and Recreation, there shall
be a division called the "Senior Services Division," which shall be under
the supervision of the Director of Community Services and Recreation. This
Division shall consist of members who will provide recreation programs and
services to the senior population.
§ 15-66. Division of Park Program Services.
Within the Department of Community Services and Recreation, there shall
be a division called "Park Program Services," which shall be under the
supervision of the Director of Community Services and Recreation. This
Division shall consist of members who provide recreation programs on site
at park facilities to include Bubbling Springs and Westbrook Park.
§ 15-67. Division of Transportation Services.
Within the Department of Community Services and Recreation, there shall
be a division called "Transportation Services," which shall be under the
supervision of the Director of Community Services and Recreation. This
Division shall consist of members who provide public transportation for
the residents. This Division shall also provide program and medical
transportation for the senior and disabled population.
§ 15-68. Division of Park Maintenance Services.
Within the Department of Community Services and Recreation, there shall
be a division called "Park Maintenance Services," which shall be under the
supervision of the Director of Community Services and Recreation. This
Division shall consist of members who will maintain all park facilities.
§ 15-63 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-69
1:72
§ 15-69. Division of Recreation Building Maintenance.
Within the Department of Community Services and Recreation, there shall
be a division called "Recreation Building Maintenance," which shall be
under the supervision of the Director of Community Services and
Recreation. This Division shall consist of members who provide daily
maintenance and repairs to recreation buildings as well as provide support
to programs offered in those facilities.
§ 15-70. Division of Veteran Services.
Within the Department of Community Services and Recreation, there shall
be a division called "Veteran Services," which shall be under the supervision
of the Director of Community Services and Recreation. This Division shall
consist of members who will provide support services to local veterans.
§ 15-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-70
1:73

ARTICLE XIII
Department of Planning and Building
[Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030; 7-9-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-031]
§ 15-71. Establishment; head of Department; composition.
There is hereby established a Department of Planning and Building, the
head of which shall be the Land Use Administrator. The Department shall
consist of the Land Use Administrator who shall serve as the department
head, a Construction Official and Building Subcode Official who shall serve
as the head of the Building Division and the appropriate subcode officials
as deemed necessary by state statute, and such additional employees as
authorized by the Township Council.
§ 15-72. Powers and duties.
A. The Department of Planning and Building, under the direction of the
Land Use Administrator, shall:
(1) Exercise initiative and professional judgment in providing the
Township with guidance and planning within the framework of a
Master Plan;
(2) Make recommendations regarding the Master Plan of the Township
so that it reflects the needs and wishes of the Township consistent
with the good welfare of the community;
(3) Assist in the preparation and maintenance of an Official Map of the
Township as may be directed by the Township Council;
(4) Prepare agenda and reports for Planning Board and Board of
Adjustment meetings;
(5) Attend all meetings of the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment
and other boards or agencies as may be required for the proper
planning of the Township;
(6) Receive, process and classify applications for subdivisions, site
plans, conditional land uses and variances;
(7) Investigate and prepare reports and recommendations on
subdivision applications and site plan applications and all other
assignments as requested by the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment;
(8) Transmit all bonding and fees received on applications to the
appropriate agency, and maintain a general ledger for all deposits
made to the boards and the Zoning Official;
(9) Make recommendations regarding the subdivision, zoning and
other land use development ordinances within the Township;
§ 15-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-72
1:75
§ 15-73. Powers and duties of Construction Official and other
subcode officials.
(10) Issue all permits required by law within the jurisdiction of the
Department of Planning and Building and keep a record of all
applications and all permits issued with a notation of any special
conditions involved, if any.
B. In addition to the powers and duties set forth under § 15-72A, the Land
Use Administrator shall also be responsible for the following:
[Amended 7-9-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-031]
(1) Determination of the proper agency to conduct a hearing and rule
on the applications submitted for approval;
(2) Preparation and advertisement of the decisions of the agency with
regard to the land use applications submitted to it;
(3) Supervision of the Building Division and Zoning Official's activities;
(4) Be responsible for such duties necessary for the proper and
efficient conduct of the functions of the offices within the
Department of Planning and Building;
(5) Under the administrative direction of the Mayor, act as Zoning
Administrator, and shall be responsible for all administrative and
legal enforcement of Chapter 500, Zoning;
(6) Performance of such other duties as may be assigned to him/her by
ordinance or by the Township Administrator.
C. The Zoning Administrator, or his designee, shall be hereby authorized
to appear in court, to appear before all administrative bodies requiring
his advice and to review all necessary plans and documents to insure
compliance with Chapter 500, Zoning.
A. Subject to the administrative control of the Land Use Administrator, the
Construction Official and the subcode officials shall perform such duties
as outlined in the Uniform Construction Code Act18 and shall keep such
records as may be necessary to properly comply with local and state
law.
B. The Construction Official and subcode official(s) shall assist in the
enforcement of Chapter 500, Zoning, under the administrative direction
of the Land Use Administrator.
C. Building, occupancy and zoning permits are to be issued in accordance
with the Uniform Construction Code and applicable local ordinance.19
D. Fire Subcode Official.
18.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127 for the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
19.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 110, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 15-72 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-73
1:76
(1) Duties of Fire Subcode Official. The Fire Subcode Official shall:
(a) Be responsible for the inspection of new buildings, alterations
and additions to structures.
(b) The Subcode Official may be the Fire Official.
§ 15-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-73
1:77

ARTICLE XIV
Municipal Court
§ 15-74. Established; powers.20
The Municipal Court of the Township, heretofore established pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq., as amended and supplemented, shall be known as
the "Municipal Court of the Township of West Milford." The Municipal Court
shall have a seal which shall bear the impress of the name of the court. The
court shall be held in the Town Hall building of the Township, or such other
place as the Township Council shall designate from time to time, and shall
exercise all the functions, powers, duties and jurisdictions conferred upon
municipal courts by the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq., as amended
or supplemented, or any other law.
§ 15-75. Municipal Judge.
§ 15-76. Municipal Court Administrator.22
A. There shall be a Municipal Judge of the Municipal Court, appointed by
the Mayor with advice and consent of Council, who shall be an attorney
at law of the State of New Jersey and who shall serve for a term of three
years from the date of appointment and until a successor shall be
appointed and qualified.
B. The Municipal Judge shall have and possess and exercise all of the
functions, duties, powers and jurisdictions conferred by N.J.S.A.
2B:12-1 et seq., as amended or supplemented, or by general law or
ordinance.21
A. There shall be an Administrator of the Municipal Court of the Township,
who shall be appointed by the Mayor with advice and consent of Council
and who shall perform such functions and duties as shall be prescribed
for him by law, the rules applicable to municipal courts, and by the
Municipal Judge. He shall receive such compensation as provided by
ordinance. His duties shall include but not be limited to:
(1) Carrying out the rules, regulations, policies and procedures
relating to the operation of the court.
(2) Interviewing and speaking to prospective complainants; receiving
complaints and dispensing information relating to court matters.
(3) Maintaining the financial records of the court.
(4) Attending court, taking minutes of the trials and entering them in
the docket; arranging trial calendars; signing court documents;
preparing and issuing warrants and commitments.
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 15-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-76
1:79
§ 15-77. Deputy Municipal Court Administrator. [Amended
12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030]
There may be a Deputy Administrator of the Municipal Court of the
Township, who shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent
of the Council, and who shall assist the Municipal Court Administrator,
pursuant to law.
§ 15-78. Municipal Prosecutor; Assistant Municipal Prosecutor.
[Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030; 4-9-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-016]
§ 15-79. Municipal Public Defender. [Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-030]
An attorney at law of the State of New Jersey shall be appointed by the
Mayor with advice and consent of Council for a term of one year pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 2B:24-4 to act as a public defender in the Municipal Court, to
represent any indigent defendant, as defined in N.J.S.A. 2A:158A-2 or legal
representation of any person charged with a disorderly persons offense
or with violation of any law, ordinance or regulation when there is the
(5) Taking and preparing bail bonds, making inquiry as to their
sufficiency and equity; receiving and accounting for fines and costs.
(6) Interviewing persons on informal police court matters to determine
if there is a basis for formal action and, if necessary, issue
summonses requiring court appearances in this regard;
maintaining and classifying records and fines.
B. In the absence of the Court Administrator, the Mayor, with the advice
and consent of the Council, is empowered to appoint a Deputy or Acting
Administrator, to serve and perform the above duties until the return by
the Court Administrator to his duties.
A. An attorney at law of the State of New Jersey shall be appointed by the
Mayor with advice and consent of Council for a one-year term to act as
Prosecutor, under the supervision of the Attorney General or County
Prosecutor, who may represent the state, county or Township in any
matter within the jurisdiction of the Township of West Milford
Municipal Court pursuant to P.L. 1999, c. 349, § 11.23
B. An attorney at law of the State of New Jersey shall be appointed by the
Mayor with advice and consent of Council for a one-year term to act as
Assistant Prosecutor, under the supervision of the Attorney General or
County Prosecutor, who may represent the state, county or Township in
any matter within the jurisdiction of the Township of West Milford
Municipal Court pursuant to P.L. 1999, c. 349, § 11, and who shall assist
the Municipal Prosecutor in the performance of his/her duties.
23.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2B:12-27.
§ 15-76 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-79
1:80
likelihood the person so charged, if convicted, will be subject to
imprisonment or in the opinion of the court any other consequence of
magnitude and in such other cases as may be referred to him.
A. Any person applying for representation by a Municipal Public Defender
shall pay an application fee in an amount no greater than the amount
set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs, in order to offset the costs of
Municipal Public Defender service.
B. The required application fee may be waived by the court, in whole or in
part, if the court determines upon a showing of clear and convincing
evidence that the fee represents an unreasonable burden on the
applicant.
C. The Municipal Court may permit the applicant to pay the required
application fee over a specific period of time not to exceed four months.
§ 15-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-79
1:81

ARTICLE XV
Planning Board
§ 15-80. Establishment.
A Municipal Planning Board is hereby established pursuant to the provision
of Chapter 420, Land Use Procedures, of this Code.
§ 15-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-80
1:83

ARTICLE XVI
Board of Adjustment
§ 15-81. Establishment.
A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 420, Land Use Procedures, of this Code.
§ 15-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-81
1:85

ARTICLE XVII
Municipal Utilities Authority
§ 15-82. Continuation; membership; terms.
The West Milford Township Municipal Utilities Authority, created by
ordinance, adopted on February 4, 1964, is hereby continued. Such body
shall consist of five members thereof, appointed by the Township Council.
The terms of the members shall be five years. Members shall be appointed
for full five-year terms. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment as above
provided for the unexpired term.
§ 15-83. Powers and duties. [Amended 10-19-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-014]
The Authority shall have and exercise all of the duties provided for by
the Municipal Utilities Authority Law, N.J.S.A. 40:14B-1 et seq., and the
amendments and supplements thereof, and any other statutes heretofore or
hereafter enacted and applicable thereto. The Municipal Utilities Authority
and its officers shall file with the Municipal Clerk of the Township of
West Milford copies of all approved minutes of the MUA upon approval of
said minutes and shall provide quarterly reports of its operations with the
Municipal Clerk.
§ 15-84. Alternate members.
There shall be two alternate members appointed to the Municipal Utilities
Authority by the Township Council. These individuals shall be designated as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2" and shall serve during the absence
or disqualification of any regular member or members. The term of each
alternate member shall be five years commencing on February 1 of the year
of the appointment; provided, however, that the initial term of Alternate No.
1 shall be four years and the initial term of Alternate No. 2 shall be five
years expiring on the fourth or fifth January 31 next ensuing after the date
of their appointments. Alternate members may participate in discussions of
the proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification
of a regular member.24
24.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 2.22, Local Assistance Board, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030.
§ 15-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-84
1:87

ARTICLE XVIII
Advisory Board of Health
§ 15-85. Members; terms. [Amended 12-16-2016 by Ord. No.
2015-017]
There shall be an Advisory Board of Health, consisting of seven members,
one of whom preferably should be a physician, to be appointed by the
Council. Upon the expiration of the respective terms of the initially
appointed members, the term of each member thereafter appointed shall
be two years. The members shall serve until their respective successors are
appointed and qualified. They shall serve without compensation.
§ 15-86. Vacancies.
In the event of the resignation of any member of the Advisory Board of
Health, his death, inability to serve, or absence without acceptable reason
from three consecutive meetings of the Board, the Township Council shall
fill such vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term.
§ 15-87. Organization; officers; minutes.
The Advisory Board of Health shall elect a President and Vice President
at the organizational meeting to be held in January. The Department of
Health shall keep on file minutes of all meeting and copies of official
correspondence of the Advisory Board of Health.
§ 15-88. Meetings.
The Advisory Board of Health shall hold regular meetings at the same time
and day of each month in the Town Hall as fixed in their organizational
meeting in January. It shall provide rules for the calling of special meetings.
§ 15-89. Powers and duties; appeals.
A. The Advisory Board of Health shall advise the Mayor and Council
concerning matters of public health within the Township. It shall make
recommendations to the Mayor and Council concerning or relating to
the operation and administration of the Department of Health to the
Township Council concerning or touching upon matters of policy or
ordinances affecting the public health.
B. It shall have the power to hear and decide appeals of all variance
decisions rendered by the Township Health Officer. Notice of an appeal
of a decision of the Health Officer shall be filed with the Board within 15
days of receipt of the Health Officer's decision. The Board shall conduct
a hearing, at which the applicant for the variance shall have the right to
appear and be heard, to cross examine opposing witnesses and to
present witnesses in his own behalf. The Board shall conduct the
hearing and render a decision within 30 days of receipt of the notice of
appeal.
§ 15-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-89
1:89

ARTICLE XIX
Parks and Recreation Committee (Advisory)
[Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030; 6-19-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-013]
§ 15-90. Established; members; terms. [Amended 3-6-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-001]
There shall be a Parks and Recreation Committee (Advisory) of the
Township, consisting of nine members, one of whom shall be a member of
the Board of Education, one of whom shall be the Parks Manager for the
Newark Watershed, and seven citizens, to be appointed by the Township
Council. The Director of the Department of Community Services and
Recreation shall serve as an ex officio member. The one representative of
the Township Council and the one representative of the Board of Education
shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the Township
Council and the Board of Education, respectively. Members shall serve
without compensation. The term of each member shall be for a period
of one year in compliance with N.J.S.A. 40:69A-149.1 et seq., the Mayor-
Council-Administrator Plan form of government. Current terms shall expire
on December 31, 2013, and subsequent terms shall be in accordance with
the calendar year.
§ 15-91. Vacancies of citizen members.
In the event of resignation of any citizen member or his death or inability
to serve or absence without acceptable reason from three consecutive
meetings of the Parks and Recreation Committee (Advisory), the Township
Council shall fill the vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term.
§ 15-92. Organization; officers; minutes.
The Parks and Recreation Committee (Advisory) shall elect a Chairman and
Vice Chairman at its organizational meeting in January. The Director of
Community Services and Recreation shall automatically assume the duties
of Secretary to the Parks and Recreation Committee (Advisory) and shall
file in the office of the Township Clerk minutes of all the meetings. The
Secretary shall maintain copies of official correspondence of the Committee
in accordance with the records retention schedule promulgated by the State
of New Jersey.
§ 15-93. Meetings.
The Parks and Recreation Committee (Advisory) shall hold regular monthly
meetings, whenever possible, at a time and place each month to be
designated at its annual organization meeting in January. Special meetings
may be called by the Chairman on three days' notice, or in accordance
with rules adopted by the Committee. The Parks and Recreation Committee
(Advisory) may make and amend rules and regulations concerning the
conduct of its meetings.
§ 15-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-94
1:91
§ 15-94. Powers.
The Parks and Recreation Committee (Advisory) may make
recommendations to the Council and the Director concerning matters of
policy affecting the Department of Community Services and Recreation
and to the Board of Education concerning or relating to the use of the
facilities, athletic equipment and plant of the school system, and may advise
the Mayor, Council and Director generally concerning recreational and
community services programs and the use of recreational areas in the
Township.
§ 15-94 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-94
1:92
ARTICLE XX
Special Advisory Committees
§ 15-95. Establishment.
The Township Council may, by resolution, create and establish special
advisory committees for the purpose of investigating such problems
affecting the Township as are referred to it by the Administrator or Council.
§ 15-96. Purpose; membership.
The Council shall state, in the resolution creating such a committee, the
purpose of the committee, the number of members and the term of the
membership. The Council may also provide for a review of the committee
and may provide for the termination of the committee, either at a fixed time
or when the task of the committee has been accomplished.
§ 15-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-96
1:93

ARTICLE XXI
Insurance Committee (Advisory)
§ 15-97. Established; members.
There shall be an insurance committee known as the "Insurance
Committee" of the Township, consisting of seven members, five to be
appointed by the Township Council, the sixth member to be the Township
Administrator and the seventh member shall be a member of the Township
Council who shall serve as Council liaison.
§ 15-98. Powers and duties.
The Insurance Committee shall advise the Council concerning all matters of
insurance pertaining to the Township.
§ 15-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-98
1:95

ARTICLE XXII
Environmental Commission
§ 15-99. Established; members; terms.
§ 15-100. Powers and duties.
The Environmental Commission shall have such powers and shall perform
such duties as prescribed for such a Commission by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et
seq., entitled "An Act Authorizing Municipalities to establish Environmental
Commissions and Supplementing, Title 40 of the Revised Statutes," and any
supplements and amendments thereto. Any acquisition as authorized by this
Act shall be subject to the approval of the Township Council.
A. There shall be an environmental commission to be known as the
"Environmental Commission" of the Township, for the protection,
development or use of natural resources, including water resources,
located within the territorial limits of the Township. It shall consist of
seven members appointed by the Mayor, one of whom shall be a
member of the Planning Board, and all of whom shall be residents of the
Township. The members shall serve without compensation. The Mayor
shall designate one of the members to serve as Chairman and presiding
officer of the Commission. The terms of office of the first Commission
shall be for one, two or three years, or part thereof, to be designated by
the Mayor in making the appointments, so that the terms of
approximately one-third of the members will expire each year,
expiration date to be December 31. Their successors shall be appointed
for terms of three years and until the appointment and qualification of
their successors.
B. There shall be two alternate members of the Environmental
Commission who shall be appointed by the Mayor. Alternate members
shall be designated at the time of appointment by the Mayor as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2". The terms of the alternate
members shall be for two years except that the terms of the alternate
members first appointed shall be two years for Alternate No. 1 and one
year for Alternate No. 2 so that the term of not more than one alternate
member shall expire in any one year. An alternate member may
participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in
the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be
delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote first.
C. The Township Council may remove any member or alternate member of
the Commission for cause, on written charges served upon the member
and after a hearing thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be
heard in person or by counsel. A vacancy on the Commission occurring
otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired
term in the same manner as an original appointment.
§ 15-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-101
1:97
§ 15-101. Records; annual report.
The Environmental Commission shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and shall make an annual report to the Township Council.
§ 15-101 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-101
1:98
ARTICLE XXIII
Senior Citizens Committee (Advisory)
§ 15-102. Established; members; terms.
There shall be a Senior Citizens Committee (Advisory), consisting of 10
members, one of whom shall be a member of the Township Council, and
nine of whom shall be citizens who have attained the age of 60 years. The
one representative of the Township Council shall be appointed by and shall
serve at the pleasure of the Township Council. The term of each senior
citizen member shall be two years, commencing on July 1, after the term
of the initially appointed member. An initially appointed member shall be
appointed for a term of either one year or two years, the length of the term
to be determined by the Council so that the terms of 1/2 of the members
expire each year. The members shall serve until their respective successors
are appointed and qualified. Members shall serve without compensation.
§ 15-103. Vacancies of citizen members.
In the event of resignation of any citizen member or his death or inability
to serve or absence without acceptable reason from three consecutive
meetings of the Committee, the Township Council shall fill the vacancy for
the remainder of the unexpired term.
§ 15-104. Organization; officers.
The Committee shall elect a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson at its
organizational meeting in July.
§ 15-105. Meetings.
The Committee shall hold regular monthly meetings at the same time and
day of each month in the Town Hall or as set in its organizational meeting
in July. Special meetings may be called in accordance with rules adopted by
the Committee. The Committee may make and amend rules and regulations
concerning the conduct of its meetings.
§ 15-106. Powers and duties. [Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-030]
The Committee shall investigate such problems affecting senior citizens
of the Township as requested by or referred to it by the Township
Administrator, Mayor or Township Council. It shall also make
recommendations to the Township Administrator, Mayor and Township
Council concerning or relating to issues that affect senior citizens of the
Township. Any technical assistance needed by the Committee may be
supplied by the Township Administrator.
§ 15-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-106
1:99

ARTICLE XXIV
Library Board of Trustees
§ 15-107. Established.
The West Milford Township Library was created by referendum on
November 8, 1983, and became effective January 1, 1984.
§ 15-108. Members; appointment; term.
§ 15-109. Functions.
The Board of Trustees of the West Milford Township Library shall:
A. The Board of Trustees of the West Milford Township Library heretofore
established in the Township shall continue, and the present members
thereof shall continue until their respective terms expire. The Board of
Trustees shall consist of nine members, one of whom shall be the
Mayor, and one of whom shall be the Superintendent of Schools. The
other seven members shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice
and consent of the Council, and at least six of the seven citizen
members must reside within the Township. Upon the expiration of the
term of office of any Trustee, the Mayor shall appoint a citizen for a
term of five years in the same manner as the original appointment was
made. Vacancies occurring in the Board of Trustees shall be filled for
the unexpired term only, in the same manner as the original
appointments are made. [Amended 6-5-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-012]
B. The Mayor and Superintendent may, respectively, appoint an alternate
to act in their place and stead with authority to attend the meetings and
vote on matters before the Board.
A. Hold in trust and manage all property of the library;
B. Rent rooms, or when proper, construct buildings for the use of the
library; [Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030]
C. Purchase books, pamphlets, documents, papers and other reading
matter;
D. Hire librarians and other necessary personnel and fit their
compensation;
E. Make proper rules and regulations for the government of the library;
F. Generally do all things necessary and proper for the establishment and
maintenance of a free public library within the Township;
G. Annually make a report of its transactions, accounts and the state and
condition of the library to the Council.
§ 15-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-109
1:101

ARTICLE XXV
Economic Development Commission
[Added 12-19-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-01925]
§ 15-110. Establishment.
The Economic Development Commission of the Township of West Milford is
hereby established.
§ 15-111. Purpose and findings.
The Township Council finds and declares that the members appointed to the
Economic Development Commission shall serve as an advisory body to the
Township Council and strive to promote economic development activities
within the Township of West Milford.
§ 15-112. Membership. [Amended 5-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-003;
10-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-017]
The Township of West Milford Economic Development Commission (the
"Commission") shall consist of 11 members and two alternate members. The
Mayor shall appoint his designee or serve in that capacity. The Council shall
appoint the Council liaison and a local business representative. The Mayor
shall appoint two citizen members. The Council shall appoint six citizen
members and two alternate members. The members shall serve without
compensation.
§ 15-113. Terms. [Amended 5-21-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-003]
A. The members of the Commission shall have staggered terms as follows
for their initial appointments:
(1) The Mayor or Mayor's designee shall serve for the term of the
Mayor.
(2) The Council liaison member shall be appointed for one year.
(3) The local business representative shall be appointed for one year.
[Amended 10-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-017]
(4) Citizen members No. 1 and No. 2 shall be appointed for the term of
the Mayor.
(5) Citizen members No. 3 and No. 4 shall be appointed for one year.
(6) Citizen members No. 5 and No. 6 shall be appointed for two years.
(7) Citizen members No. 7 and No. 8 shall be appointed for three years.
(8) Alternate member No. 1 shall be appointed for a two-year term.
25.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. XXV, Tourism and Economic
Revitalization Commission, added 11-2-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-24.
§ 15-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-113
1:103
§ 15-114. Meetings; minutes.
A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum
for the conduct of business. The Commission shall annually establish a
meeting schedule, and written notice of the time, date and place of all
meetings shall be publicly available sufficiently in advance thereof. The
schedule and notices shall be provided to the office of the Township Clerk.
The Commission shall be considered a public body for the purpose of
complying with the provisions of the Open Public Meetings Act, N.J.S.A.
10:4-6 et seq. Minutes of each meeting shall be produced and approved
by the Commission at a subsequent meeting. At the conclusion of each
meeting, the Chairman (or Secretary if one is appointed) shall in a timely
manner forward to the Township Clerk a copy of the approved minutes.
§ 15-115. Officers.
The members of the Commission shall annually choose a Chairperson and
such other officers as it may deem necessary from among its members. All
members shall have equal voting privileges.
§ 15-116. Powers and duties.
(9) Alternate member No. 2 shall be appointed for a one-year term.
B. Thereafter, citizen members No. 3 through No. 8 shall be appointed for
three-year terms, and alternate members No. 1 and No. 2 shall be
appointed for two-year terms.
A. It is the intention of the Township Council that the Commission shall
support its activities through solicitation of donations and acquisition of
grant monies. The Township shall not make an annual appropriation for
the budgetary needs of the Commission. [Amended 12-20-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-016]
B. The Commission shall not be authorized to pledge the credit of the
Township or to create any debt against it, or in any manner act as the
agent of the Township.
§ 15-113 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-116
1:104
ARTICLE XXVI
Auditor
§ 15-117. Appointment; term.
§ 15-118. Powers and duties.
The Auditor shall make the annual audit and shall have the powers and
perform the duties prescribed by general law, ordinance or rules and
regulations of the Division of Local Government of the Department of
Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey. He shall also perform such
duties and render such services as may be prescribed by resolution of the
Council.
A. An independent auditor shall be appointed by the Mayor with advice
and consent of Council pursuant to general law. He shall serve for a
term of two years, effective January 1. He shall receive such
compensation as may be agreed upon and determined by the Council.
B. The Auditor shall be a registered municipal accountant of the State of
New Jersey, but need not be a resident of the Township.
C. In lieu of appointing an individual auditor, the Council may appoint a
firm of auditors, one or more members of which shall be a registered
municipal accountant of New Jersey.
§ 15-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-118
1:105

ARTICLE XXVII
Wanaque Valley Regional Sewerage Authority
§ 15-119. Established.
There is hereby established and created the Wanaque Valley Regional
Sewerage Authority, in concert and together with the municipalities of
Wanaque and Ringwood.
§ 15-120. Members; appointment; terms.
The Authority shall consist of six members. These members shall be
appointed by resolution of each of the several governing bodies as provided
in law. Each of the several governing bodies combining the regional
authority shall have the power to appoint two of the members of the
regional authority. Members shall serve staggered terms of five years.
§ 15-121. Powers and duties.
The Authority shall have and exercise all the powers and duties conferred
upon it by the Sewerage Authorities Law, Title 40, Chapter 14A of the
Revised Statutes, its amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 15-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-121
1:107

ARTICLE XXVIII
Public Records
§ 15-122. Preservation and inspection.
All the books, maps, papers, accounts, statements, vouchers and other
documents whatsoever acquired or produced in any Township department
shall be carefully and conveniently filed, kept and preserved, and be and
remain the sole property of the Township and shall not at any time be
removed from the offices of such department except when required for
use in the official business of the Township, and shall then be returned to
such office without delay. Each Township officer shall be responsible for
assuring that the requirements of this section are complied with in respect
to his particular office. This section shall be subject to the provisions of
Destruction of Public Records Law (1953), N.J.S.A. 47:3-15 et seq. All such
documents and records of the Township shall, during office hours, be open
to public search, inspection and examination, provided that such search,
inspection and examination shall not extend to records pertaining to an
investigation in progress by any department, board, commission, agency
or official nor to materials prepared for the prosecution or defense by
the Township of any legal right or action; and provided that such search,
inspection and examination be made under such regulations as the person
in whose custody such records, books and documents shall establish for the
safety and preservation thereof.
§ 15-123. Public records and copies.26
Copies of public records shall be made available to any member of the
public upon specific request. Each Township officer responsible for the
record shall require the requester to sign a statement setting forth his or
her name, address, phone number and specific public records requested.
In the event the records are not immediately available, or require some
searching or compilation by the Township officer, the Township officer shall
advise the requester of a specific time when such copies shall be made
available, and may require a deposit, not to exceed $10, to cover the cost
thereof. The fees for photocopies of records, police accident reports and
charges for additional time spent by Township officers are set forth in
Chapter 135, Fees and Costs.
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 15-122 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-123
1:109

ARTICLE XXIX
Interlocal Services Agreement
§ 15-124. Findings.
Certain federal funds are potentially available to the County of Passaic
under Title 1 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974. As
it is necessary to establish a legal basis for the county and its people to
benefit from this program, an agreement has been proposed under which
the Township of West Milford and the County of Passaic, in cooperation with
other municipalities, shall establish an interlocal services program pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1. It is in the best interests of the Township of West Milford
to enter into such an agreement.
§ 15-125. Execution of agreement.
The agreement entitled "Agreement between the County of Passaic and
Certain Municipalities located therein for the Establishment of a
Cooperative Means of Conducting Certain Community Development
Activities," a copy of which is attached hereto by reference, shall be
executed by the Township Council in accordance with law.
§ 15-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-125
1:111

ARTICLE XXX
Americans With Disabilities Grievance Procedures
§ 15-126. Grievance procedures established.
It is the intent of this article to establish an internal grievance procedure
providing for prompt and equitable resolution of complaints alleging any
action prohibited by the U.S. Department of Justice regulations
implementing Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act (hereinafter
"ADA"). Title II states, in part, that "no otherwise qualified disabled
individual shall, solely by reason of such disability, be excluded from the
participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination"
in programs or activities sponsored by the Township of West Milford.
§ 15-127. Americans With Disabilities Act Coordinator.
§ 15-128. Americans With Disabilities Act Compliance Committee.
§ 15-129. Grievance procedure.
Any person aggrieved by an alleged action done in violation of the
provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act shall be entitled to pursue
the following procedures:
A. There is hereby established the position of ADA Coordinator, who shall
be a Township employee appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council.
B. The ADA Coordinator shall receive no additional compensation.
A. There is hereby established an ADA Compliance Committee which shall
be comprised of the Township Construction Official, the Township
Engineer, the Township Recreation Director, one representative from
the medical profession, and four Township residents from the local
disabled community, to be appointed by the Township Council.
(1) The Township employees shall be permanent members of the ADA
Compliance Committee.
B. The ADA Compliance Committee shall establish rules and procedures
for hearing complaints, requests, or suggestions from disabled persons
regarding access to and participation in public facilities, services,
activities and functions in the community.
A. A complaint regarding access, alleged discrimination or a violation of
the ADA shall be submitted, in writing, to the ADA Coordinator.
B. The complaint shall be filed within 180 days from the date of the alleged
discrimination or violation. The time for filing the complaint may be
extended for a period of 30 days for good cause.
§ 15-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-129
1:113
C. The ADA Coordinator shall conduct an investigation and render a
written decision within 15 working days of the filing of the complaint. A
copy of the decision shall be forwarded to the complainant.
D. In the event that the complaint cannot be resolved by the ADA
Coordinator to the satisfaction of the complainant, the complaint shall
be forwarded to the ADA Compliance Committee.
E. After notifying the complainant by certified mail, the ADA Compliance
Committee shall conduct a public hearing, at which time the
complainant may voice his objections to the decision of the ADA
Coordinator. The proceedings shall be recorded and the tape of the
proceeding maintained for a period of one year.
F. In the event the complainant is not satisfied with the decision of the
ADA Compliance Committee, he/she may appeal the decision to the
Township Council of the Township of West Milford.
§ 15-129 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-129
1:114
ARTICLE XXXI
Lakes Committee
[Added 12-16-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-033]
§ 15-130. Establishment of Lakes Committee.
There is hereby established the Township of West Milford Lakes Committee.
§ 15-131. Purpose.
The purpose of the Lakes Committee is to address and advise the Township
Council and the Township Planning Board of any issues that may affect the
lake communities in the Township of West Milford. The Lakes Committee
shall strive to promote and protect the lakes of the Township.
§ 15-132. Members.
§ 15-133. Terms of members.
The appointment of the Committee members shall be for staggered terms
commencing January 1, 2010 (initial year). During the initial year, four
members shall be appointed to serve for a one-year term, and the remaining
five members appointed for a two year-term. Thereafter, upon the expiration
of the initial terms, all members appointed shall serve for a two-year term.
A vacancy in the Committee occurring other than by expiration of the term
shall be filled by the Township Council for the unexpired term in the same
manner as the original appointment. All Committee members shall serve
without compensation in performance of their duties.
§ 15-134. Meetings.
The Committee shall meet at Town Hall on a monthly basis, as deemed
necessary by the Committee. At the conclusion of the meeting, the Lakes
A. The Township of West Milford Lakes Committee shall consist of nine
members (only one member serving per lake association at any time),
who shall be appointed by the Township Council, upon recommendation
by the Lakes Committee.
B. Each of the members shall have one vote. In addition to the voting
members, a member of the Town Council and of the Environmental
Commission shall serve as an ex officio nonvoting liaison of the
Committee.
C. The Committee shall designate one of the members as "Chair" of the
Lakes Committee and shall notify the Clerk's office of such designation.
The Committee shall advise the Township Council and the Planning
Board of the Committee's work. Each of the voting members of the
Lakes Committee shall also have a designated alternate from their
particular association to serve in the Committee member's place when
needed.
§ 15-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-134
1:115
Committee shall forward to the Township Clerk as soon as practicable a
copy of the minutes of the meeting. The Lakes Committee shall retain
attendance records of all members. All lake community residents are
encouraged to attend any meeting.
§ 15-135. Powers and functions.
The Committee may appoint a Vice-Chair and Secretary and adopt a
schedule of meetings. The functions of the Lakes Committee shall be to:
A. Advise and submit recommendations to the Mayor and Council of the
Township of West Milford on matters related to the role Township
government may play to improve the various lake communities within
the Township.
B. Advise the Mayor, Council and Planning Board of the Township of West
Milford of situations or issues that are affecting the lake communities
within the Township of West Milford.
C. Increase public awareness regarding the importance of the
environment as it relates to the lakes within the Township of West
Milford.
D. Review and make recommendations to the Mayor and Township Council
on pending federal, state and local legislation.
§ 15-134 WEST MILFORD CODE § 15-135
1:116
Chapter 21
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel — See Ch. 33.
§ 21-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any officer or employee, whether or not compensated or
part-time individual member of appointed boards and committees and
elected officials, who are authorized to perform any act or service; provided,
however, that the term does not include an independent contractor.
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE — Any employee or former employee of the Township.
§ 21-2. Defense of action.
The Township shall provide for the defense of any civil or criminal action
brought against a public employee for any act directly related to the lawful
exercise of official authority in the furtherance of their official duties, and
this obligation shall extend to any cross-action, counterclaims or crosscomplaint
against such employee.
§ 21-3. Exceptions.
A. The provisions of § 21-2 shall not be applicable when the Township
Council determines that:
(1) The act or omission was not directly related to the lawful exercise
of official authority in the furtherance of their official duties.
(2) The act or failure to act was because of actual fraud, willful
misconduct or actual malice.
(3) The defense of the action or proceeding is provided for by an
insurance policy or policies, whether obtained by the Township or
by any other person.
(4) The public employee failed to deliver to the Township Clerk, within
10 calendar days after the time they were served with the
summons, complaint, process, notice demand or pleading, the
original or a copy of the same.
(5) The public employee has failed to cooperate fully with the defense.
§ 15-135 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 21-3
21:117
§ 21-4. Methods of providing defense.
The Township may provide any defense required of it under this chapter
through the Township Attorney or through the retention of another attorney.
The cost of retention of an outside attorney shall be provided when the
defense of the action or proceeding creates a conflict of interest between
the Township and the public employee.
(6) The action is a disciplinary proceeding instituted against the
employee by the Township or is a criminal proceeding instituted as
a result of a complaint on behalf of the Township.
B. If, however, any such disciplinary or criminal proceeding instituted by
or on behalf of the Township is dismissed or finally determined in favor
of the employee, the employee shall be reimbursed for the expense of
his or her defense.
A. When the Township provides any defense required of it under this
chapter through the Township Attorney, the Township may assume
exclusive control over the representation of the public employee, and
such employee shall cooperate fully with the defense.
B. The Township Council may approve the retention of an outside attorney
in accordance with the following conditions:
(1) The employee does not have the right to an attorney of his or her
choice at Township expense. However, the Township Council may
approve of an attorney requested by the employee.
(2) The attorney retained by the Township shall provide a written
retainer agreement and shall submit an affidavit of services
rendered prior to payment.
(3) Nothing in this section shall prevent an employee from retaining an
attorney of the employee's choice at his or her own expense,
without reimbursement from the Township.
C. Township Attorney responsibilities; possible conflicts.
(1) When the outside attorney is retained, the Township Attorney shall
be directly involved with the public employee's attorney concerning
any recommendation for settlement of a civil lawsuit. The Township
Attorney shall then present any recommendation of settlement,
which must be in the best interest of the Township, to the Township
Council for its approval.
(2) Where a possible conflict exists between the Township and the
public employee, acting within the scope of his official Township
duties, and where both are named as parties in the same civil
lawsuit, the Township Attorney may decline any involvement in the
matter.
§ 21-3 WEST MILFORD CODE § 21-4
21:118
§ 21-5. Reimbursement.
§ 21-6. Indemnification.
Chapter 26
(3) In circumstances involving litigation or other legal proceedings
between two public employees qualifying for the privileges granted
herein, the Township Attorney will not be required to represent or
otherwise participate on behalf of either party.
A. Where the employee is not provided with a defense as a result of a
determination that the exceptions set out in § 21-3A(1), (2) or (6) are
applicable, the employee shall be entitled to reimbursement of legal
expenses when:
(1) The legal action is dismissed or finally determined in favor of the
employee; and
(2) The Township Council is notified within 30 days of the termination
of the proceeding, and signed attorney's affidavit of service is
provided.
B. The Township will reimburse only an amount the Township Council
determines to be reasonable, even if the attorney fees to be paid by the
employee are greater than that amount. The Township under no
circumstances will be liable to the private attorney; rather the
Township will directly reimburse the employee.
A. In any case where the Township is required to provide a defense, or
where the employee is entitled to defense reimbursement under this
chapter, the Township shall pay or shall reimburse the public employee
for:
(1) Any bona fide settlement agreements entered into by the employee,
provided the procedures set out in this chapter have been complied
with.
(2) Any judgments entered against the employee.
B. In addition, in any case where the Township would be required to
provide a defense under this chapter except for the fact that such
defense is provided for by insurance, the Township shall provide
indemnification as aforesaid, but only to the extent not covered by
insurance. Nothing in this chapter shall authorize the Township to pay
for punitive or exemplary damages or damages resulting from the
commission of a crime, except the Township may indemnify an
employee for exemplary or punitive damages resulting from the
employee's civil violation of state or federal law, if, in the opinion of the
Township Council, the acts committed by the employee upon which the
damages are based did not constitute actual fraud, actual malice, willful
misconduct or intentional wrong.
§ 21-4 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 21-6
26:119
LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM
§ 26-1. Creation of program; purpose.
A Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP) is herewith created in
accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997,27 to reward members of
the volunteers and ambulance squad members for their loyal, diligent, and
devoted services to the residents of the Township of West Milford.
§ 26-2. Administration of plan.
The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferred income
account for each volunteer member that meets the criteria set forth below;
that such contributions shall be made in accordance with a plan that shall
be established by the Township of West Milford pursuant to P.L. 1997, c.
388; and that such plan shall be administered in accordance with the laws
of the State of New Jersey, the US Internal Revenue Code, and this chapter.
§ 26-3. Criteria for members; maximum annual contribution per
member.
§ 26-4. Cost of program.
The estimated cost of the program has been calculated as follows:
§ 26-5. Points.
Each active volunteer member shall be credited with points for volunteer
services provided to the volunteer fire company/ambulance-first aid squad
in accordance with the following schedule:
A. The LOSAP shall provide for the annual contributions to each eligible
member that meets the criteria as follows:
(1) One hundred points are required for a member to be eligible for an
annual contribution;
(2) Five years of service are required for vesting.
B. The annual contribution shall be a maximum of $700 per eligible
member.
A. For regular annual services: $140,000 per year.
A. Fire Department: see Schedule A.28
B. WMFAS and UGLVAC: see Schedule B.29
27.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:14-183 et seq.
28.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
29.Editor's Note: Schedule B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 21-6 WEST MILFORD CODE § 26-6
26:120
§ 26-6. Approval by voters required.
This chapter shall not take effect unless it is approved by the voters as a
public question at the next general election.30
Chapter 31
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
30.Editor's Note: At a general election held 11-2-1999, the voters approved this Length of
Service Awards Program.
§ 26-6 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 26-6
26:121

ARTICLE I
Hiring of Attorneys for Legal Services
[Adopted 10-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-026]
§ 31-1. Certification and authorization forms required.
Prior to being hired, any attorney who applies for a legal position within the
Township of West Milford and/or its boards, committees or other agencies of
the municipality shall complete and execute both an attorney ethics history
certification and a disciplinary authorization and release form, or other
superseding form promulgated by the Supreme Court of New Jersey, Office
of Attorney Ethics.
§ 31-2. Applicable offices.
The provisions in § 31-1 of this article shall apply to consideration of the
appointments and reappointments to the following offices: Township
Attorney, Township Prosecutor, Municipal Court Judge, Public Defender,
Planning Board Attorney, Board of Adjustment Attorney, Bond Attorney,
Labor Attorney, as well as the attorneys for other commissions, committees,
boards, authorities and other agencies. In addition, the provisions of § 31-1
A. The attorney ethics history certification form shall be a form adopted by
the governing body of the Township of West Milford and shall cause the
licensed legal professional to certify, under oath, the prior ethics history
of that professional. The certification shall also state that the
professional understands that any discrepancy ultimately discovered
between the certification and the release forms may constitute cause
for removal from such position, as authorized by the governing body of
the Township of West Milford. The certification form shall be certified to
and completed by the licensed legal professional during the application
process and submitted to the Township Clerk to be kept on file as part
of his/her application, and shall be considered a public document by the
Township. The certification form, however, shall be returned to the
licensed legal professional in the event the professional is not hired by
the Township of West Milford.
B. The release form shall grant authorization to the Township of West
Milford to request from the Office of Attorney Ethics, a certificate of
ethical conduct or other superseding certificate, relating to the licensed
legal professional's ethics history. The form shall be executed by the
licensed legal professional during the application process and shall be
submitted to the Township Clerk for proper forwarding to the Office of
Attorney Ethics. Upon receipt by the Township Clerk of the certificate of
ethical conduct or other superseding certificate and any documents
relating to the professional's ethics history, the documents shall be kept
on file as part of his/her personnel record and shall be considered a
public document by the Township. The documents, however, shall be
returned to the licensed legal professional in the event the professional
is not hired by the Township of West Milford.
§ 31-1 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 31-2
26:123
of this article shall also apply to any licensed legal professional working in
the law firm of the individual(s) appointed or retained by the Township who
provides the Township with legal services in conjunction with the appointed
or retained individual(s).
§ 31-3. Failure to comply.
Any licensed legal professional within the scope of this article who does
not comply with the provisions contained herein may not be considered for
appointment or reappointment to the Township by the Mayor and Council,
or by the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or any other board or
agency.
§ 31-4. Exemptions.
This article shall not apply to licensed legal professionals who have already
been appointed or retained by the Township prior to the article's passage;
instead, the licensed legal professionals who are subsequently appointed or
retained by the Township after this article's passage shall be subject to the
provisions of this article. This article shall not apply to substitute judges,
prosecutors or public defenders that appear in the West Milford Township
Municipal Court.
§ 31-2 WEST MILFORD CODE § 31-4
26:124
Chapter 33
PERSONNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 15. Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 21.
§ 31-4 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 31-4
26:125

ARTICLE I
Personnel Policies
§ 33-1. General policies.
§ 33-2. Abolition or modification of offices.
The Township Council may, by ordinance, abolish, increase, decrease or
modify the terms and compensation of any office of the Township, except
where otherwise provided by law.
A. Employment in the Township shall be based on merit and fitness, free of
personal and political considerations.
B. Appointments, promotions and other personnel actions shall be on a
merit basis and in accordance with civil service regulations where
applicable.
§ 33-1 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 33-2
26:127

ARTICLE II
Appointments
§ 33-3. Power of appointment. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-6; 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030]
All employees, officers and department heads of the Township, except as
otherwise provided in Chapter 15 of the Code of the Township of West
Milford, shall be appointed by the Mayor, except as otherwise provided by
law.
§ 33-4. Qualifications.
Original appointments to fill vacancies or for new positions shall be limited
to qualified persons who have been interviewed or tested concerning such
factors as education, experience, aptitude, knowledge, character and
physical and mental fitness.
§ 33-5. Residence of officers and employees. [Amended 9-2-1987 by
Ord. No. 1987-21; 10-16-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-3131]
A. Officers and employees to be residents; terminology. Unless otherwise
provided by law, all officers and employees employed by the Township
of West Milford after the effective date of this section shall be bona fide
residents therein. A "bona fide resident," for the purpose of this section,
is a person having a permanent domicile within the Township of West
Milford and one which has not been adopted with the intention of again
taking up or claiming a previous residence acquired outside of the
Township.
B. Civil service applicants to be residents. Unless otherwise provided by
law, all applicants for positions and employment in the classified civil
service area shall be bona fide residents of the Township after the
effective date of this section, subject to the exceptions of N.J.S.A.
40A:9-1.4.
C. Maintenance of residence. It shall be the duty of the hiring authority to
ensure that all employees hired after the effective date of this section
shall remain bona fide residents of the Township. Failure of any such
employee to maintain residency in the Township shall be cause for
removal or discharge from service.
D. Unavailability of qualified residents.
(1) When the appointing authority of the Township has determined
that there cannot be recruited a sufficient number of qualified
residents for available specific positions or employment, the
appointment authority shall advertise for other qualified
31.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it shall take effect 1-1-1997.
§ 33-3 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 33-5
26:129
§ 33-6. Application for appointment. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-6]
Applicants for employment shall apply on forms provided by the
Administrator and which have been designed to obtain pertinent
information concerning the applicant's education, training, experience,
character and other factors necessary to determine his fitness and
qualification for service to the Township. All applications shall be filed with
the Administrator.
applicants. Classification of qualified applicants in such instances
shall be determined in the following manner:
(a) Other residents of Passaic County.
(b) Other residents of counties contiguous to Passaic County.
(c) Other residents of the state.
(d) All other applicants.
(2) All appointments shall be made in the order of preference
established hereinabove, except subject to preferences granted
pursuant to any other provisions of law.
E. Special talent positions.
(1) Whenever the appointing authority shall determine that there are
certain specific positions and employments requiring special
talents or skills which are necessary for the operations of the
Township and which are not likely to be found among the residents
of the Township, such positions or employments so determined
shall be filled without reference to residency.
(2) Such provisions shall set forth formal criteria pursuant to which
such positions and employments shall be so determined. The
criteria shall be established by the appointing authority as the need
shall so exist from time to time.
F. Preference in promotion. Promotion preference shall be given to a bona
fide resident of the Township. When promotions are based upon merit,
as properly determined, a bona fide resident shall be given preference
over a nonresident in any instance when all other measurable criteria
are equal. Such preference under this section shall in no way diminish,
reduce or affect the preference granted pursuant to other law.
G. Statutory provisions to control. Nothing contained in this section shall
require residence in the Township where a state statute would allow
otherwise.
§ 33-5 WEST MILFORD CODE § 33-7
26:130
§ 33-7. Processing. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
The Administrator shall be charged with processing all applications for
appointment to vacancies or new positions, and reporting thereon to the
Council. Where it appears that an applicant is otherwise qualified for
employment, the Administrator shall require that the applicant furnish
evidence that he is physically fit for the position for which he seeks
employment.
§ 33-8. Grounds for rejection of an applicant.
An applicant for employment covered by civil service may be rejected where
he:
A. Is not qualified for appointment to the position for which he has applied.
B. Is physically unfit to perform the duties of the position for which he has
applied.
C. Is addicted to the habitual or excessive use of drugs or intoxicants.
D. Has been convicted of any crime or offense, including disorderly
persons offenses involving moral turpitude.
E. Has received other than an honorable discharge from the Armed
Services of the United States.
F. Has been dismissed from previous employment for delinquency,
insubordination or misconduct.
G. Has practiced or attempted to practice any deception or fraud in his
application or in furnishing other evidence of eligibility for
appointment.
H. Is not within age limits that have been established for the position for
which he seeks appointment.
§ 33-7 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 33-8
26:131

ARTICLE III
Personnel Management
[Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
§ 33-9. Probation.
Except when provided by law, every person appointed to a new position
shall be deemed to be on probation in the position to which he shall have
been appointed for a period of three months, but such probation shall
not affect permanent status of any other Township employment that such
person may have achieved. Prior to his completion of the probationary
period, the employee or officer shall be evaluated by the Administrator to
determine whether he shall be granted permanent status or dismissed. The
Administrator may require reports and recommendations from immediate
superiors and department heads for this purpose. In accordance with
N.J.S.A. 52:17B-69, a probationary or temporary appointment as a police
officer may be made for a total period not exceeding one year for the
purpose of enabling a person seeking permanent appointment to take a
police training course as required by law.
§ 33-10. Personnel records.
The Administrator shall initiate a personnel file for each new employee,
and all records of such employee's accumulated vacation and sick leave,
leave time and the like shall be maintained for such employee in such
file. The Administrator shall make such files available for inspection by the
employee on a reasonable basis. Such records should include grievances,
dates of appointments and promotions, job title, salaries, commendations,
disciplinary actions, leave of any type taken and accumulated merit ratings,
and the like. Appropriate forms for reporting such information shall be
developed by the Township Administrator, and the order of filing such forms
within a file shall be uniform.
§ 33-9 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 33-10
26:133

ARTICLE IV
Working Conditions
[Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
§ 33-11. Daily time reports.
Each employee receiving wages or regular compensation from the Township
shall be required to complete daily time reports, on forms or cards to be
prepared by the Administrator. They shall be required to observe and follow
the procedure herein stated:
§ 33-12. Accidents.
A. Each department head and each employee shall make out and maintain
his own daily time report, completing such information on such report
as shall be directed by the Township Administrator. For each report
made out by an employee, the information contained therein must be
certified to by the department head.
B. At the end of each week, the department head shall be responsible to
collect and receive from the employees under his head all of the daily
time reports prepared by them, shall examine them, and shall certify
them as to accuracy or inaccuracies.
C. On the Monday immediately following, the department head shall file
all of the daily time reports received by him with the Township
Treasurer.
D. For daily time reports prepared by and for the employees of the
Township Division of Streets and Roads in the Department of Public
Works and Engineering, the following additional information shall be
noted on the reports: a daily analysis of work performed by the
employee, with certification by the department head.
A. Any employee who is injured in the performance of his duties shall
immediately report the accident to his superior. Whenever an accident
or any incident shall occur involving damage to Township equipment or
property, damage to property of others, personal injury to any Township
official or employee, or personal injury to others, the following written
reports shall be filed:
(1) A detailed report to be completed and filed by the officer or
employee involved in the accident or incident, to be filed with his
department head, within 24 hours after the alleged accident, with
sufficient copies of the report for the Township Administrator,
department head, and for the Township insurance carrier. Upon
receipt of the reports and copies, the department head shall
forthwith forward the report and copies to the Township
Administrator who shall, upon receipt of same, transmit the copies
thereof to all necessary persons. The report so filed shall contain
the following information: the date, time, and place of the accident;
§ 33-11 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 33-12
26:135
§ 33-13. Outside employment.
Employees shall not accept outside employment or engage in outside
business activities without the prior written approval of the Township
Administrator or other appointive authority. No application for permission
to accept outside employment shall be granted unless such outside
employment will not interfere with the employee's performance or
compromise his position with the Township through a conflict of interest.
the names and addresses of the parties involved; a description of
the damages or injuries sustained; the names and addresses of
witnesses. In the event the officer or employee is unable to file the
report within the period above stated because of injury sustained,
then such report should be sought for by the department head from
any other employee available and who might have the information
sought for. The report of the accident shall be secured from the
employee involved as soon as he is able to make such report.
B. The department head, following receipt of such report, and not later
than one week from the date of the accident or occurrence, shall make
and complete his investigation of the same, and shall within such period
submit his written report of his findings with sufficient copies thereof
for the Administrator and Township insurance carrier. The report and
copies shall be filed with the Township Administrator who shall, upon
receipt of the same, transmit the copies thereof to the necessary
persons. The report so filed shall contain the following information:
(1) Detailed statement of investigation made.
(2) Names and addresses of parties interviewed.
(3) Responsibility of Township employees involved.
(4) Opinion as to Township responsibility.
(5) Estimate of damages to Township equipment or property, with
repair estimates or costs.
(6) Recommendation as to repair or replacement of damaged property.
(7) Statement of injuries sustained by Township employee or other
party.
(8) Names and addresses of witnesses.
C. The report so filed shall not be for public information.
§ 33-12 WEST MILFORD CODE § 33-13
26:136
ARTICLE V
Meritorious Actions
[Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
§ 33-14. Merit policy; personnel file.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Township to recognize and
encourage meritorious actions on the part of its officers and employees.
To this end, letters of commendation concerning Township employees from
their superiors and from members of the public with whom they deal shall
be directed to the attention of the Administrator, and then recorded in the
employee's personnel file. In addition, the Administrator may, on its own
motion, commend the work of particular officers and employees and cause
such commendation to be inserted in their personnel files.
§ 33-14 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 33-14
26:137

ARTICLE VI
Dismissal and Suspension
§ 33-15. Causes for dismissal. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-6]
Dismissal is the removal of an employee from employment for cause. An
employee may be dismissed by the Administrator for any of the causes
enumerated by statute or regulation for civil service employees.
§ 33-16. Recommendation by department head. [Amended 9-1-2004
by Ord. No. 2004-6]
A department head may recommend to the Township Administrator that
proper proceedings be taken for the dismissal of an employee, when such
action is deemed by the department head to be in the best interest of the
Township service. Such dismissal recommendation shall be in writing and
shall state the reasons therefor.
§ 33-17. Procedure.
Any employee who is cited for dismissal by his department head shall be
so informed immediately in writing by the department head. Such written
notification shall state the reason for the dismissal. The procedure for such
dismissal shall then be in accordance with the rules and regulations as laid
down by the civil service laws of the State of New Jersey, and the rules laid
down by the Civil Service Commission.
§ 33-18. Suspension.
Suspension is the temporary removal of an employee from service. A
suspended employee shall not receive pay, nor shall he be permitted to use
or accrue any privileges or benefits during the suspension period.
A. Causes. An employee may be suspended without pay for reasons of
misconduct, negligence, inefficiency, disloyalty, insubordination,
repeated unauthorized absence or other offenses or causes.
B. Notice. Suspension may be by the department head or the Township
Administrator. If the suspension is by the department head, notice
thereof shall within 24 hours thereof be made to the Township
Administrator. Notice of suspension shall be brought to the attention of
the employee in writing, and shall specify the cause and number of days
the employee shall be suspended. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-6]
C. Review. Whenever an employee is suspended or recommended for
suspension, he shall have such right of review or appeal as afforded to
him by the rules and regulations of the Civil Service Commission.
§ 33-15 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 33-19
26:139
§ 33-19. Statutory provisions.
In any case where the laws of the State of New Jersey provide for the
procedure to dismiss, suspend or otherwise discipline an employee, such
laws shall control in preference to the provisions of this article.
§ 33-20. Applicability to Police Department.
The provisions of this article shall apply to the members of the Police
Department, but shall not be considered to abrogate or repeal any of the
provisions as contained in § 15-49, Division of Police, of the Code of the
Township of West Milford.
§ 33-19 WEST MILFORD CODE § 33-20
26:140
ARTICLE VII
Bonding
§ 33-21. Bonding of officers and employees.
A. Every officer or employee of the Township who by virtue of his office or
position is entrusted with the receipt, custody or expenditure of public
moneys or funds, and any other officer or employee who may be
required to do so by the Administrator, shall, before entering upon the
duties of his office or position, execute and deliver a surety bond in such
amount as may be fixed by the Administrator, binding him to the
Township in its corporate name and conditioned upon the true and
faithful performance of his duty. Each officer or employee required by
law to give bond shall execute such bond with sufficient surety and
deliver the same to the Township Clerk, except that the Clerk shall
deliver his bond to the Township Treasurer, before he enters upon the
discharge of his duties of the office or employment. [Amended
9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
B. If any officer or employee shall neglect to execute and deliver his bond
as herein required within 30 days after due notification of his election
or appointment, his office or position may be declared vacant.
C. In every case in which any person is required by the laws of the state or
by any ordinance of the Township to give a bond for the faithful
performance of his duties, such bond shall be secured by a corporate
surety authorized to do business in this state, and the premium therefor
shall be paid by the Township. Each such bond shall be approved by the
Township Attorney as to form and sufficiency, and nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent the use of one or more blanket
bonds when so approved.
§ 33-21 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 33-21
26:141

ARTICLE VIII
Township Office Hours
[Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
§ 33-22. Public office hours.
The public, administrative and executive business offices of the Township
shall be open for the transaction of public business daily 8:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m., except Saturdays and Sundays and legal holidays. All departments in
times of emergency shall provide Township services for 24 hours a day. The
Administrator or a department head may require any officer or employee to
be in attendance for work on any day or days whenever he determines that
a public exigency or emergency so requires.
§ 33-22 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 33-22
26:143

ARTICLE IX
Civil Service
§ 33-23. Civil service.
Civil Service was adopted by Ordinance No. 1959-6, adopted August 21,
1959, which ordinance has been saved from repeal at the time of adoption
of this Code.
§ 33-23 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 33-23
26:145

ARTICLE X
Criminal Background Checks of Certain Township Employees
[Added 5-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-006]
§ 33-24. Background checks as condition of employment.
All current Township employees and successful candidates for employment
by the Township of West Milford in the Health Department or the
Department of Community Services and Recreation or any such department
that is or shall be charged with providing services to minors, the elderly,
persons who are physically or developmentally disabled or those who are
infirm shall be the subject of a background investigation by the West Milford
Township Administration Department, subject to the limitations as
hereinafter stated. The background check shall be required upon all current
Township employees as well as successful candidates, 18 years of age
or older, for paid positions with the Township of West Milford, which
employment regularly involves contact with minors, the elderly, persons
who are physically or developmentally disabled or those who are infirm.
This section shall also apply to those individuals, 18 years or older, who
contract with the Township to perform work which regularly involves
contact with minors, the elderly, persons who are physically or
developmentally disabled or those who are infirm.
§ 33-25. Procedure; costs.
§ 33-26. Conditions under which person is disqualified from service.
A. All individuals subject to the performance of a background
investigation, as set forth above, must consent to submit to a criminal
history background check to be conducted through the Township
Administration Department within a reasonable amount of time to be
determined by the Administration Department. Such applicants shall
fully complete the required form(s) made available through the offices
of the Department of Administration and return said form(s) to the
Township Administrator. Applicants who fail to submit the required
form(s) to the Township Administrator or otherwise refuse to consent to
or cooperate in securing a criminal history background check shall not
be considered for employment by the Township.
B. All costs associated with the conducting of the criminal history check(s)
and subsequent checks shall be covered by the Township for all of the
full-time Township employees required to submit to same pursuant to
this article. Part-time employees, contractors and other individuals who
are not full-time employees of the Township shall be responsible for the
cost of a background check.
A. A person may be disqualified from serving as an employee within the
Township if that person's criminal history record background check
reveals a record of conviction of any of the following crimes and
offenses:
§ 33-24 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 33-26
26:147
§ 33-27. Submissions; exchange of background check information.
§ 33-28. Limitations on access and use of criminal history record
information.
(1) In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense:
(a) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses as set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et
seq., such as criminal homicide; N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq., such
as assault, reckless endangerment, threats, stalking; N.J.S.A.
2C:13-1 et seq., such as kidnapping; N.J.S.A. 2C:14-1 et seq.,
such as sexual assault; or N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq., such as
robbery.
(b) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those
crimes and disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A.
2C:24-1 et seq., such as endangering the welfare of a child.
(c) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes.
(d) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the
New Jersey Statutes, except Paragraph (4) of Subsection (a) of
N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10.
(2) In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in
New Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly
persons offenses described in Subsection A(1) of this section.
B. In addition to the aforementioned, failure by an individual to be truthful
in disclosing information regarding prior convictions in his/her
employment application or failure to submit to a background check
within the time frame established by the Department of Administration
may be cause for disqualification from service.
A. All current and prospective Township employees shall submit their
name, address, social security number and written consent to the
Township for the criminal history record background check to be
performed.
B. The Administration Department shall act as a clearinghouse for the
collection and dissemination of information obtained as a result of
conducting criminal history record background checks pursuant to this
article.
C. The Township Administrator or his designee shall coordinate a criminal
history record background check every three years after the initial
check is performed, with the Township bearing the costs for the
subsequent criminal history record background checks.
§ 33-26 WEST MILFORD CODE § 33-28
26:148
§ 33-29. Employee, volunteer or appointee may challenge accuracy
of report.
If this criminal history record may disqualify an individual for any purpose,
the Department of Administration shall provide the applicant with an
opportunity to challenge the accuracy of the information contained in the
criminal history record. The applicant shall be afforded a reasonable period
of time, not to exceed 14 days, in which to correct the record. A person is
not presumed guilty of any charges or arrests for which there are no final
dispositions indicated on the record.
§ 33-30. Evidence of affirmative rehabilitation.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, if such current or
prospective employee's criminal history record background check reveals
a disqualifying offense, but such person has affirmatively demonstrated
rehabilitation, such rehabilitation may be considered as a factor in the
determination of whether or not to disqualify such individual from service.
§ 33-31. Exemptions.
The Township shall only permit the following exemptions under this article:
A. Access to criminal history record information for non-criminal-justice
purposes, including licensing and employment, is restricted to the
Department of Administration, Personnel Coordinator and appropriate
department head(s), on a need-to-know basis, as authorized by federal
or state statute, rule or regulation, executive order, administrative
code, local ordinance or resolution regarding obtaining and
disseminating criminal history record information obtained under this
article.
B. Such individuals shall limit their use of criminal history record
information solely to the authorized purpose for which it was obtained,
and criminal history record information furnished shall not be
disseminated to persons or organizations not authorized to receive the
records for authorized purposes. This record shall be destroyed
immediately after it has served its intended and authorized purpose.
Any person violating the federal or state regulations governing access
to criminal history record information may be subject to criminal and/or
civil penalties.
A. Any person who, by virtue of his or her occupation, is required by
statute to undergo a federal and state criminal history record
background check similar in nature to the requirements contained
herein, and who can provide proof of the results of such background
check, is exempt from the requirement hereunder until three years
have elapsed since the most current background check. Thereafter,
those individuals shall be required to submit to additional background
checks in accordance with § 33-27C. This section would apply to
members of the Township Police Department.
§ 33-28 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 33-31
26:149

ARTICLE XI
Criminal History Background Checks of Employees and Volunteers
of Nonprofit Youth-Serving Organizations
[Added 2-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-001]
§ 33-32. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — A determination
of whether a person has a criminal record by cross-referencing that
person's individual data with those on file with the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, Identification Division, and the State Bureau of Identification
of the Division of State Police.
EMPLOYEES — All full-time, part-time and seasonal employees of the West
Milford Township Recreation.
SPONSORED PROGRAM — Recreation programs run directly and jointly by
the Township, including oversight, control and/or fiscal contribution.
STATE BUREAU OF IDENTIFICATION — The entity located within the
New Jersey State Police responsible for retrieving criminal background
information on individuals as requested by state, local or private entities.
VOLUNTEER — A person who has direct, nonsupervised and ongoing
interaction in the course of his/her service with minors. This includes, but is
not limited to, a coach, assistant coach and manager of a team.
VOLUNTEER REVIEW OPERATION (VRO) — The unit located within the
State Bureau of Identification that is responsible for administering criminal
background checks for volunteer coaches as specified in this article.
YOUTH-SERVING ORGANIZATION — Any corporation, association or other
organization which provides recreational, cultural, charitable and social
activities for persons younger than 18 years of age.
§ 33-33. Request for criminal background checks. [Amended
11-6-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-019]
A. The Township of West Milford requires that all employees and
volunteers of youth-serving organizations involved in sponsored
programs and/or utilizing the Township's recreational facilities request
through the West Milford Township Department of Community Services
and Recreation that a criminal history background check on each
prospective and current coach of nonprofit youth-serving organizations
be performed. No person will be permitted to act as an employee or
volunteer until the results of the background checks have been received
and reviewed by the Administrator of the Township. Said background
check will be in accordance with:
§ 33-32 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 33-33
26:151
§ 33-34. Conditions under which person is disqualified from service.
(1) The State Bureau of Identification, in accordance with N.J.A.C.
13:59-1.1 et seq. and with the procedures and guidelines adopted
by the VRO; or
(2) An agency approved by the Township Police Chief which conducts
an internet-based search of relevant databases which would
indicate all criminal history for an individual comparable to the
information obtained from the State Bureau of Identification.
B. The West Milford Township Department of Community Services and
Recreation shall conduct the criminal history record background
check(s) only upon receipt of the written consent to the check(s) from
the prospective or current employee or volunteer or from the
organization itself.
C. The VRO or the approved internet-based provider shall advise the
Township Department of Community Services and Recreation of the
eligibility of the prospective or current coach. Any information received
by the Township shall be confidential.
D. The organization shall bear the costs for conducting such checks for
prospective or current coaches participating in cosponsored programs
in accordance with the regulations established by the VRO or approved
internet-based agency.
A. A person may be disqualified from serving as an employee or volunteer
of a nonprofit youth serving organization if that person's criminal
history record background check reveals a record of conviction of any
of the following crimes and offenses:
(1) In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense:
(a) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses as set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et
seq., such as criminal homicide; N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq., such
as assault, reckless endangerment, threats, stalking; N.J.S.A.
2C:13-1 et seq., such as kidnapping; N.J.S.A. 2C:14-1 et seq.,
such as sexual assault; or N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq., such as
robbery;
(b) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those
crimes and disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A.
2C:24-1 et seq., such as endangering the welfare of a child.
(c) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes.
(d) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the
§ 33-33 WEST MILFORD CODE § 33-34
26:152
§ 33-35. Submissions; exchange of background check information.
[Amended 11-6-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-019]
§ 33-36. Limitations on access and use of criminal history record
information.
New Jersey Statutes, except Paragraph (4) of Subsection (a) of
N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10.
(2) In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in
New Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly
persons offenses described in Subsection A(1) of this section.
B. In addition, a person may be disqualified from serving as an employee
or volunteer of a nonprofit youth-serving organization if such individual
fails to consent to submit to a criminal history record background check
pursuant to this article.
A. Prospective or current employees and volunteers of youth-serving
organizations for sponsored programs and/or for utilizing Township
recreational facilities shall submit their names, addresses, fingerprints,
written consent, and any other necessary information to the
organization for the criminal history record background check to be
performed. The organization shall submit this documentation to the
West Milford Township Department of Community Services and
Recreation, which shall coordinate the background check and refer the
information to the State Bureau of Investigation or approved internetbased
agency for the background check. Thereafter, the Township shall
conduct periodic background checks after the date of the initial
background check, but not less than every 36 months.
B. The West Milford Township Police Department shall act as a
clearinghouse for the collection and dissemination of information
obtained as a result of conducting criminal history record background
checks pursuant to this article.
A. Access to criminal history record information for non-criminal-justice
purposes, including licensing and employment, is restricted to
authorized personnel of the youth-serving organization, on a need-toknow
basis, as authorized by federal or state statute, rule or regulation,
executive order, administrative code, local ordinance or resolution
regarding obtaining and dissemination of criminal history record
information obtained under this article.
B. Such persons or organizations shall limit their use of criminal history
record information solely to the authorized purpose for which it was
obtained, and criminal history record information furnished shall not be
disseminated to persons or organizations not authorized to receive the
records for authorized purposes. Any person violating the federal or
state regulations governing access to criminal history record
information may be subject to criminal and/or civil penalties.
§ 33-34 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 33-37
26:153
§ 33-37. Determination by Police Department; appeal process.
[Amended 11-6-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-019]
A. The VRO or approved internet-based agency shall make a
recommendation based on the provisions of N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1 et seq. as
to whether the prospective or current volunteer coach is being
recommended. The VRO or approved internet-based agency will
provide the West Milford Township Police Department with a letter of
recommendation or nonrecommendation for each individual for whom
the VRO or approved internet-based agency completed a background
check.
B. The Department of Community Services and Recreation shall promptly
notify a prospective or current employee or volunteer who receives a
letter of nonrecommendation from the VRO or approved internet-based
agency. Individuals who receive a letter of nonrecommendation from
the VRO or approved internet-based agency will not be permitted to
participate as an employee or volunteer. Such individuals may obtain a
copy of their criminal history record by contacting the VRO or approved
internet-based agency in writing. The individuals shall then have 30
days from the receipt of notification from the West Milford Township
Department of Community Services and Recreation to petition the
Appeals Committee, consisting of the Director of the Township
Recreation Department, the Township Administrator and the Township
Police Chief, for a review and to cite reasons substantiating the review.
C. Individuals who receive a letter of nonrecommendation from the VRO or
approved internet-based agency may be permitted to serve as an
employee or volunteer if they affirmatively demonstrate rehabilitation
to the Appeals Committee. In determining whether a person has
affirmatively demonstrated clear and convincing evidence of
rehabilitation, the Appeals Committee may consider the following
factors in conjunction with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1 et seq.:
(1) The nature and responsibility of the position which the convicted
person would hold or has held, as the case may be;
(2) The nature and seriousness of the offense;
(3) The circumstance under which the offense occurred;
(4) The date of the offense;
(5) The age of the person when the offense was committed;
(6) Whether the offense was an isolated or repeated incident;
(7) Any social conditions which may have contributed to the offense;
and
(8) Any evidence of rehabilitation, including good conduct in prison or
the community, counseling or psychiatric treatment received,
acquisition of additional academic or vocational schooling,
§ 33-37 WEST MILFORD CODE § 33-37
26:154
§ 33-38. Exemptions.
The Township shall only permit the following exemptions under this article:
successful participation in correctional work release programs or
the recommendation of those who have had the person under their
supervision.
D. In all instances, the final determination of whether an individual will be
permitted to serve as an employee or volunteer utilizing the Township's
recreational facilities will lie in the sole discretion of the Appeals
Committee, which must vote unanimously.
E. The Appeals Committee shall promptly advise the prospective or
current employee or volunteer whether he or she is qualified.
F. When the Township Department of Community Services and Recreation
receives a letter of nonrecommendation from the VRO or approved
internet-based agency, the Department of Community Services and
Recreation shall file that letter within its Department, and it shall keep
the written notification on file for three years from the date it was
issued.
G. The Department of Recreation may request the Police Department to
review its files to determine if there is written notification on file stating
whether a criminal history record background check of a current or
prospective employee or volunteer reveals a disqualifying offense or
stating that the person has affirmatively demonstrated rehabilitation
under this article.
A. Any person who, by virtue of his or her occupation, is required by
statute to undergo a federal and state criminal history record
background check similar in nature to the requirements contained
herein, and who can provide proof of the results of such background
check, is exempt from the requirement hereunder if such check was
conducted within the past year. After such demonstration of proof of
compliance, such individual shall then be subject to subsequent checks
pursuant to § 33-35A.
B. If the organization already utilizes a different means for obtaining
criminal history record background checks, such as Little League
baseball, then such organization may annually submit its own
certification certifying the names of the individual employees and/or
volunteers and providing proof that such criminal history record
background check was performed for that year. In addition, the
organization must also submit to the Department of Community
Services and Recreation and the Township Police Department the
guidelines and parameters of such independent background check
company for the conducting of its background checks. In the event the
Police Department determines that the independent background check
company's guidelines and parameters are insufficient, then the
§ 33-37 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 33-38
26:155
§ 33-39. Remedies for breach by youth-serving organizations.
Any violation of this article by a youth-serving organization is considered a
serious threat to the health and life of the youth of the Township. As a result,
upon violation, the Township may suspend or terminate use of Township
facilities, and the youth-service organization and the officer who executed
the affidavit shall be subject to fines and other penalties. In determining
the remedy such factors as whether the breach was intentional, the severity
of the noncompliance, and the good-faith steps taken to cure the violation
should be considered.
Township reserves the right to not grant the exemption under this
subsection to the organization.
§ 33-38 WEST MILFORD CODE § 33-39
26:156
Chapter 38
RETIREMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 31. Personnel — See Ch. 33.
§ 33-39 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 33-39
26:157

ARTICLE I
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 10-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-047]
§ 38-1. Positions eligible to participate.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program: Township Administrator, all Township department heads who are
appointed by the Mayor and Township Council who report directly to the
Township Administrator, Municipal Prosecutor and Municipal Court Judge
and any gubernatorial appointees who serve in county or municipal
government for a fixed term.
§ 38-2. Positions exempt from membership.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2: Certified Health Officer; Tax Collector; Chief Financial Officer;
Construction Code Official; Qualified Purchasing Agent; Tax Assessor;
Registered Municipal Clerk; Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector and
Principal Public Works Manager/Superintendent.
§ 38-3. Participation in Program following appointment to eligible
position.
If an individual is appointed to one of the positions listed in § 38-1 and
the individual is not serving in a position as described in § 38-2 above,
the Pension Certifying Officer of the municipality may determine that the
individual is not required to join the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program if that individual:
§ 38-4. Implementation; construal of provisions.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.), as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
A. Was an active participant in the Public Employee Retirement System on
July 1, 2007, and continuously since that time; or
B. Has been appointed pursuant to a valid promotional process; or
C. Is appointed on a temporary, interim or "acting" basis to a position
requiring state certification as set forth in § 38-2 herein and is in
pursuit of the required certification; or
D. Meets such other exceptions that may be approved by the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 38-1 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 38-4
26:159
Chapter 42
RULES OF COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 15.
§ 42-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Rules of Council," and as hereinafter
sometimes referred to as "the rules."
§ 42-2. Governing rules.
Except as may be provided in the Charter, questions of order, the
organization and the conduct of business of the Council shall be governed
by Robert's Rules of Order Revised, in all cases to which they are applicable,
and in which they are not inconsistent with these rules.
§ 42-3. Meetings. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6;
2-10-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3; 5-18-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-012]
A. Regular meetings. The Council shall hold regular meetings at the times
specified in the resolution adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A.10:4-6 et seq.,
the Open Public Meetings Act. All regular meetings of the Council shall
be held in the Council Chamber or such other place within the Township
upon appropriate notice to the public.
B. Special meetings. The Mayor, whenever he deems it in the public
interest, may call for a special meeting, Upon request in writing of a
majority of the Council or at the direction of the Township
Administrator, the Mayor shall call a special meeting of the Council. A
request by Councilmen or the Mayor for a special meeting shall state
the date, time, place and purpose of the meeting. The Mayor shall
deliver the call for a special meeting to the Township Clerk, who shall
forthwith provide notice thereof to each Councilman through his official
Township email account. No business except what is described in the
call shall be considered at the special meeting. Except in case of
emergency, special meetings shall require at least 48 hours' advance
written notice to the official newspaper of the Township in accordance
with N.J.S.A.10:4-6 et seq.
C. Adjourned meetings. An adjourned meeting shall be considered a
continuation of the preceding meeting, and the business of the Council
shall be resumed where it was left at the last adjournment.
§ 38-4 WEST MILFORD CODE § 42-3
26:160
§ 42-4. Presiding officer; Township Attorney. [Amended 9-1-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-6; 5-18-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-012]
§ 42-5. Agenda. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6; 5-18-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-012]
D. Notice required. All meetings shall receive such prior notice required
by and conducted in conformity with the Open Public Meetings Law
(P.L. 1975, Chapter 231).32
A. Presiding officer. The presiding officer of the Council shall be the Mayor
and in his absence the Council President. The presiding officer shall
preserve strict order and decorum at all regular, workshop and special
meetings of the Council. He shall state every question coming before
the Council and announce the decision of the Council on all matters
coming before it. He shall appoint special committees of the Council.
The Mayor may vote on all questions only in the event of a tie vote, his
name being called last. The Mayor shall sign all ordinances adopted by
the Council during his presence except when he shall invoke the power
of veto in accordance with the rules governing same. In the event of the
absence of the Mayor, such ordinances shall be signed by the presiding
officer, except that the presiding officer shall not sign such ordinances
during the period for mayoral veto as prescribed by law.
B. Township Attorney. The Township Attorney or such member or
members of his office as he may designate shall be available to the
Council at all regular, workshop and special meetings, and at such other
meetings or conferences as may be designated by a majority of Council,
the Mayor or Administrator. He, or his designee, shall draw ordinances
and resolutions when and as requested by the Council.
A. The Township Administrator shall establish a deadline for staff
submission of all reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions,
claims, contract documents or other matters to be submitted to the
Council for consideration or discussion at a Council meeting. Said
documents shall be delivered by the appropriate departments, staff, or
contracted professionals to the Township Administrator and the
Township Clerk. The Township Administrator, together with the
Township Clerk, shall prepare a calendar of such matters together with
such additional matters that they may have to present to the Council. In
conformity with the prescribed order of business as hereinafter
provided, the Township Clerk shall prepare an agenda and furnish a
copy to the Mayor, the Administrator, each member of the Council and,
when required, the Township Attorney prior to the Council meeting and
as far in advance of the meeting as time for preparation will permit.
B. Any member of the public, group or organization wishing to seek
Council discussion or action on any item must submit a request in
writing to the Office of the Township Clerk during regular business
32.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 42-3 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 42-5
26:161
§ 42-6. Call to order. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6;
5-18-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-012]
The Mayor shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the meeting
and shall immediately call the Council to order. In the absence of the
Mayor or the Council President, the Township Clerk or his designee shall
call the Council to order. In the event that the Township Clerk calls the
Council to order, he shall then determine whether a quorum is present and
in that event shall call for the election of a temporary presiding officer.
Upon the arrival of the Mayor or the Council President, the temporary
presiding officer shall forthwith relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of
the business immediately before the Council.
§ 42-7. Roll call. [Amended 5-18-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-012]
Before proceeding with the business of the Council, the Township Clerk
or his designee shall call the roll of the members, and the names of those
present shall be entered in the minutes.
§ 42-8. Quorum. [Amended 5-18-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-012]
§ 42-9. Order of business. [Amended 5-7-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-19;
12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030; 5-18-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-012]
The order of business at all regular Council meetings shall be as follows:
hours. The Clerk shall cause same to be provided to the Mayor, Council
and Administrator when providing the agenda for the next regularly
scheduled Council meeting. The Mayor and/or Administrator may cause
such items to be placed on a future workshop agenda for discussion
or a future regular meeting for action. Failure of the Mayor and/or
Administrator to place such items on a future agenda shall be construed
as a directive to forego the matter. Any Council member may, at the
next meeting after receipt of such requests, seek consensus from a
majority of the Council to have such matters placed on a future
workshop agenda for discussion or a future regular meeting agenda for
action. Failure any Council member to seek such consensus shall be
construed as Council's directive to forgo the matter.
A. A majority of the whole number of members of the Council shall
constitute a quorum. No ordinance, resolution or motion shall be
adopted by the Council without the affirmative vote of the majority of all
the members of the Council.
B. Should no quorum attend within 30 minutes after the hour appointed
for the meeting of the Council or within 60 minutes if a Councilman or
Councilmen should telephone and signify they will attend, the Mayor, or
in his absence the Township Clerk or his designee, may thereupon
adjourn the meeting until an appropriate time and date.
A. Meeting: reading of adequate notice.
§ 42-5 WEST MILFORD CODE § 42-9
26:162
§ 42-10. Reading of minutes. [Amended 5-18-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-012]
Unless a reading of the minutes of a Council meeting is requested by a
majority of the Council, such minutes may be approved without reading,
provided that the Township Clerk, at least two full working days preceding
the meeting, shall deliver a copy thereof to each member of the Council.
The Presiding Officer and the Township Clerk shall sign approved minutes.
Copies of the minutes shall be made available to the public in accordance
with the law.
§ 42-11. Voting and minutes. [Amended 5-18-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-012]
The vote upon every motion, resolution or ordinance shall be taken by roll
call, and the yeas and nays shall be entered on the minutes. Upon the call
of the roll, a member shall adhere to Robert's Rules of Order and may not
discuss or explain his vote. The silence of any Councilman who is present
shall be recorded as an affirmative vote unless he states directly that he
either abstains or votes "present." The minutes of each meeting shall be
signed by the presiding officer and by the Clerk.
B. Pledge of Allegiance.
C. Roll call.
D. Minutes.
E. Presentations.
F. Proclamations.
G. Unfinished business, final passage of ordinances.
H. Public comments.
I. Council comments.
J. New business, introduction of ordinances, resolutions.
K. Consent agenda.
L. Approval of expenditures.
M. Reports of Administrator, Mayor, and Council members.
N. Appointments and resignations.
O. Executive session.
P. Adjournment.
§ 42-9 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 42-12
26:163
§ 42-12. Committees. [Amended 5-18-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-012]
There shall be no standing committees of the Council, other than the
Committee of the Whole. The rules of the Council shall govern the meetings
of the Committee of the Whole so far as applicable. Special committees for
legislative purposes may be appointed by the Mayor pursuant to resolution.
No special committee shall proceed to the consideration of any matter
referred to it unless a majority of the members of the committee shall
be present. All committee meetings shall be held within the Township.
No special committee shall report on a matter referred to it at the same
meeting at which the reference is made, except by consent of a majority of
the members of the Committee.
§ 42-13. Nominations and appointments. [Amended 5-18-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-012]
With respect to appointments to be made by the Council, any member of the
Council may nominate as many candidates as there are offices to be filled.
The Council will consider such nominations in Committee of the Whole,
which will report to a regular meeting of the Council. Where there is a
single office to be filled, the consensus of the Council on the appointment
shall be taken, and the nominee receiving a majority shall be deemed
appointed. Where there is more than one office to be filled, such as on a
board, commission or authority, the same procedure shall be followed with
respect to each office separately until the total number of appointments
to be made has been completed. In the discretion of the Chair, a group of
nominations may be considered at once where there is no apparent division
in the Council as to the nominees included in the group.
§ 42-14. Rules of debate. [Amended 5-18-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-012]
A. Questions under consideration. When a question is presented and
seconded, it is under consideration, and no motion shall be received
thereafter, except to adjourn, to lay on the table, to postpone, or to
amend, until the question is decided. These motions shall have
preference in the order in which they are mentioned, and the first two
shall be decided without debate.
B. The Mayor. The Mayor, or such other member of the Council as may be
presiding, may move, second and debate from the chair, subject only to
such limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed upon all
members, and shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges
of a Councilman by reasons of his being the presiding officer.
C. Getting the floor. Improper references shall be avoided. Every member
desiring to speak for any purposes whatsoever shall address the
presiding officer and, upon recognition, shall confine himself to the
question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous
language. A member may only speak once on the same subject, but may
speak to clear up a matter of fact or explain a material part of his
§ 42-12 WEST MILFORD CODE § 42-14
26:164
§ 42-15. Addressing the Council. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-6; 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030; 5-18-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-012]
speech, except that a member after moving a question may once again
speak on the same subject.
D. Interruption. A member once recognized shall not be interrupted when
speaking unless it be to call him to order or as herein otherwise
provided. If a member while speaking be called to order, he shall cease
speaking until the question of order be determined by the presiding
officer, and if in order, he shall be permitted to proceed. Any member
may appeal to the Council from the decision of the presiding officer
upon a question of order, when without debate the presiding officer
shall submit to the Council the question, "Shall the decision of the chair
be sustained?" and the Council shall decide by a majority vote.
E. Privilege of closing debate. The Councilman moving the adoption of an
ordinance or resolution shall have the privilege of closing the debate.
F. In the event a conflict as to procedure or protocol shall arise, the Chair
of the meeting shall first be guided by the Township Code, and
thereafter Robert's Rules of Order shall apply.
A. Any other person may address the Council by oral request, addressed to
the presiding officer, at such time and during that portion of the
meeting agenda entitled "Public comments."
B. Any person may be granted leave to address the Council during the
meeting, by oral request to the presiding officer, which leave shall be
granted only after showing to the satisfaction of a majority of the
members of the Township Council present that the subject of the matter
of the address deserves the time and attention of the Township Council.
Such remarks shall be limited only to that item, then under
consideration by the Council.
C. Any member of the Council may address any question or remarks to a
person of the public in attendance, on any matter then under
consideration by the Council, but only after request to the presiding
officer and by and with the consent of the majority of the members
present.
D. When, during any discussion by the Council, the name of a person
present has been mentioned or referred to, such person may be granted
permission to address the Council at such time, but only after it has
been shown to the satisfaction of a majority of the members of the
Council present that such person deserves the time and attention of the
Council.
E. Where advertisements have been published or notices served for public
hearings, then, and in such case, at the time and place so specified in
§ 42-14 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 42-15
26:165
§ 42-16. Decorum. [Amended 5-18-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-012]
§ 42-17. Ordinances, resolutions and contract documents; consent
agenda. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord No. 2004-6; 5-18-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-012]
the notice so published or served, all persons interested shall be given
an opportunity to be heard on the subject matter advertised.
F. Each person addressing the Council shall give his name and address in
an audible tone of voice for the records. He shall limit his remarks to
five minutes, and to one statement, on any item or topic; further time
may be granted by the Council, by a majority assent of the members
present, if the subject matter deserves the time and attention of the
governing body. All remarks shall be addressed to the Council as a body,
and not to any member thereof. No person, other than members of the
Council and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into
any discussion, either directly or through a member of the Council,
without the permission of the presiding officer. No question shall be
asked a member of the Council or any other person present at the
meeting, except through the presiding officer.
A. By Council members. While the Council is in session, the members must
preserve order and decorum, and a member shall neither by
conversation or otherwise except as herein provided delay or interrupt
the proceedings, the peace of the Council, disturb any member while
speaking nor refuse to obey the orders of the Council or its presiding
officer.
B. By persons. Any person making impertinent or slanderous remarks or
who shall become boisterous while addressing the Council shall
forthwith be barred from further audience before the Council, by the
presiding officer, unless permission to continue or again address the
Council be granted by the majority vote of the Council.
C. Enforcement of decorum. The Chief of Police, or such other member or
members of the Police Department as he may designate, shall be the
Sergeant at Arms of the Council meetings. He or they shall carry out all
orders and instructions given by the presiding officer for the purpose of
maintaining order and decorum at the Council meetings.
A. Introduction. Ordinances may be introduced and adopted by title,
except bonding or local improvement ordinances, introduction of which
shall be in accordance with existing statute, before consideration by the
Council on second and final reading. Every ordinance after introduction
and adoption on first reading shall be published as required by law, and
the publication shall be at least one week or 10 days, as required by law,
prior to the time fixed for further consideration for second and final
passage. At the time and place so specified in such notice, all persons
interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard thereon.
§ 42-15 WEST MILFORD CODE § 42-17
26:166
§ 42-18. Adjournment. [Amended 5-18-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-012]
A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and decided without debate.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 57
AIR POLLUTION
§ 57-1. Title of code.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Air Pollution Control Code of
the Township of West Milford."
B. Prior approval.
(1) All ordinances, resolutions and contract documents before
presentation to the Council shall have been reduced to writing and
shall have been approved as to form and legality by the Township
Attorney or his designee.
(2) No ordinance other than the local budget ordinance shall take
effect less than 20 days after its final passage, unless the Council,
by 2/3 vote, shall adopt a resolution declaring an emergency and
fixing an earlier date.
C. Consent agenda.
(1) The agenda for each regular Township Council meeting shall
contain a section entitled "Consent Agenda." The consent agenda
shall consist of all resolutions and applications not necessary to be
read in their entirety at the regular Township Council meeting, as
determined by the Township Clerk and the Township Administrator.
(2) Items that appear on the consent agenda shall be included in one
resolution entitled "Resolution Authorizing Passage of Consent
Agenda." The resolution shall contain the title of all of the
resolutions and applications to be considered at the regular
Township Council meeting. It shall only be necessary for the
Township Council to vote on the resolution authorizing the passage
of the consent agenda. Any individual member of the Council may,
on request, remove any item from the consent agenda and request
that it be voted upon separately by the Township Council.
D. Filing of resolutions. All resolutions shall be filed with the Township
Clerk and entered in the minutes.
§ 42-17 AIR POLLUTION § 57-2
57:167
§ 57-2. Findings; declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared that air pollution is a menace to the health, welfare and
comfort of the residents of the Township and a cause of substantial damage
to property. For the purpose of preventing and reducing atmospheric
pollution, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the Township to minimize
air pollution as herein defined and to establish standards governing the
installation, maintenance and operation of equipment and appurtenances
relating to combustion, which is a source, or potential source, of air
pollution.
§ 57-3. Definitions.
The following terms wherever used herein or referred to in this code shall
have the respective meanings assigned to them unless a different meaning
clearly appears from the context:
AIR CONTAMINANT — Solid particles, liquid particles, vapors or gases
which are discharged into the outdoor atmosphere.
AIR POLLUTION — The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of one or more
air contaminants in such quantities and duration as are, or tend to be,
injurious to human health or welfare, animal or plant life or property, or
would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property.
ASBESTOS — Actinolite, amositi, anthophyllite, chrysotile, crocidolite,
tremolite.
DIRECT HEAT EXCHANGER — Equipment in which heat from the
combustion of fuel is transferred to a substance being heated so that the
latter is contacted by the products of combustion and may contribute to the
total effluent.
DIRECTOR OF AIR POLLUTION CONTROL or DIRECTOR — The person
or persons who are authorized by this chapter to exercise the powers
prescribed by this code.
ECONOMIC POISONS — Those chemicals used as insecticides,
rodenticides, fungicides, herbicides, nematocides or defoliants.
FRIABLE MATERIAL — Any material which can be crumbled, pulverized, or
reduced to powder by hand pressure.
FUEL — Solid, liquid or gaseous materials used to produce useful heat by
burning.
GARBAGE — Waste animal or vegetable matter from houses, kitchens,
restaurants, hotels, produce markets or any other source, or food of any
kind to be thrown away.
INCINERATOR — Any device, apparatus, equipment or structure used for
destroying, reducing or salvaging by fire any material or substance,
including but not limited to refuse, rubbish, garbage, trade waste, debris or
scrap; or a facility for cremating human or animal remains.
§ 57-2 WEST MILFORD CODE § 57-3
57:168
INDIRECT HEAT EXCHANGER — Equipment in which heat from the
combustion of fuel is transferred by conduction through a heat-conducting
material to a substance being heated, so that the latter is not contacted by
and adds nothing to the products of combustion.
INTERNAL CROSS-SECTION DIMENSION — Any maximum linear
perpendicular distance from an inside wall of a stack or chimney to the
inside of an opposite wall, such as the diameter of a circular cross section,
or the length or width of a rectangular cross section.
LIQUID PARTICLES — Particles which have volume but are not of rigid
shape and which, upon collection, tend to coalesce and create uniform
homogenous films upon the surface of the collecting media.
MANUFACTURING PROCESS — Any action, operation or treatment
embracing chemical, industrial, manufacturing or processing factors,
methods or forms, including, but not limited to, furnaces, kettles, ovens,
converters, cupolas, kilns, crucibles, stills, dryers, roaster, crushers,
grinders, mixers, reactors, regenerators, separators, filters, reboilers,
columns, classifers, screens, quenchers, cookers, digesters, towers,
washers, scrubbers, mills, condensers or absorbers.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes all vehicles propelled otherwise than by
muscle power, excepting such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks.
ODOR — The property of a substance which affects the sense of smell.
OPACITY — The property of a substance which renders it partially or wholly
obstructive to the transmission of visible light expressed as the percentage
to which the light is obstructed.
OPEN BURNING — Any fire wherein the products of combustion are
emitted into the open air and are not directed thereto through a stack or
chimney of an incinerator.
OPERATOR — Any person who has care, custody, or control of a building or
premises, or a portion thereof, whether with or without knowledge of the
owner thereof.
OUTDOOR ATMOSPHERE — Air space outside of buildings, stacks or
exterior ducts.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly, or severally with others, shall
have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof; or shall have charge or control of any dwelling
or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as fiduciary, including
but not limited to executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee,
receiver or guardian of the estate; or as a mortgagee in possession
regardless of how such possession was obtained. Any person who is a lessee
subletting or reassigning any part or all of any dwelling or dwelling unit
shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor and shall have a joint
responsibility over the portion of the premises sublet or assigned by such
lessee.
§ 57-3 AIR POLLUTION § 57-3
57:169
PARTICLES — Any material, except uncombined water, which exists in
finely divided form as liquid particles or solid particles at standard
conditions.
PERSON — Corporations, companies, associations, societies, firms,
partnerships and joint-stock companies, as well as individuals, and shall
also include all political subdivisions of this state or any agencies or
instrumentalities thereof.
PLANT LIFE — Vegetation, including but not limited to trees, tree branches,
leaves, yard trimmings, shrubbery, grass, weeds and crops.
REFUSE — Rubbish, garbage, trade waste and plant life.
RINGELMANN SMOKE CHART — Ringelmann's Scale for Grading the
Density of Smoke, as published by the United States Bureau of Mines,
or any chart, recorder, indicator or device which is approved by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection as the equivalent of the
Ringelmann's Scale for the measurement of smoke density.
RUBBISH — Waste solids not considered to be highly flammable or
explosive, including but not limited to rags, old clothes, leather, rubber,
carpets, wood, excelsior, papers, ashes, furniture, tin cans, glass, crockery,
masonry and other similar materials.
SALVAGE OPERATION — Any operation or activity from which is salvaged
or reclaimed any product or material, including but not limited to metals,
chemicals or shipping containers.
SMOKE — Small gasborne or airborne particles, exclusive of water vapor,
arising from a process of combustion in sufficient number to be observable.
SOLID PARTICLES — Particles of rigid shape and definite volume.
SOURCE OF OPERATION — Any manufacturing process or any identifiable
part thereof emitting an air contaminant into the outdoor atmosphere
through one or more stacks or chimneys.
STACK or CHIMNEY — A flue, conduit or opening designed and constructed
for the purpose of emitting air contaminants into the outdoor air.
STANDARD CONDITIONS — 70° F. and one atmosphere pressure, 14.7 psia
or 760 mm Hg.
TRADE WASTE — All waste solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting
from construction, building operations, or the prosecution of any business,
trade or industry, including but not limited to plastic products, cartons,
paint, grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders and
other forms of solid or liquid waste material.
VISIBLE SMOKE — Smoke which obscures light to a degree readily
discernible by visual observation.
§ 57-4. Prohibition of air pollution.
No person or owner of property, or person or persons having possession or
control thereof, shall cause, suffer, allow or permit to be emitted into the
§ 57-3 WEST MILFORD CODE § 57-4
57:170
open air substances in such quantities as shall result in air pollution. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to the use of economic poisons.
§ 57-5. Prohibition of open burning.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit:
§ 57-6. Exceptions for open burning.
The provisions of § 57-5 shall not apply to:
§ 57-7. Prohibition of smoke from combustion of fuel.
A. A salvage operation by open burning.
B. The disposal of rubbish, garbage or trade waste, or buildings or
structures, by open burning.
C. The disposal of any type of plant life by open burning.
A. Variances approved and issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:27-2 of the New
Jersey Administrative Code.
B. Open burning of refuse for training or research exercises when
conducted at a permanent facility or training center designed to be
used solely for such purposes on a continuing basis.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit visible smoke to be
emitted into the outdoor air from combustion of fuel in any stationary
indirect heat exchanger except as provided in Subsection B hereof.
B. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke, the shade or
appearance of which is darker than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke
Chart, or greater than 20% opacity, exclusive of water vapor, to be
emitted into the outdoor air from the combustion of fuel in any
stationary indirect heat exchanger having a rated hourly capacity of
200 million Btu or greater gross heat input, and discharging through a
stack or chimney having all internal cross sectional dimensions of 60
inches or greater.
C. The provisions of Subsections A and B of this section shall not apply to
smoke which is visible for a period of not longer than three minutes in
any consecutive thirty-minute period.
D. The provisions of this section shall not apply to direct heat exchangers
or manufacturing processes, or any motor vehicle while operating on
the public highways.
E. Any person responsible for the construction, installation, alteration or
use of an indirect heat exchanger shall, when requested by the Director,
provide the facilities and necessary for determining the density or
opacity of smoke being discharged into the open air.
§ 57-4 AIR POLLUTION § 57-8
57:171
§ 57-8. Incinerators; operation and installation regulations.
§ 57-9. Control and prohibition of air pollution from asbestos
surface coatings.
A. Hours of operation. No person shall operate or permit the operation of
an incinerator in the Township before 9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m.,
including complete extinction of the fire and removal of materials from
the firebox to a noncombustible container and in a safe manner. The
Director may, by special permit, because of exceptional circumstances,
permit different hours of operation under such conditions as he shall
deem necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the public or of
persons in the vicinity.
B. Abatement of air pollution. Where the operation of an incinerator
constitutes an immediate and substantial menace to public health and
safety, or is a substantial source of air pollution causing irritation and
discomfort to persons in the vicinity, and the owner or operator fails
upon written or oral notice to take immediate corrective measures, the
Director may take all necessary measures to abate the condition,
including, but not limited to, ordering the cessation of use of the
equipment and sealing the same, pending a hearing in the Municipal
Court.
C. Prohibitions.
(1) No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke from any
incinerator, the shade or appearance of which is darker than No. 1
of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, to be emitted into the open air; or
emissions of such opacity within a stack or chimney, or, exclusive of
water vapor, of such opacity leaving a stack or chimney to a degree
greater than the emission designated as No. 1 of the Ringelmann
Smoke Chart.
(2) The provisions of Subsection C(1) shall not apply to smoke emitted
during the building of a new fire, the shade or appearance of which
is not greater than No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, for a
period of three consecutive minutes; or emissions of such opacity
within a stack or chimney, or, exclusive of water vapor, of such
opacity leaving a stack or chimney to a degree greater than the
emission designated as No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, for a
period no greater than three consecutive minutes.
(3) No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the emission of
particles of unburned waste or ash from any incinerator which are
individually large enough to be visible while suspended in the
atmosphere.
(4) No person shall construct, install, use or cause to be used any
incinerator which will result in odors being detectable by sense of
smell in any area of human use or occupancy.
§ 57-8 WEST MILFORD CODE § 57-9
57:172
§ 57-10. Director of Air Pollution Control.
The Health Officer of the Township shall, in addition to his other duties,
enforce and administer the provisions of this code and, in exercising his
powers and duties hereunder, shall be known as the "Director of Air
Pollution Control." The Director may appoint or designate other employees
or officers of the Township to perform duties necessary for the enforcement
of this code.
§ 57-11. Emergency inspections.
§ 57-12. Right of entry; failure to grant access.
Where the Director or his agent is refused entry or access, or is otherwise
impeded or prevented by the owner, occupant or operator from conducting
an inspection of the premises, such person shall be in violation of this code
and subject to the penalties provided in this chapter.
A. Prohibition. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit surface
coating by spraying on any building, structure, facility, installation or
internal or external portion thereof, asbestos or friable material
containing in excess of 0.25%, by weight, asbestos.
B. Tests.
(1) Conduct of tests. Any person responsible for the manufacture,
application or use of any coating which the Director, or any agent
thereof, has reason to believe contains asbestos shall, when
requested by the Director, conduct such tests as are necessary in
the opinion of the Director to determine the presence and the
amount and/or kinds of asbestos in the coating. Such tests shall be
conducted in a manner approved by the Director and shall be made
at the expense of the person responsible.
(2) Waiver of requirements. The Director may waive the testing
requirements of Subsection B(1) of this section upon receipt of a
materials specification report from the material manufacturer
certifying that the asbestos content of the surface coating for which
testing is required complies with the provisions of Subsection A
hereof.
A. Emergency inspections may be authorized without warrant if the
Director has reason to believe that a condition exists which poses an
immediate threat to life, health or safety. Such procedure shall only
take place where the time taken to apply for and secure the issuance of
a warrant would render ineffective the immediate action necessary to
abate the condition.
B. Emergency inspections may also be authorized by the Governor in
times of air pollution emergencies in accordance with N.J.S.A. 26:2C-32.
§ 57-9 AIR POLLUTION § 57-13
57:173
§ 57-13. Search warrant or access warrant.
§ 57-14. Inspections required.
All buildings and premises subject to this code are subject to inspection
from time to time by the Director of Air Pollution Control or his duly
authorized representatives. All rooms and areas in the building shall be
available and accessible for such inspection which shall be made during
usual business hours if the premises is used for nonresidential purposes;
provided, however, that inspections may be made at other times if:
§ 57-15. Violations and penalties.
A. The Director may, upon affidavit, apply to the Judge of the Township for
a search warrant setting forth factually the actual conditions under
circumstances that provide a reasonable basis for believing that a
violation of the code may exist on the premises, including one or more
of the following:
(1) That the premises requires inspection according to the cycle
established by the Township for periodic inspections of premises of
the type involved.
(2) That observation of external conditions (smoke, ash, soot, odors) of
the premises and its public areas has resulted in the belief that
violations of this code exist.
(3) That circumstances such as age and design of fuel-burning
equipment and/or system, type of incinerator, particular use of
premises or other factors render systematic inspections of such
buildings necessary in the interest of public health and safety.
B. If the Township Judge is satisfied as to the matter set forth in the
affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of a search warrant permitting
access to and inspection of that part of the premises on which the
nuisance or violation may exist.
A. The premises is not available during the foregoing hours for inspection.
B. There is reason to believe that violations are occurring on the premises
which can be determined and proved by inspection only during other
than the prescribed hours.
C. There is reason to believe a violation exists of a character which is an
immediate threat to health or safety requiring inspection and
abatement without delay.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or
who shall fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof, shall be punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not exceeding
$2,500, imprisonment not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
§ 57-13 WEST MILFORD CODE § 57-15
57:174
§ 57-16. Construal of provisions.
This code shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purpose herein
described. Nothing herein shall be construed as repealing or abridging
the emergency powers of any agency of government except to the extent
expressly set forth herein.
§ 57-17. Statutory accordance.34
This chapter is promulgated and adopted in accordance with N.J.S.A.
26:2C-1 et seq., as amended; and nothing contained herein or any action
taken hereunder is to be interpreted as being in conflict with the New Jersey
Air Pollution Control Act and the New Jersey Administrative Code.
Chapter 63
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages in recreation areas — See
Ch. 256.
community service not exceeding 90 days, for each violation. Each day
that such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.33
B. The violation of any section of this code shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense independent of the violation of any other section, or of
any order issued pursuant to this code.
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 57-15 AIR POLLUTION § 57-17
57:175

ARTICLE I
Consumption in Public Places
[Adopted as Sec. 5-12 of the 1976 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 63-1. Consumption restricted.
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage within the Township or
have in his or her possession any alcoholic beverage unless it is contained
within the original sealed container while:
§ 63-2. Alcoholic beverage control licenses exempted.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the consumption or sale
of alcoholic beverages on or in any place in which an alcoholic beverage
control license has been issued, or in or upon any public lands, or in the hall,
clubhouse or meeting area of any civic, religious or community association
within the Township, subject to the rules and regulations of the alcoholic
beverage control laws.
A. In or on any public street, road, highway, lane or thoroughfare,
including parking lots.
B. In or upon any private property or private street, road, highway, beach,
park, recreational facility, land or thoroughfare, including parking lots,
without the consent or permission or authorization of the owner of such
property, or without the express authorization, consent or permission of
a person or board director authorized to grant such consent, permission
or authorization with respect to such property.
C. While in or upon any motor vehicle or any public conveyance, whether
in motion or parked, in, upon or located on such public or private
property.
D. While in or upon the lands or property of the municipal building,
Veteran's Park, or public library without the express authorization of
the Township Council.
§ 63-1 AIR POLLUTION § 63-2
57:177

ARTICLE II
Licensing; Regulations
[Adopted as Ch. 7 of the 1976 Revised General Ordinances;
amended in its entirety 8-16-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-00835]
§ 63-3. Purpose.
This article is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Township of West Milford in accordance with the
provisions of an act of the legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled "An
Act Concerning Alcoholic Beverages," comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws
of 1933, its supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A.
33:1-1 et seq., and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 63-4. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meanings as they have in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and the rules and
regulations of the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 63-5. Licenses.
A. Laws applicable. All applications for licenses, all licenses issued, and all
proceedings under this article shall be in accordance with the act, rules
and regulations referred to in the previous section and all other
applicable laws of the State of New Jersey or of the United States.
B. Issuing authority. All licenses required by this article shall be issued by
the Township Council, which shall also administer the provisions of this
article.
C. License required. No person shall sell, expose for sale or cause to be
sold any alcoholic beverages within the Township without having
obtained a license in accordance with the act referred to in § 63-3 and
the provisions of this article.
D. License fees; maximum number.
(1) The annual license fees for the sale or distribution of alcoholic
beverages in the Township are set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and
Costs.
(2) The maximum number of plenary retail consumption licenses that
shall be issued is 35, and the maximum number of club licenses is
three.
(3) The maximum number of plenary retail distribution licenses shall
be one per every 7,500 persons in accordance with the formula
established by the State Legislature in N.J.S.A. 33:1-12.4 et seq.
35.Editor's Note: This ordinance was reaffirmed and ratified 12-5-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-010.
§ 63-3 AIR POLLUTION § 63-5
57:179
§ 63-6. Hours of sale.
(4) No seasonal retail consumption license shall be issued.
A. Hours of sale; plenary retail consumption licenses. Alcoholic beverages
may be sold, delivered, or served to or consumed in any plenary retail
consumption licensed premises on any day as follows:
(1) On Monday through Saturday between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
3:00 a.m. the following day.
(2) On Sunday between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 3:00 a.m. the
following day. [Amended 5-1-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-007]
(3) On New Year's Eve/Day between the hours of 7:00 a.m., or as
otherwise provided, and 5:00 a.m. the following day.
B. Hours of sale; retail distribution licenses.
(1) There shall be no sale of liquor in original containers (package
goods) before 9:00 a.m. in accordance with the regulations
promulgated by the State of New Jersey, Department of Law and
Public Safety, Office of the Attorney General, Division of Alcoholic
Beverage Control.
(2) There shall be no sale of liquor in original containers (package
goods) after 10:00 p.m. in accordance with the regulations
promulgated by the State of New Jersey, Department of Law and
Public Safety, Office of the Attorney General, Division of Alcoholic
Beverage Control.
(3) No premises which operates with a plenary retail distribution
license shall sell alcoholic beverages before 9:00 a.m. and after
10:00 p.m.
C. Hours of sale; club licenses. Alcoholic beverages may be sold, delivered,
or served to or consumed in any club-licensed premises on any day as
follows:
(1) On Monday through Thursday between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and
12:00 midnight.
(2) On Friday and Saturday between the hours of 12:00 noon and 1:00
a.m. the following day.
(3) On Sunday between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
[Amended 5-1-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-007]
(4) On New Year's Eve/Day between the hours of 4:00 p.m., or as
otherwise provided, and 5:00 a.m. the following day.
§ 63-5 WEST MILFORD CODE § 63-7
57:180
§ 63-7. Transfer of licenses. [Amended 4-18-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-003]
The fee to transfer a liquor license, per the Division of Alcoholic Beverage
Control of the State of New Jersey, is set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and
Costs.
§ 63-8. Posting of license and copy of this article.
The license and a copy of this article shall be posted in a conspicuous place
on the licensed premises.
§ 63-9. Revocation of licenses.
§ 63-10. Club licenses; regulations.
A. Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this article or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State Division
of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
B. Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 to 33:1-96 by service of a five-day
notice of charges preferred against the licensee and affording a
reasonable opportunity for hearing. Any suspension or revocation shall
carry the penalties and prohibitions provided in the statutes referred
to.
C. Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this article.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CLUB — A nationally recognized or affiliated association consisting
of 100 or more persons, operating solely for benevolent, charitable,
fraternal, religious, civic or similar purposes, and not for private gain.
Such club shall have a membership which is comprised of at least 80%
West Milford residents.
CLUB MEMBER — Any individual in good standing who has been
admitted to voting membership in the manner regularly prescribed by
the bylaws of a club, and who maintains such membership in a bona
fide manner, and whose name and address are entered on the list of
members. No individual shall be eligible for such club membership
unless he has filed written application with the appropriate body, as set
forth in the club bylaws, and such application is approved by such body
at least three days prior to the filing for a club license. Persons holding
limited or auxiliary club membership shall not be deemed to be club
members for the purpose of filing for a club license.
GUEST OF MEMBER — An individual who is expressly invited to the
club licensed premises by an individual member of the club, and who is
§ 63-7 AIR POLLUTION § 63-10
57:181
sponsored by and personally attended by the member at such premises.
An individual club member may have as his guest no more than three
individuals on any one occasion, unless such individuals are attending
a private affair, such as a wedding, anniversary, confirmation, bar
mitzvah or birthday party, honoring a spouse, child, parent, brother
or sister of a club member. Such club shall keep a guest register,
as designated by the Township Clerk, which shall be signed by each
guest upon entering the club premises. The guest register shall contain
the name and address of the guest, and shall be kept available for
inspection at all times.
B. Qualifications for issuance and renewal.
(1) No license shall be issued to any club unless it shall have been in
active operation in the Township for at least three years
continuously, immediately prior to the submission of its application
for a license.
(2) No license shall be issued to any club unless it shall have been in
exclusive possession and use of a clubhouse or club quarters for at
least three years continuously, immediately prior to the submission
of its application for a license. Any bona fide club which has been in
active operation in the Township for a period of time required as
aforesaid, but which has been deprived of continuous possession
and use of its clubhouse or club quarters by reason of foreclosure,
dispossess or other removal for a cause other than the violation of
the laws of the state or of municipal ordinance, shall not be
prevented thereby from obtaining a club license upon presenting,
to the satisfaction of the issuing authority, proof of such facts and
proof that possession of suitable premises has been obtained.
There shall be no exceptions granted from these requirements.
(3) No club license shall be issued nor renewal granted to any
corporation, association or organization in which an officer or
member of the governing body has been convicted of a crime
involving moral turpitude, unless the statutory disqualification
resulting from such conviction has been removed by order of the
Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control of the State
of New Jersey. Applications for removal of the disqualification may
be made by verified petition to the Director of the Division of
Alcoholic Beverage Control of the State of New Jersey, when the
unlawful situation has been corrected.
(4) A printed or typewritten list containing the names and addresses of
all members of the club as of the date of filing a club license
application shall be submitted with the initial application as well as
with each subsequent renewal application. No club license shall be
renewed unless the club consists of at least 100 members at the
time of renewal. The charter or articles of association of the club
shall also be presented for inspection, or a certified copy of the
§ 63-10 WEST MILFORD CODE § 63-10
57:182
same submitted with the initial application. There shall be no
exceptions granted from these requirements.
§ 63-10 AIR POLLUTION § 63-10
57:183

ARTICLE III
Possession or Consumption by Underage Persons
[Adopted 12-27-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-021]
§ 63-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as a guardian of the underage
person pursuant to a testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — The underage person's grandparent, aunt or uncle, sibling, or
any other person related by blood or affinity.
§ 63-12. Consumption, purchase, sale or possession by underage
persons.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to purchase,
sell, consume or have in his or her possession any alcoholic beverage in or
upon any public or private street, highway, park, footway or other public or
quasi-public place or in a private residence or upon any private property
within the Township of West Milford, except as hereinafter provided or as
may be permitted by state statute.
§ 63-13. Exceptions.
A. Nothing contained in this article is intended, nor shall it be construed,
as prohibiting an underage person from consuming or possessing an
alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious observance, ceremony
or rite, or consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in the
presence of and with the permission of a parent, guardian or relative
who has attained the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic
beverages; provided that, if the underage person is found to possess or
consume an alcoholic beverage in the presence of and with the
permission of a relative other than a parent or guardian, the police shall
notify the parent or legal guardian, by certified mail, of the incident
together with the name of the relative who gave permission for the
possession or consumption of the alcoholic beverage by the underage
person. The notification shall include a request that the parent or
guardian acknowledge and return a copy of the letter to the Police
Department within 15 days of receipt.
B. This article shall not prohibit the possession of alcoholic beverages by
any underage person while actually engaged in the performance of
employment by a person who was licensed under Title 33 of the Revised
Statutes or while actively engaged in the preparation of food while
enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel management program at a county
vocational school or post-secondary educational institution; however,
this article shall not be construed to preclude the imposition of a
penalty under this section, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81 or any other section of law
§ 63-11 AIR POLLUTION § 63-13
57:185
§ 63-14. Violations and penalties; driving privileges.
against a person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage
activity on or at premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
A. Any person found guilty of violating the terms of this article shall be
subject to a fine of $250 for a first offense and a fine of $350 for any
subsequent offense. In addition, the court may, upon a finding of guilty,
in addition to the fine authorized for this offense, suspend or postpone
for six months the driving privileges of the defendant. Upon the
conviction of any person and the suspension or postponement of that
person's driver's license, the court shall forward a report to the Division
of Motor Vehicles stating the first and last day of the suspension or
postponement period imposed by the court pursuant to this section. If a
person at the time of the imposition of a sentence is less than 17 years
of age, the period of license postponement, including a suspension or
postponement of the privilege of operating a motorized bicycle, shall
commence on the day the sentence is imposed and shall run for a period
of six months after the person reaches the age of 17 years. If the
defendant at the time of the imposition of the sentence has a valid
driver's license issued by this state, the court shall immediately collect
the license and forward it to the Division of Motor Vehicles along with
the report. If for any reason the license cannot be collected, the court
shall include in the report the complete name, address, date of birth,
eye color and sex of the person, as well as the first and last date of the
license suspension period imposed by the court.
B. The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the person
is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of license
suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. The defendant shall be required
to acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to
receive a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt
of the written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a
violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
C. If the person convicted under this article is not a New Jersey resident,
the court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresident
driving privilege of the person based on the age of the person and
submit to the Division the required report. The court shall not collect
the license of a nonresident convicted under this article. Upon receipt
of a report by the court, the Division shall notify the appropriate
officials in the licensing jurisdiction of the suspension or postponement.
§ 63-13 WEST MILFORD CODE § 63-14
57:186
Chapter 67
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 67, Amusements, consisting of Article I, Coin-Operated
Amusement Devices, adopted as Sec. 6-6 of the 1976 Revised General
Ordinances, as amended, was repealed 2-21-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-001.]
Chapter 71
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals in parks — See Ch. 256.
§ 63-14 AIR POLLUTION § 63-14
57:187

ARTICLE I
Licensing and Regulation of Dogs and Cats
[Adopted as Ch. 8 of the 1976 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 71-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms shall have the meanings herein indicated for
the purposes of this article:
AT LARGE — Refers to a dog off the premises of the person owning or
keeping or harboring it and not in a crate or other safe control; or not
securely fastened to a tether, leash or chain, held by its owner, or other
person, capable of controlling the dog.
CERTIFIED ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — A person 18 years of age or
older who has satisfactorily completed a course of study approved by the
Commissioner of Health on the control of animals, prescribed by N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.16a, or who has been employed in the State of New Jersey in the
capacity of and with similar responsibilities to those required of certified
animal control officers pursuant to the provisions of this act, for a period of
three years.[Added 10-7-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-29]
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
KEEPER — Any person exercising control over a dog or permitting a dog to
remain on premises under his control.
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet
shop.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, shall include every
person having a right of property in that dog and every person who has
that dog in his keeping, and when applied to the proprietorship of any other
animal, including, but not limited to, a cat, shall include every person having
a right of property in that animal and every person who has that animal in
his keeping.[Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030]
PET SHOP — Any place of business which is not part of a kennel, wherein
animals, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, birds, fish, reptiles,
rabbits, hamsters or gerbils, are kept or displayed chiefly for the purpose
of sale to individuals for personal appreciation and companionship rather
than for business or research purposes.[Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-030]
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of dogs or other animals
seized either under the provisions of this article or otherwise.[Amended
12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030]
SHELTER — Any establishment where dogs are received, housed and
distributed.[Amended 10-7-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-29]
§ 71-1 AIR POLLUTION § 71-1
57:189
VICIOUS DOG — Any dog which has been declared by a Judge to be a
vicious dog or which has attacked or bitten any human being, or which
habitually attacks other dogs or domestic animals.
§ 71-2. Licensing and registration tags; rabies inoculation.
[Amended 10-19-1983 by Ord. No. 1983-29; 7-2-1986 by Ord. No.
1986-14; 10-7-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-29]
A. License and registration tag required. Any person who shall own, keep
or harbor a dog of licensing age within the Township of West Milford
shall, during the month of January of each year, apply for and procure
from the Animal Control Officer a license and official metal registration
tag for each such dog so owned, kept or harbored and shall place upon
each such dog a collar or harness with the registration tag securely
fastened thereto.
(1) The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or any dog
which attains licensing age shall make application for license and
registration tag within 10 days after such acquisition or age
attainment.
(2) Any person who shall bring or shall cause to be brought into the
Township of West Milford any dog licensed in another state for the
current year and bearing a registration tag, and who shall keep the
same or permit the same to be kept within the Township for a
period of more than 90 days, shall immediately apply for a license
and registration tag for each such dog unless such dog shall be
licensed under § 71-3 of this chapter.
(3) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the
Township of West Milford any unlicensed dog and who shall keep
the same or permit the same to be kept within the Township for a
period of 10 days shall immediately apply for a license and
registration tag for each such dog unless such dog be licensed
under § 71-3 of this chapter.
B. Rabies inoculation requirement. No license or registration tag shall be
issued for any dog unless the owner thereof provides evidence to the
licensing authority that the dog to be licensed and registered has been
inoculated with a rabies vaccine for a period equivalent to that for
which the license is sought or a certificate of exemption from that
requirement.
C. License and registration tag fees. The annual license and registration
fees for dogs are set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs. [Amended
2-6-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-8; 4-17-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-20;
4-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-12; 5-2-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-013;
9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-02336]
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 71-1 WEST MILFORD CODE § 71-2
57:190
§ 71-3. Pet shops, kennels, shelters and pounds.
D. Exceptions.
(1) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any dog licensed
under § 71-3 of this chapter.
(2) Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as
"Seeing-Eye" dogs, dogs used to assist handicapped persons and
commonly known as "Service Dogs," and dogs used to assist deaf
persons and commonly known as "Hearing Ear" dogs shall be
licensed and registered as other dogs hereinabove provided for,
except that the owner or keeper of such dog shall not be required
to pay any fee therefor.
E. Delinquent fees. [Amended 4-17-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-20]
(1) Any person who shall own, keep or harbor an unlicensed dog of
licensing age after the last day of January of each year shall be
required to pay a delinquent license fee as set forth in Chapter 135,
Fees and Costs, in addition to the cost of each license or license
renewal. [Amended 4-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-12; 5-2-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-013; 9-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-02337]
(2) The payment of the delinquent fee required under this provision
shall not relieve any person from liability for prosecution for
violation of this article.
F. Application for license. The application for a dog license shall state the
breed, sex, age, color, and markings of the dog for which the license and
registration are sought, and whether it is a long- or short-haired variety
and the name by which the dog is known or called; also the name, street
and post office address of the owner and person who shall keep, harbor
or maintain such dog within the Township of West Milford. The
information on the application and the registration number issued for
the dog shall be preserved for a period of three years by the Animal
Control Officer. Additionally, the Animal Control Officer shall forward
an accurate account of registration numbers issued or otherwise
disposed of to the State Department of Health and Senior Services each
month on forms furnished by the Department. Registration numbers
shall be issued in the order of the applications received.
G. Removal of tags. No person except an officer in the performance of his
duties shall remove a registration tag from the collar or harness of any
dog without the consent of the owner, nor shall any person attach a
registration tag to a dog to which it was not issued.
A. License required; exemption for individual dog licenses. [Amended
10-7-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-29]
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 71-2 AIR POLLUTION § 71-3
57:191
§ 71-4. Disposition of fees. [Amended 10-7-1987 by Ord. No.
1987-29]
(1) Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a
kennel, pet shop, shelter, or pound within the Township of West
Milford shall apply to the Animal Control Officer of the Township
for a license entitling him to keep or operate such establishment.
(2) Any person holding such license shall not be required to secure
individual licenses for dogs owned by such licensee and kept at
such establishments. Such licenses shall not be transferable to
another owner or different premises.
B. Application information. The application shall describe the premises
where the establishment is located or is proposed to be located, the
purpose or purposes for which it is to be maintained, and shall be
accompanied by the written approval of the Director of Health showing
compliance with the local and state rules and regulations governing
location of and sanitation at such establishments.
C. Expiration; revocation of license. All licenses issued for kennel, pet
shop, shelter or pound shall state the purpose for which the
establishment is maintained, and all such licenses shall expire on the
last day of June of each year, and be subject to revocation by the
Township on recommendation of the State Department of Health and
Senior Services or the Township Health Department for failure to
comply with the rules and regulations of the State Department or
Township Department governing the same, after the owner has been
afforded a hearing by either the State Department or Township
Department. [Amended 10-7-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-29]
D. License fees. The annual license fees for kennel and pet shop licenses
are set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs. There shall be no license
fee for shelters or pounds. [Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-030]
E. Control of dogs off premises. No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter
or pound shall be permitted off such premises, except on leash or in a
crate or other safe control.
F. Reports to State Department of Health and Senior Services. The
Township Health Department shall forward to the State Department of
Health and Senior Services a list of all kennels, pet shops, shelters and
pounds licensed within 30 days after the licenses therefor are issued,
which list shall include the name and address of the licenses and the
kind of license issued.
G. Other municipal ordinances applicable. Provisions from Chapter 500,
Zoning, relating to such establishments shall supersede and have
priority over the provisions of this section relating thereto. [Added
10-7-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-29]
§ 71-3 WEST MILFORD CODE § 71-4
57:192
§ 71-5. Dog and cat records; canvass. [Amended 10-7-1987 by Ord.
No. 1987-29; 2-6-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-8]
§ 71-6. Animal Control Officer; enforcement. [Added 10-7-1987 by
Ord. No. 1987-29]
A. License fees and other moneys collected or received under the
provisions of this article, except the registration tag fees, shall be
forwarded to the Township Treasurer within 30 days after collection of
receipt, and shall be placed in a special account separate from any of
the other accounts of the Township and shall be used for the following
purposes only: collecting, keeping and disposing of dogs liable to
seizure under this article; local prevention and control of rabies;
providing antirabies treatment under the direction of the Health
Department for any person known or suspected to have been exposed
to rabies; all other purposes prescribed by the statutes of New Jersey
governing the subject, and for administering the provisions of this
article. Any unexpended balance remaining in such special account
shall be retained therein until the end of the third fiscal year following
and may be used for any of the purposes set forth in this section. At the
end of the third fiscal year following, and at the end of each fiscal year
thereafter, there shall be transferred from such special account to the
general funds of the Township any amount then in such account which
is in excess of the total amount paid into the special account during the
last two fiscal years next preceding.
B. The registration tag fee for each dog shall be forwarded within 30 days
after collection to the State Department of Health and Senior Services.
A. Maintenance of dog and cat records. The Township Health Department
shall keep and maintain a record of any reported complaint made
against any dog or cat, including complaints involving any alleged
incident pertaining to the dog or cat having bitten any person or animal
within the Township, together with any record of Municipal Court
action pertaining to the same.
B. Dog and cat canvass. Any person appointed shall biennially cause a
canvass to be made of dogs and cats owned, kept or harbored within the
Township and shall report, on or before September 1 of the year in
which the canvass is made to the Animal Control Officer and to the
Township Health Department, and to the State Department of Health
and Senior Services the result thereof, setting forth in separate
columns the names and addresses of persons owning, keeping or
harboring unlicensed dogs and cats, the number of unlicensed dogs and
cats owned, kept or harbored by each of said persons, together with a
complete description of each of said unlicensed dogs and cats.
[Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030]
A. Animal Control Officer; appointment. A certified Animal Control Officer
shall be appointed and employed, who shall be responsible for animal
§ 71-4 AIR POLLUTION § 71-6
57:193
§ 71-7. Impounding; grounds; notice; destruction. [Amended
10-7-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-29; 12-7-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-39;
2-6-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-8; 3-17-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-12]
control within the Township of West Milford and who shall enforce
and abide by the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-15 et seq. [Amended
12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030]
B. Enforcement. All police officers of the Township, regular and special,
the Animal Control Officer and his authorized agents are hereby given
full power and authority and are charged with the duty to enforce this
article.
A. Grounds for impoundment.
(1) It shall be a violation of this article for the owner or person keeping
or harboring an animal to allow any condition which may lead to
impoundment of the animal to exist. The Animal Control Officer or
his authorized agents shall take into custody and impound or cause
to be taken into custody and impounded, and thereafter destroyed
or disposed of as provided in this section:
(a) Any dog or cat off the premises of the owner or of the person
keeping or harboring said dog or cat which said officer or his
agent or agents have reason to believe is a stray dog or cat.
(b) Any dog or cat off the premises of the owner or of the person
keeping or harboring said dog or cat without a current
registration tag on his collar.
(c) Any dog or cat or other animal which is suspected to be rabid.
(d) Any dog or cat or other animal off the premises of the owner
reported to, or observed by, the Animal Control Officer or his
authorized agents to be ill, injured or creating a threat to
public health, safety or welfare, or otherwise interfering with
the enjoyment of property.
(2) Feral cats managed by the West Milford Animal Shelter Society
pursuant to Chapter 71, Article IV are not stray animals and shall
not be subject to the provisions of this section. [Added
12-16-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-02638]
B. Notice.
(1) If any animal so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed
thereon or attached thereto the name and address of any person or
a registration tag, or the owner or the person keeping or harboring
said animal is known, the Animal Control Officer, or his authorized
agents, shall forthwith serve on the person whose address is given
38.Editor's Note: With the inclusion of this ordinance, former Subsection A(1) through (4)
was redesignated Subsection A(1)(a) through (d).
§ 71-6 WEST MILFORD CODE § 71-7
57:194
§ 71-8. Entry on to premises. [Added 10-7-1987 by Ord. No.
1987-29; amended 2-6-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-8]
Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this article may go upon any premises to seize for impounding any dog
or cat, which he may lawfully seize and impound when such officer is in
immediate pursuit of such dog or cat, except upon the premises of the
owner of the dog or cat if the owner is present and forbids the same.
on the collar, or on the owner or the person keeping or harboring
said animal, if known, a notice in writing stating that the animal
has been seized and will be liable to be disposed of or destroyed if
not claimed within seven days after the service of the notice.
(2) A notice under this section may be served either by delivering it to
the person on whom it is to be served, or by leaving it at the
person's usual or last known place of abode, or at the address given
on the collar, or by forwarding it by post in a prepaid letter
addressed to that person at his usual or last known place of abode,
or to the address given on the collar.
(3) When any dog or cat so seized has been detained for seven days
after notice, when notice can be given as above set forth, or has
been detained for seven days after seizure, when no notice has
been given as above set forth and if the owner or person keeping or
harboring said dog or cat has not claimed said dog or cat and paid
all expenses incurred by reason of its detention, including
maintenance not exceeding the fee set forth in Chapter 135, Fees
and Costs, and if the dog or cat be unlicensed at the time of seizure
and the owner or person keeping or harboring said dog or cat has
not produced a license and registration tag for said dog or cat, the
Animal Control Officer may cause the dog or cat to be destroyed in
manner causing as little pain as possible and consistent with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:22-19. No dog or cat or other animal so
caught and detained or procured, obtained, set or brought to a
pound or shelter shall be sold or otherwise made available for the
purpose of experimentation. Any person who sells or otherwise
makes available any such dog or cat or other animal for the purpose
of experimentation shall be guilty of a disorderly persons offense.
[Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030]
(4) After observation, any animal seized under this section suspected
of being rabid shall be immediately reported to the Director of
Health of the Township of West Milford and to the State
Department of Health and Senior Services.
C. Fees. The owner or person keeping or harboring any animal taken into
custody and impounded by the Animal Control Officer or his authorized
agents shall pay the fees set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs.
[Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030]
§ 71-7 AIR POLLUTION § 71-9
57:195
§ 71-9. Hindering enforcement. [Amended 10-7-1987 by Ord. No.
1987-29]
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this article.
§ 71-10. Barking dogs. [Added 10-7-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-29]
No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any dog which habitually barks,
howls or cries. The habitual barking, howling or crying of a dog or dogs in
the Township of West Milford is hereby declared to be a disturbing noise
within the meaning of N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, Subsection 8, and is further declared
to be a nuisance.
§ 71-11. Dogs at large. [Amended 10-7-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-29]
§ 71-12. General dog regulations. [Amended 10-7-1987 by Ord. No.
1987-29]
It shall be unlawful for any owner, keeper or person in whose care, custody
or control a dog has been left, for that person to:
A. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit
the dog to run at large within the Township. This shall not apply to
hunting dogs while they are in the woods and fields of the Township and
are under the dominion and control of the owners.
B. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit
it to be upon any public street or in any public place of the Township
unless such dog is securely confined and controlled by a leash or tether
of adequate and sufficient strength to restrain the animal which shall
not be more than six feet in length.39
A. Keep or maintain any dog leashed or tethered in the open, upon any
property within the Township, without providing said animal with
adequate food, water and a place of shelter within the radius of the
tether or leash.
B. To tether or leash a dog by tying the same directly to the neck of the
animal or by connecting a leash or tether to a choke collar.
C. To tether or leash a dog so as to suffer or permit the animal to block or
interfere with any gate, walk, path or steps when the same constitutes
the means of ingress or egress to the premises from the public way;
provided, however, that this provision shall not prevent any person from
permitting a dog to run at large upon private premises where the same
are totally enclosed by a fence of adequate and sufficient strength and
height to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure, and provided
further that there is posted conspicuously at all entrances to the
39.Editor's Note: Original Section 8-12, Vicious dogs, which previously followed this section,
amended 10-7-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-29, was repealed 2-6-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-8.
§ 71-9 WEST MILFORD CODE § 71-12
57:196
§ 71-13. Damage by dogs. [Added 10-7-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-29]
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit it to
do any injury to any person, or to do any damage to any lawn, shrubbery,
flowers, grounds or property of another person.
§ 71-14. Removal of dog feces; definitions; exceptions; violations
and penalties. [Added 10-7-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-29; amended
9-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-17]
premises, a sign with lettering at least two inches and not more than
three inches in height and at least 1 1/2 inches and not more than three
inches in width, said sign being 12 inches in height and width, stating
that there is a dog running at large upon said premises.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
IMMEDIATE — That the pet solid waste is removed at once, without
delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance
animal) kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the
pet; excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or
other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is
regularly emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or
disposal into a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper
treatment and disposal.
B. Removal of feces.
(1) Any person owning or in charge of any pet which soils, defiles,
defecates on or commits any nuisance of any common
thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area, park or any
place where people congregate or walk, or upon any public
property whatsoever, or upon any private property without
permission of the owner of said property, shall immediately remove
all feces deposited by any such pet in a sanitary manner.
(2) The feces removed from the aforementioned designated areas shall
be disposed of by the person owning or in charge of the pet by
placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other sealed,
§ 71-12 AIR POLLUTION § 71-14
57:197
§ 71-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-7-1987 by Ord. No.
1987-29]
nonabsorbent, leakproof container, and discarded in a refuse
container which is regularly emptied by the municipality or some
other refuse collector; or by disposal into a system designed to
convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and disposal.
(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply to pet owners and
keepers who require the use of a disability assistance animal while
such animal is being used for that purpose.
C. Enforcement and penalties.
(1) Enforcement. All police officers of the Township, regular and
special, and the Health Officer or his/her duly authorized designee,
are hereby given full power and authority and are charged with the
duty to enforce all provisions of this article.
(2) Violations and penalties. Any person or persons, firm, association
or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to any one or more of the
following penalties: a fine not exceeding $1,250, but in no event
less than $100, imprisonment for any term not exceeding 90 days,
or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this article, any person who violates or
who fails to comply with § 71-2, 71-3 or 71-9 of this article or the rules
and regulations promulgated by the State Department of Health and
Senior Services and enforced by the Township Health Department,
governing the sanitary conduct and operation of kennels, pet shops,
shelters and pounds, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $5 nor
more than $50, plus costs of court for each offense, except that for the
first offense in cases of violations of § 71-2 of this article, the penalty
shall be not less than $1 nor more than $50, plus costs of court.
B. Any person who shall violate § 71-11 of this article shall be liable to a
mandatory fine of $25 plus costs of court for the first offense; $50 plus
costs of court for the second offense; and $100 plus costs of court for
the third offense and each offense thereafter or to imprisonment for a
period of not more than 10 days or both in the discretion of the court.
C. Any person who shall be deemed to suffer or permit a dog previously
determined to be vicious under Section 8-1240 to run at large shall be
liable to a fine of not less than $200 nor more than $300 plus costs of
court for the first offense or to imprisonment for a period of not more
than 10 days or both in the discretion of the court, and to a fine of not
less than $300 nor more than $500 plus costs of court or to
40.Editor's Note: Original Section 8-12, Vicious dogs, was repealed 2-6-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-8.
§ 71-14 WEST MILFORD CODE § 71-15
57:198
§ 71-16. Licensing and registration of cats. [Added 2-6-1991 by Ord.
No. 1991-8]
imprisonment for a period of not less than 10 days or both in the
discretion of the court for a second offense and each offense thereafter.
D. Any owner who suffers or permits a vicious dog to run at large within
the Township shall, in the event said animal is deemed to have bitten
any person or other domestic animal, be subject to a fine of not less
than $300 and not more than $500.
E. All other offenses for which a penalty is not provided for under this
section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $300 or imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 10 days, or both.
A. License and registration tags required.
(1) No person shall own, harbor or maintain a cat of more than six
months of age in the Township of West Milford unless the person
harboring or maintaining the cat shall have a valid license for such
cat, and shall have placed a registration tag, securely fastened, to a
collar or harness.
(2) An application shall be completed and a license and official metal
registration tag procured from the Township Animal Control Officer
on an annual basis during the month of July. A license for any
previously unlicensed cat must be procured within 10 days after
the cat is brought into the Township or attains licensing age. A
license for any cat licensed in another state for the current year
shall be procured within 90 days after the cat is brought into the
Township.
B. Rabies inoculation required. No license or registration tag shall be
issued for any cat unless the owner thereof provides evidence to the
licensing authority that the cat to be licensed and registered has been
inoculated with a rabies vaccine for a period equivalent to that for
which the license is sought or a certificate of exemption from that
requirement.
C. License and registration tag fees. The annual license and registration
tag fee, the replacement tag fee and the delinquent fee for late license
and registration fees for cats are set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and
Costs. The license shall expire on the last day of July of the year
following the issuance of the license. [Amended 4-18-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-12; 5-2-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-013; 9-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-023; 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030]
D. Exemption. The provisions of this section, § 71-16, do not apply to feral
cat colonies managed by the West Milford Animal Shelter Society in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 71, Article IV. [Added
12-16-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-026]
§ 71-15 AIR POLLUTION § 71-16
57:199

ARTICLE II
Wildlife Feeding
[Adopted as Sec. 19-16 of the 1976 Revised General Ordinances;
amended in its entirety 9-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-20]
§ 71-17. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife
in any public park or on any other property owned or operated by the
Township of West Milford so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 71-18. Definitions and word usage.
§ 71-19. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by the Township, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife (for
example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or
unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 71-20. Enforcement.
All police officers of the Township, regular and special, and the Health
Officer or his/her duly authorized designee are hereby given full power and
authority and are charged with the duty to enforce all provisions of this
article.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning:
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
"Feeding" does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or
game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 71-17 AIR POLLUTION § 71-21
57:201
§ 71-21. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-030]
Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the
penalties imposed in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, of the Township
Code.
§ 71-21 WEST MILFORD CODE § 71-21
57:202
ARTICLE III
Swine
[Adopted as Sec. 19-9 of the 1976 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 71-22. Establishment of code by reference.
A code regulating premises on which swine are maintained; establishing
minimum standards governing the location and maintenance of such
premises; authorizing inspections of such premises; declaring and defining
certain acts or conditions on such premises as nuisances; declaring and
fixing penalties for violations thereof is hereby adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A.
26:3-69 to 26:3-69.6. A copy of the code is annexed hereto and made a part
hereof without inclusion of the text herein.
§ 71-23. Title of code.
The code established and adopted by this article is described and commonly
known as the "Maintenance of Swine Code of New Jersey (1957)."
§ 71-24. Public record.
Three copies of the Maintenance of Swine Code of New Jersey (1957) have
been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of the Department of Health
and will remain on file in such office for the use and examination of the
public.
§ 71-25. License required.
No person shall maintain more than 10 swine, as defined in the code,
on premises within the boundaries of the Township until a valid license
therefor shall have been issued by the Department of Health, excepting that
persons now maintaining swine as defined by the code shall not be obliged
to obtain a license for one year from the effective date of the code.
§ 71-26. Denial or suspension of license; hearing.
Licenses required by this article or code may be denied or suspended
by the Department of Health for failure to comply with this article or
code. The Department of Health shall afford the person whose license to
maintain swine on premises has been denied or suspended an opportunity
to be heard in public hearing; and following this to be informed of the
Department's decision within two weeks thereafter.
§ 71-27. License fee. [Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030]
The fee for a license to maintain swine on premises shall be set forth in
Chapter 135, Fees and Costs.
§ 71-22 AIR POLLUTION § 71-28
57:203
§ 71-28. Expiration of license; renewal.
Licenses issued for the maintenance of swine on premises shall expire
annually on December 31 of each year, and application for renewal thereof
shall be submitted together with the required fee prior to January 15 of each
year.
§ 71-28 WEST MILFORD CODE § 71-28
57:204
ARTICLE IV
Feral Cat Trap-Neuter-Return Program
[Adopted 12-16-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-026]
§ 71-29. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meaning
set forth in this provision. When not inconsistent with the context, words
used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number
include the singular, words in the singular number include the plural, and
words in the male gender include the female gender.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Any person employed or appointed by the
Township who is authorized to investigate violations of laws and regulations
concerning animals, and to issue citations in accordance with New Jersey
law and this Code.
CAREGIVER — Any person who provides food, water or shelter to or
otherwise cares for a cat.
EAR TIPPING — Straight-line cutting of the tip of the left ear of a cat by a
licensed veterinarian while the cat is anesthetized.
FERAL CAT — A cat who is completely or substantially unsocialized to
humans. The usual and consistent temperament of a feral cat is extreme
fear and resistance to contact with humans. Feral cats are:
FERAL CAT COLONY — An individual feral cat or a group of cats who
congregate together outside as a unit. Any non-feral cats who congregate
with a multiple-cat colony shall be deemed part of it.
NUISANCE — Disturbing the peace by:
OWNER — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust,
estate, or any other legal entity.
SPONSOR — The West Milford Animal Shelter Society.
STRAY CAT — A cat who is regularly off the property of the owner, is not
under the physical control and restraint of the owner and is not regularly
provided with food by the owner.
SUITABLE SHELTER — Shelter that provides protection from rain, sun, and
other elements that is adequate to protect the health of the cat.
A. Born in the wild;
B. Offspring of tame or feral cats and not socialized; or
Formerly tame cats who have been abandoned and have reverted to an
untamed state.
C.
A. Habitually or continually howling, crying or screaming; or
The habitual and significant destruction, desecration or soiling of
property against the wishes of the owner of the property.
B.
§ 71-29 AIR POLLUTION § 71-29
57:205
TAME CAT — A cat who is socialized to humans and is appropriate as a
companion for humans.
TNR — Trap, neuter and return.
TNR PROGRAM — A program pursuant to which feral and stray cats are
trapped, neutered or spayed, vaccinated against rabies, ear tipped and
returned to the location where they congregate.
TOWNSHIP — Township of West Milford in the County of Passaic.
§ 71-30. Feral cat colonies.
Feral cat colonies shall be permitted and caregivers shall be entitled to
maintain them in accordance with the terms and conditions of this article.
§ 71-31. Sponsorship of colony TNR programs.
§ 71-32. Feral cat caregiver requirements.
Caregivers are responsible for the following:
A. The West Milford Animal Shelter Society is approved as sponsor.
B. It shall be the duty of the sponsor to:
(1) Obtain and maintain liability insurance for all TNR-related
activating, naming West Milford Township as an additional insured,
and agree in writing to hold the Township of West Milford harmless
against any and all liability resulting from the actions or failures to
act of sponsors, trappers and caregivers;
(2) Review and approve of colony caregivers;
(3) Help to resolve any complaints over the conduct of a colony
caregiver or of cats within a colony;
(4) Maintain records provided by colony caregivers on the size and
location of the colonies, as well as the vaccination and spray/neuter
records of cats in the sponsor's colonies; and
(5) Report annually to the Township on the following:
(a) Number of colonies in the Township;
(b) Total number of cats in colonies;
(c) Number of cats and kittens spayed and neutered pursuant to
the TNR program; and
(d) Number of cats and kittens placed in permanent homes.
(6) Be responsible for any cost associated with the program.
A. Registering the feral cat colony with the sponsor;
§ 71-29 WEST MILFORD CODE § 71-32
57:206
§ 71-33. Exemptions from restrictive ordinances.
The following sections of the Township of West Milford shall not apply
to feral cat colonies managed by the TNR Program or to any person or
organization that is providing care for a feral cat colony and is taking steps
to trap and sterilize the animals:
§ 71-34. Disposition of colony cats.
An Animal Control Officer who has trapped a cat whose left ear has been
tipped shall release the cat unless the cat is injured or sick and requires
medical attention. If the cat requires medical attention, the Animal Control
Officer shall bring the cat to the sponsor. If the Animal Control Officer
releases the cat, the Animal Control Officer shall contact the sponsor and
provide the sponsor with a description of the cat, the location where the cat
was trapped, and the complaint which caused the Animal Control Officer to
set the trap.
B. Taking steps to vaccinate the colony population for rabies and update
the vaccinations whenever possible; taking steps to get all cats in the
colony population spayed/neutered by a licensed veterinarian;
C. Providing the sponsor with descriptions of each cat in the colony and
copies of documents evidencing that the cats have been vaccinated,
spayed/neutered, and ear tipped; providing food, water and, if feasible,
suitable shelter for colony cats;
D. Observing the colony cats and keeping a record of any illnesses or
unusual behavior noticed in any colony cats;
E. Obtaining the approval of the owner of any property to which the
caregiver requires access to provide colony care;
F. In the event that kittens are born to a colony cat, taking steps to remove
the kittens from the colony after they have been weaned, and place the
kittens in homes, foster homes, or with animal shelters, rescue
organizations or veterinary offices for the purpose of subsequent
permanent placement;
G. Reporting annually in writing to the sponsor on the status of the colony,
including data on the number and gender of all cats in the colony, the
number of cats who died or otherwise ceased being a part of the colony
during the year, the number of kittens born to colony cats and their
disposition, and the number of cats and kittens placed in permanent
homes as companion cats; and
H. Obtaining proper medical attention for any colony cat who appears to
require it.
A. Section 71-7, Impounding; grounds; notice; destruction.
B. Section 71-16, Licensing and registration of cats.
§ 71-32 AIR POLLUTION § 71-35
57:207
§ 71-35. Ordinance enforcement.
The Township shall have the following rights:
§ 71-36. Nuisance complaints.
The requirements of this article notwithstanding, Animal Control Officers
and police officers may investigate any Nuisance complaint. If an Animal
Control Officer or police officer determines that an ear-tipped feral colony
cat is causing a nuisance as defined by this article, the Animal Control
Officer or police officer shall contact the sponsor and allow the sponsor 60
days to resolve the complaint or remove the cat before the officer takes
further action. If the sponsor fails to resolve the nuisance or remove the cat
within the 60 days, the Animal Control Officer may remove the cat. If an
Animal Control Officer or police officer reasonably determines that a cat is
injured or poses a significant threat to public health, the officer may reduce
the time that the sponsor has to resolve the complaint, as necessary to
protect the cat and public health, before taking further action. In the case of
an emergency, the Animal Control Officer or police officer may remove the
cat, but within 24 hours the Township must provide the sponsor with notice
of the cat's whereabouts and allow the sponsor an opportunity to retrieve
the cat for treatment, return, or relocation.
A. The right to seize or remove cats from a colony who have not been
vaccinated against rabies and who are demonstrating signs of the
disease.
B. The right to seize or remove a cat from a colony who is creating a
nuisance as defined above, after the caregiver and sponsor have been
given 60 days to resolve the complaint or remove and relocate the cat
and have failed to do so.
C. The right to seize or remove a colony of cats when the caregiver
regularly fails to comply with the requirements of this article and the
sponsor has not been able to obtain a replacement or substitute
caregiver within 60 days of the Township's notice to the sponsor of the
caregiver's failure to comply with this article.
§ 71-35 WEST MILFORD CODE § 71-36
57:208
ARTICLE V
Waterfowl
[Adopted 4-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-006]
§ 71-37. Purpose.
It has been well established that the feeding of migratory, nonmigratory
and resident waterfowl is detrimental to the waterfowl and may result in
damage to flora, fauna and property, harm water quality, increase potential
to spread disease and cause a public health nuisance and safety hazard
that is detrimental to the health and general welfare of the public. The
purpose of this article is to prohibit the feeding of waterfowl, on any public
or lands41 owned by community property associations in the Township,
including Township and state waterways, so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 71-38. Definitions and word usage.
§ 71-39. Feeding of waterfowl prohibited.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning:
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material in a location accessible to waterfowl any type of food,
including but not limited to corn, wheat or other grains, bread, popcorn,
salt, scraps or any similar nutritive substance to be eaten by waterfowl.
PERSON — Any individual 18 years of age or older, corporation,
company, partnership, firm, association, or entity subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WATERFOWL — Any bird that frequents the water, or lives about rivers,
lakes, etc., or on or near the sea, whether migratory or not, including
but not limited to ducks, geese, swans, heron, and egrets.
WATERWAYS — Lakes, ponds, streams, creeks, rivers and stormwater
basins.
A. No person shall purposely or knowingly, as said terms are defined in
Title 2C of the New Jersey Revised Statutes, feed, bait, cause, permit to
be fed or in any manner provide access to food to any waterfowl in the
township, on lands or waterways located in the Township of West
Milford either publicly or owned land or lands owned by a community
41.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 71-37 AIR POLLUTION § 71-39
57:209
§ 71-40. Enforcement.
All police officers of the Township, regular and special, and the Health
Officer or his/her duly authorized designee are hereby given full power and
authority and are charged with the duty to enforce all provisions of this
article.
§ 71-41. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the
penalties imposed in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, of the Township
Code.
property association. This section shall not apply to the feeding of
waterfowl raised and securely kept in an enclosed pen or other
enclosure on privately owned property.
B. No person shall purposely or knowingly create any condition which
results in a congregation of waterfowl on property which:
(1) Results in an accumulation of waterfowl feces or droppings;
(2) Results in damage to flora, fauna or real property;
(3) Results in a threat or nuisance to the public health, safety or
welfare; or
(4) Results in a threat to the health, safety or welfare of waterfowl.
§ 71-39 WEST MILFORD CODE § 71-41
57:210
ARTICLE VI
Chicken Hens on Less Than One Acre of Land
[Adopted 9-18-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-016; amended 11-13-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-023]
§ 71-42. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHICKEN HENS — Any female of the chicken species.
§ 71-43. Number of chicken hens allowed.
No more than six chicken hens shall be allowed on properties of less than
one acre in accordance with the provisions of § 500-90B(3) of the Township
Code.
§ 71-44. Housing requirements (coops and runs).
§ 71-45. Waste management.
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, chicken hens
shall be housed and kept in a manner which will not constitute a public
or neighborhood nuisance. Chicken hens shall not be permitted to fly or
run at large.
B. All chickens hens shall be housed in coops or structures that are
properly designed for such use and completely separated from any
building utilized for dwelling purposes.
C. Coops and runs shall be restricted to the rear yard area and shall
adhere to the applicable side and rear yard setbacks pursuant to
§ 500-12 of Chapter 500, Zoning. The setback requirement for
accessory buildings and structures from other buildings set forth in
§ 500-12 shall not apply to coops and runs.
D. The Zoning Officer shall approve the structures prior to their
installation with the issuance of a zoning permit.
E. No chicken hens shall be kept unless they can be contained on the
property of their owner or the agent of their owner.
A. Chicken hen manure may be applied to garden soil and incorporated
into the soil.
B. Chicken hen manure shall not be used on the surface of any property or
portion thereof in a manner similar to that used in the laying of mulch
or topsoil.
C. Chicken hen manure may be composted in such a way as to minimize
any fly and odor problems.
§ 71-42 AIR POLLUTION § 71-45
57:211
§ 71-46. Feed.
§ 71-47. Compliance.
All parties seeking to house, keep or maintain chicken hens on properties of
less than one acre in size in the Township of West Milford shall comply with
the provisions of this legislation.
§ 71-48. Enforcement; penalties.
§ 71-49. Precedence of Land Use Code.
In any instance where the provisions of §§ 71-42 through 71-48 conflict with
the provisions of the Township's Land Use Code, Chapters 414, 420, 460,
470 and 500, the Land Use Code shall take precedence.
D. Chicken hen manure may be bagged and removed from the premises.
E. Chicken hen manure may not be stored, composted or applied to soil
within 10 feet of the property line.
F. There shall be no runoff of chicken hen manure to neighboring
properties.
A. Any food scattered for chicken hen consumption shall be cleaned up
daily.
B. All chicken hen food shall be stored and kept in tight containers.
C. All chicken hen food shall be protected from access by rodents and
other wildlife.
A. All enforcement agents of the Township shall have the authority to
enforce the provisions of this article. Such enforcement agents shall
include but not be limited to the Zoning Officer, the Construction Code
Official, the Health Officer and his staff, the Animal Control Officer and/
or the Police Department.
B. Penalties may include the removal of chicken hens from the property.
C. Summonses for noncompliance with any provision hereof may be issued
by the appropriate enforcement officials.
D. Penalties may be imposed by the Municipal Court Judge up to the
maximum penalty allowed by law.
§ 71-45 WEST MILFORD CODE § 71-49
57:212
Chapter 78
AUCTIONEERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Games of chance on Sundays — See Ch. 169.
Garage sales — See Ch. 174.
General licensing — See Ch. 203.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 263.
§ 78-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUCTIONEER — All persons who engage in the sale of goods, wares and
merchandise, at sale or auction, to the highest bidder, or to others at prices
fixed by bid.
PUBLIC AUCTION — The sale of goods, wares or merchandise to the
highest bidder, or to others at prices fixed by bid.
§ 78-2. License required.
No person shall act as an auctioneer or conduct a public auction without
first obtaining a license therefor from the Township Council, in the manner
provided in this chapter.
§ 78-3. Fee.42
The annual license fee is set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs, except
that the fee may be prorated from the date of the filing of the application
for the balance of the year. After a license has been issued, no refund of the
fee or any portion thereof shall be made.
§ 78-4. Bond.43
The applicant shall also deliver to the Township Clerk, together with the
application and fee, a bond in the amount of $5,000 to the Township and
its inhabitants protecting them against fraud or damage arising from the
conduct of the auction.
§ 78-5. Parking required.
The licensee shall provide a reasonable amount of parking facilities for the
use of patrons.
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 71-49 AUCTIONEERS § 78-6
78:213
§ 78-6. Special police. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
The licensee shall provide and bear the expense for special police,
appointed by the Township Administrator. The number of special policemen
shall be determined by the Chief of Police, based upon the amount of traffic
and number of patrons.
§ 78-7. Records required.
§ 78-8. Prohibited days; hours.
§ 78-9. Inspection; rules and regulations.
§ 78-10. Exceptions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to apply to religious, charitable,
civic or other organizations not organized for pecuniary profit, and who do
not regularly engage in the business of auctions, nor to sales under court
order or private single sale.
Chapter 84
BICYCLES, SKATES, SKATEBOARDS AND SCOOTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ice sleds — See Ch. 188. Motor-driven and recreational vehicles — See
Ch. 379.
A. The licensee shall keep records on the licensed premises of the names
and addresses of persons employed by him or transacting business with
him.
B. The records shall at all reasonable times be open to the inspection of
the Chief of Police, and to any person duly authorized in writing, for
that purpose, by the Township Council.
A. No public auction shall be open for business or conducted on any
Sunday or holiday.
B. No public auction sale shall be conducted between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 9:00 a.m.
A. Upon filing of an application and the accompanying fee and bond, the
Township Clerk shall forthwith advise the Department of Health of the
license application. The Department of Health shall, from time to time,
inspect the premises of the licensee to determine the adequacy of the
sanitary facilities, and shall report any violations to the Township
Administrator. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
B. The licensee shall comply with all state and municipal laws and rules
and regulations.
§ 78-6 WEST MILFORD CODE § 78-10
78:214
ARTICLE I
Helmet Use Required
[Adopted 9-13-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-015]
§ 84-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the safety, health and general
welfare of the residents of the Township of West Milford and the users of
the streets and sidewalks of the Township of West Milford. By enacting this
article, the Township seeks to prevent personal injury and property damage
as a result of the use of bicycles, skates, skateboards, and scooters within
the Township.
§ 84-2. Definitions.
The listed words shall, for the purposes of this article, have the following
meanings:
BICYCLE — A vehicle with two wheels propelled solely by human power
and having pedals, handlebars and a saddle-like seat. The term shall include
a bicycle for two or more persons, having seats and corresponding sets of
pedals arranged in tandem.
HELMET — Protective headgear which meets the standards of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI Z90.4, Bicycle Helmet
Standard), Snell Memorial Foundation's 1990 Standard For Protective
Headgear For Use In Bicycling, the American Society for Testing and
Materials (ASTM) standard or other such standard, as appropriate.
IN-LINE SKATES — A pair of devices worn on the feet with at least two or
more wheels attached, which wheels are in tandem and which devices are
used to glide and propel the user over the ground.
SCOOTER — A device propelled by muscular power, which consists of a
footboard between end wheels and is controlled by an upright steering
handle attached to a front wheel.
SKATEBOARD — A device propelled by muscular power which consists of a
footboard between end wheels.
§ 84-3. Helmet required.
No person under the age of 17 shall operate any bicycle, scooter, skateboard
or use in-line skates on any public roadway, rights-of-way, sidewalks,
parklands or any other property open to the public located within the
Township of West Milford and which property may or may not be owned by
the Township of West Milford, including a passenger on any bicycle, without
said persons wearing a helmet as defined herein. For the purposes of this
section, "wearing a helmet" means having a helmet of good fit, fastened
securely upon the head.
§ 84-1 AUCTIONEERS § 84-4
78:215
§ 84-4. Responsibility of parent or guardian.
The parent of the minor child or the guardian of any minor child shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any such child to violate any of the provisions
of this article.
§ 84-5. Violations and penalties; impoundment of equipment.
Any person, or in case of a violation by a minor, the parent or legal guardian
of the violator, who violates the provisions of § 84-3 of this article shall be
subject to the following penalties:
§ 84-6. Waiver of fines.
The court shall waive any fine for which a person who violates the provision
of § 84-3 of this article would be liable if such person, or in the case of a
minor, a parent or legal guardian of such person, supplies the court with
proof that, between the date of violation and the appearance date for such
violation, such person, parent or legal guardian has purchased or rented a
helmet which meets the requirements of this article for use by the person or
A. First offense. A reprimand and warning, in writing, by the West Milford
Township Police Department will be served to the offender. The written
warning will state that official safety equipment must be worn for
immediate continued use of said device on the streets and sidewalks of
the Township of West Milford. Also, upon a first offense, the West
Milford Township Police Department may confiscate such device, and
the offender must show proof of ownership of the required safety gear
to the Township Police Department in order to have the device returned
to him or her. A list of names and addresses of previous first-time
offenders who have received written warnings will be kept by the West
Milford Township Police Department.
B. Second offense. A summons will be issued by the West Milford Township
Police Department for the second-time offender to appear in Municipal
Court. A second-time offender is subjected to a maximum fine of $25.
Also, upon a second offense, the West Milford Township Police
Department shall confiscate such device pending a subsequent court
hearing. At that hearing, the offender must show proof of ownership of
the required safety gear in order to have the device returned to him or
her.
C. Third offense. A summons will be issued by the West Milford Township
Police Department for the third-time offender to appear in Municipal
Court. A third-time offender is subjected to a maximum fine of $100.
Also, upon a third offense, the West Milford Township Police
Department shall confiscate such device pending a subsequent court
hearing. At that hearing, the offender must show proof of ownership of
the required safety gear in order to have the device returned to him or
her.
§ 84-4 WEST MILFORD CODE § 84-6
78:216
persons charged with the violation. Such waiver of the fine shall not apply
to a third or subsequent conviction under this article.
§ 84-6 AUCTIONEERS § 84-6
78:217

ARTICLE II
Mt. Laurel Skate Park
[Adopted 8-26-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-013]
§ 84-7. Skate Park registration required; fees.
§ 84-8. Skate Park rules and regulations.
A. Limits of use; permits required. Skating in the Mt. Laurel Skate Park is
limited to the operation of skateboards and in-line skates and by
persons who have paid the appropriate annual fee as set forth herein
and who have completed the annual registration form prepared by the
Township Department of Community Services and Recreation. Persons
who are under 18 years of age must apply for their permit with their
parent or legal guardian.
B. Permit fees; display of permits.
(1) The cost of annual permits shall be as set forth in Chapter 135,
Fees and Costs.
(2) Permits are valid from January 1 through December 31.
(3) Permits must be displayed on helmets at all times.
A. Each skater must have the membership sticker displayed on his or her
helmet.
B. The skate park is a skate-at-your-own-risk facility, designed for
skateboarding only. Bicycles, scooters and any type of motorized
vehicles are not permitted at any time.
C. Skate park hours are daily 10:00 a.m. to dusk. The park will be open
from the second Saturday in April to the third Saturday in October
(weather permitting).
D. The park may be closed without notice or due to inclement weather. Do
not skate when the equipment and/or surfaces are wet, snowy or icy.
E. Safety equipment must be worn at all times: shirt, shoes, helmet, elbow
pads and kneepads. All safety equipment must be securely fastened and
worn per manufacturer's specifications.
F. Participants must provide their own equipment.
G. There shall be no modifications to the individual skate park ramps and
attractions. No outside objects except equipment are allowed within the
confines of the park, including bags, knapsacks, backpacks, etc.
H. Food, glass, beverages, gum, pets and smoking are strictly prohibited.
I. Spectators are welcome outside the confines of the perimeter fence.
§ 84-7 AUCTIONEERS § 84-8
78:219
§ 84-9. Additional rules and regulations.
The Township Council of the Township of West Milford shall have the power
to establish, by resolution, additional rules and regulations for the use and
control of the skate park. Any such rules and regulations shall be posted
at the skate park and shall have the same force and effect as any other
provision of this article, and the violation thereof shall constitute violation
of this article.
§ 84-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
article, or any of the rules and regulations established pursuant hereto,
shall be immediately ejected from the skate park and be subjected to a
verbal warning for the first offense within the calendar year, a fine of $25
for the second offense committed within the same calendar year, a fine of
$100 for the third offense committed within the same calendar year and
a permanent forfeiture of the privilege to use the skate park for a fourth
offense committed within the same calendar year. In the event the individual
who has violated the terms of this article shall be a minor at the time of such
violation(s), the individual's legal guardian shall be the individual who shall
be responsible to respond to such violation(s) at the Township Municipal
Court. In addition to or in lieu of the aforementioned fines, the Municipal
Court may impose a period of community service.
J. Boom boxes, radios and personal music devices (iPod, MP3 players,
headphones and earphones) are prohibited.
K. No organized events or contests of any kind are allowed in the skate
park.
L. All persons using the skate park must abide by all other park rules and
regulations.
M. Use of this park is a privilege, not a right. The Township expects that all
users, guests and spectators will be respectful of others and those in
the surrounding area. Profanity, obscene gestures, rowdiness, fighting
or intentional damage to the facility will not be tolerated. If an
individual skater and/or group of skaters is identified as having not
adhered to these rules, it will result in loss of privileges to the facility.
N. Skating is limited to within the fenced skate park area only. There shall
be no skating in the parking lots, street, and basketball courts.
O. All skate park participants must be at least seven years old to use the
park. Children under age 10 must be accompanied by an adult.
P. Smoking, drugs, alcohol, profanity, vandalism, reckless and/or
disruptive behavior in the skate park are prohibited.
Q. Report emergencies or injuries immediately to the West Milford Police
Department, (973) 728-2800 or 911.
§ 84-8 WEST MILFORD CODE § 84-10
78:220
Chapter 90
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 90-1. Adoption of House Numbering Map.
The Tax Maps of the Township of West Milford shall serve as the House
Numbering Maps, a copy of which are on file with the Township Engineer.
These maps are hereby made part of this chapter and are hereby adopted
and approved. The number shown thereon for each building and lot is
hereby assigned to that building or lot.
§ 90-2. Assignment of numbers; corrections.
§ 90-3. Display of numbers.
All buildings within the boundaries of the Township of West Milford shall
display their house number in numerals of at least four inches in height
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:70-3 and Section 505.1 of the New Jersey Uniform
Fire Code, in clear view by the front entrance door of their residence. If
the residence has a street mailbox, it shall also have the house number
displayed on it. All numbers shall be displayed in such a way that they
are visible to persons passing by the premises on the abutting street. If
a residence is not viewable from the street, numerals conforming to the
specifications above shall also be placed at an area located on the property
which is visible from the abutting street.
§ 90-4. Issuance of certificate of occupancy.
No certificate of occupancy or smoke detector certifications will be issued
by the Building Inspector or Fire Bureau or anyone in his Department for
A. Upon any subdivision of land in the Township resulting in a lot or lots
other than those delineated on the map or maps, the Township Engineer
shall assign a number to each lot resulting from the subdivision, which
shall be in proper numerical sequence in relation to the number
assigned to other lots fronting on the same street, and he shall record
the same upon the map or maps and, within 10 days of the filing of the
approval given for such subdivision of land, notify the Tax Assessor.
B. No subdivision of land, major or minor, requiring approval by the
Planning Board shall be approved by it unless a number shall be
assigned by the Township Engineer for each building or lot.
C. If the Township Engineer determines that an error has been made in
assigning a number or street address to any building or lot or that a
change in the assigned number or street address is in the best interests
of the municipality, the Engineer shall advise the Tax Assessor and,
upon approval from same, the Engineer shall correct the map, and the
Tax Assessor shall correct the number or street address to the
appropriate designation.
§ 84-10 AUCTIONEERS § 90-4
78:221
the occupancy of any building unless the provisions of the foregoing section
or sections shall have been complied with.
§ 90-5. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Township Zoning
Officer or Fire Bureau.
§ 90-6. Violations and penalties.
Property owners found to be in violation of this chapter shall be subject to
the following penalties:
Chapter 94
BUILDINGS, UNFIT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 110.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 152.
Nuisances — See Ch. 230.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 285.
§ 94-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Any building or structure, or part thereof, whether used for
human habitation or otherwise, and includes any appurtenances belonging
to or usually enjoyed therewith.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — The Health Officer of the Township of West
Milford.
HEALTH OFFICER — The legally designated health officer of the
Department of Health or an authorized representative of the Health Officer.
OWNER — The holder or holders of the title in fee simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations and corporations
who have interests of record in a building and any who are in actual
possession thereof.
PUBLIC OFFICER — The Construction Official, all building code officials
and fire officials.
A. First offense: The property owner shall receive a written warning notice
from the Township. Such notice shall allow the property owner one
week in which to cure the violation.
B. Second and subsequent offenses: The property owner shall receive a
fine of $75 per offense.
§ 90-4 WEST MILFORD CODE § 94-1
94:222
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING — Any building which is wholly or partly used or
intended to be used for living or sleeping quarters by human occupants.
§ 94-2. Standards.
§ 94-3. Enforcement authority; Building Standards Board.
A. Building unfit for human habitation. A building shall be deemed unfit for
human habitation if conditions exist in such building which are
dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of such
building, the occupants of neighboring buildings or other residents;
such conditions may include the following (without limiting the
generality of the foregoing): defects therein increasing the hazards of
fire, accident, or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light or
sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structural defects;
uncleanliness.
B. Additional standards of habitability for residential dwellings. The "New
Jersey State Housing Code" (1980 Revision) approved by the
Department of Health and Conservation and Economic Development
and filed in the Secretary of State's Office, as may be amended from
time to time, shall serve as a guide to the Board in determining whether
residential dwellings in this Township are safe, sanitary and fit for
human habitation.
A. Creation of Board. [Amended 5-5-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-14;
12-18-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-43]
(1) There is hereby created a Building Standards Board consisting of:
(a) One member of the Township Council to be appointed by it.
(b) The Construction Official or an employee of the Planning and
Building Department selected by the Construction Official to
act as his designee.
(c) The Planning Director or his designee.
(d) The Township Fire Official or his designee.
(e) The Township Tax Collector or her designee.
(f) Up to two private citizens to be appointed by the Township
Administrator. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
(g) The Health Officer who shall be the chairperson.
(h) Up to two private citizens appointed by the Township
Administrator to act as alternates in the event the two citizen
members are unable to attend a scheduled meeting.
[Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
§ 94-1 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 94-3
94:223
§ 94-4. Procedure for determining fitness of buildings for human
habitation.
(2) The Board shall hold meetings as necessary, and minutes shall be
kept.
B. The Building Standards Board shall be responsible for exercising the
powers prescribed by this chapter.
A. The Health Officer shall investigate the habitability of any building
within the Township whenever a petition is filed by any member of the
Building Standards Board or by at least five residents of the Township
charging that the building is unfit for human habitation.
B. If the Health Officer's preliminary investigation discloses a basis for
such charges, a complaint shall be served upon the owner of and parties
in interest in such building stating the charges and containing notice
that a hearing will be held before the Building Standards Board.
C. The Building Standards Board shall hold a hearing on the complaint not
more than 30 nor less than 10 days after service. The owner and party
in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to
appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony. Formal rules of
evidence shall not apply.
D. Findings and orders. If, after notice and hearing, the majority of the
Building Standards Board finds that the building under consideration is
unfit for human habitation, the Board shall issue its findings of facts in
support of such determination and shall cause to be served upon the
owner thereof and parties in interest an order:
(1) Repairs, alterations or improvements of the said building to be
made by the owner, within a reasonable time, which time shall be
set forth in the order or at the option of the owner to vacate or have
the said building vacated and closed within the times set forth in
the orders; and
(2) If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises, and the
owner fails to repair, alter or improve the said building within the
time specified in the order, then the owner shall be required for
remove or demolish the said building within a reasonable time as
specified in the said order of removal.
E. Failure to comply with orders of the Board.
(1) If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve
or, at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the
public officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or
improved, or to be vacated and closed; the Board may cause to be
posted on the main entrance of any building so closed a placard
with the following words: "This building is unfit for human
§ 94-3 WEST MILFORD CODE § 94-4
94:224
§ 94-5. Appeals. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
Any person affected by any order issued by the Board shall be given an
opportunity to be heard by the Township Administrator, provided written
request for a hearing is made to the Administrator within 10 days after
service of the order. The written request for the hearing shall be filed with
the Township Clerk and shall specify in detail the reasons why the person
affected believes the order of the Board was not justified. The Township
Administrator may affirm, modify or revoke the order.
habitation or occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this
building is prohibited and unlawful."
(2) If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish
the building, the Board with the consent of the Township Council
may cause such building to be removed or demolished, or may
contract for the removal or demolition thereof after advertisement
for, and receipt of, bids therefor.
F. Demolition or correction of defects by Township; recovery of costs.
Where demolition, correction of a defect in the premises, or work
necessary to place the premises in a proper condition so as to conform
to ordinances of the Township or applicable laws of the State of New
Jersey, requires expending Township monies, the enforcement official
shall present a report of work proposed to be done to accomplish the
foregoing to the Township Council with an estimate of the cost, along
with a summary of the proceedings undertaken by the enforcement
official to secure compliance, including notices served upon the
occupants, owners, operators or other agents, as the case may be. The
Township Council may thereupon, by resolution, authorize the
demolition, correction of the defect or work necessary to place the
premises in proper condition and in compliance with this code. The
enforcement official or the Director of the Township Department of
Public Works and Engineering, depending upon the volume of the work
to be performed, may thereafter proceed to have the work performed in
accordance with the resolution at Township expense, not to exceed the
amount specified in the resolution, and shall, upon completion thereof,
submit a report of the monies expended and costs to the Township
Council. After review of the report, the Township Council may approve
the expense and costs, whereupon the same shall become a lien against
the premises, collectible as provided by law. A copy of the resolution
approving the expenses and costs shall be certified by the Township
Clerk, whereupon the same shall be filed with the Tax Collector of the
Township, who shall be responsible for the collection, and a copy of the
report and resolution shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owner.
§ 94-4 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 94-6
94:225
§ 94-6. Emergency conditions. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-6]
Whenever the enforcement official finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, he may,
without notice of hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an
emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems necessary
to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this
chapter, such order shall be effective immediately, but upon petition to the
Township Administrator the owner shall be afforded a hearing as soon as
possible. After such hearing, depending upon his findings as to whether the
provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto have been complied with, the Township Administrator shall continue
such order in effect, or modify it.
§ 94-7. Search warrant.
§ 94-8. Violations and penalties. [Added 9-2-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-36]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, in addition to
any other penalties or orders provided by ordinance or statute, and upon
conviction, be subject to the general penalty as set forth in Chapter 1,
Article III, General Penalty, of the Code of the Township of West Milford. It
shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to fail to comply with an
order duly issued by the Building Standards Board.
Chapter 101
CHARITABLE CLOTHING BINS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Permit fees — See Ch. 135.
Littering — See Ch. 208.
Nuisances — See Ch. 230.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 263.
A. The Health Officer may, upon receipt of a petition to determine fitness
in accordance with § 94-4A, apply to the Municipal Judge of the
Township of West Milford for a search warrant.
B. The Health Officer may apply to the Municipal Judge of the Township of
West Milford for a search warrant to gain access to any structure where
he has probable cause to believe that a violation of this chapter is
occurring or where such inspections are required as part of a routine
inspection survey.
§ 94-6 WEST MILFORD CODE § 101-1
94:226
§ 101-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter only, the term "solicitation" or "solicit"
shall mean the request, directly or indirectly, for money, credit, property,
financial assistance, or other thing of any kind or value. Solicitation shall
include, but not be limited to, the use or employment of canisters, cards,
receptacles or similar devices for the collection of money or other thing of
value. A solicitation shall take place whether or not the person making the
solicitation receives any contribution.
§ 101-2. Permit required for placement and use.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no person
shall place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin within the Township of
West Milford, for solicitation purposes, without obtaining a permit from the
Municipal Clerk, which is approved by the Township Council. Permits are
renewable on an annual basis during the month of January.
§ 101-3. Permit fee.
The annual permit fee is as set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs, and
will be used to offset the costs involved in enforcing this chapter.
§ 101-4. Application requirements.
The application for obtaining a permit shall include:
A. The location where the bin would be situated, as precisely as possible;
B. The manner in which the person anticipates any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin would be used, sold, or dispersed, and
the method by which the proceeds of collected donations would be
allocated or spent;
C. The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of any person or
entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin, at which such person can be reached during
normal business hours. For the purposes of this subsection, an
answering machine or service unrelated to the person does not
constitute a bona tide office; and
D. Written consent from the property owner to place the bin on his
property.
E. Submission of proof that the clothing bin is owned by a charitable
organization registered with the Attorney General of the State of New
Jersey pursuant to P.L. 1994, c. 16 (N.J.S.A. 45:17A-18 et seq.) or that
the clothing bin is owned by a religious corporation, trust, foundation,
association or organization incorporated under the provisions of Title
15 or 16 of the Revised Statutes or Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes.
§ 101-1 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 101-5
94:227
§ 101-5. Renewal application requirements.
In addition to the above application requirements, renewal applications
must include:
§ 101-6. Placement and maintenance.
West Milford Township shall not grant an application for a permit to place,
use, or employ a donation clothing bin if it determines that the placement
of the bin could constitute a safety hazard. Such hazards shall include, but
not be limited to, the placement of a donation clothing bin within 50 yards
of any place which stores large amounts of, or sells, fuel or other flammable
liquids or gases; or the placement of a bin where it interferes with vehicular
or pedestrian circulation. The person placing, using or employing a
donation clothing bin shall maintain the bin and the area surrounding the
bin such that there shall be no accumulation of clothing or other donations
outside the bin.
§ 101-7. Display of permit.
The following information shall be clearly and conspicuously displayed on
the exterior of the donation clothing bin:
A. A statement on the manner in which the person has used, sold, or
dispersed any clothing or other donation collected via the bin, the
method by which the proceeds of collected donations have been
allocated or spent, and any changes the person anticipates he or she
may make in these processes during the period covered by the renewal;
B. The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of any entity
which shared or profited from any clothing or other donations collected
via the bin, and of any entities which may do so during the period
covered by the renewal; and
C. If the location of the bin is to be moved, the new location where the bin
is to be situated, as precisely as possible, and written consent from the
property owner of the new location.
A. The permit number and its date of expiration;
B. The name and address of the registered person who owns the bin, and
of any other entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin;
C. The telephone number of the owner's bona fide office, and, if applicable,
the telephone number of the bona fide office of any other entity which
may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected via
the bin. For the purposes of this subsection, an answering machine or
service unrelated to the person does not constitute a bona fide office;
D. In cases when any entity other than the person who owns the bin may
share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected via the
§ 101-5 WEST MILFORD CODE § 101-7
94:228
§ 101-8. Receipt and investigation of complaints.
§ 101-9. Additional penalties and remedies.
In addition to any other penalties or remedies authorized by the laws of
this state, any person who violates any provision of this chapter or the
provisions of P.L. 2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq.) which results in
seizure of the donation clothing bin shall be:
bin, a notice, written in a clear and easily understandable manner,
indicating that clothing or other donations collected via the bin, their
proceeds, or both, may be shared, or given entirely to, an entity other
than the person who owns the bin, and identifying all such entities
which may share or profit from such donations; and
E. A statement, consistent with the information provided to the Township
in the most recent permit or renewal application, indicating the manner
in which the owner anticipates any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin would be used, sold, or dispersed, and the method
by which the proceeds of collected donations would be allocated or
spent.
A. The Zoning Officer shall receive and investigate, within 30 days, any
complaints from the public about the bin. Whenever it appears to the
Zoning Officer that a person has engaged in, or is engaging in, any act
or practice in violation of this chapter, the person who placed the bin
shall be issued a warning, stating that if the violation is not rectified or
a hearing with the appropriate municipal agency is not requested
within 45 days, the bin will be seized or removed at the expense of the
person who placed the bin, and any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin will be sold at public auction or otherwise disposed
of. In addition to any other means used to notify the person who placed
the bin, such warning shall be affixed to the exterior of the bin itself.
B. In the event that the person who placed the bin does not rectify the
violation or request a hearing within 45 days of the posting of the
warning, West Milford Township may seize the bin, remove it, or have it
removed, at the expense of the person who placed the bin, and sell at
public auction or otherwise dispose of any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin. Any proceeds from the sale of the donations
collected via the bin shall be paid to the chief financial officer of the
Township.
A. Subject to a penalty of up to $20,000 for each violation. The Township
may bring this action in the West Milford Township Municipal Court or
the Superior Court of New Jersey as a summary proceeding under the
Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999, P.L. 1999, c. 274 (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10
et seq.), and any penalty monies collected shall be paid to the chief
financial officer of the Township; and
§ 101-7 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 101-9
94:229
Chapter 110
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 94.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 152.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 285.
Subdivision of land and site plan review — See
Ch. 470.
Zoning — See Ch. 500.
§ 110-1. Uniform Construction Code Enforcing Agency.
B. Deemed ineligible to place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin for
solicitation purposes pursuant to this chapter and P.L. 2007, c. 209
(N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61). A person disqualified from placing, using, or
employing a donation clothing bin by violating the provisions of P.L.
2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq.) may apply to the Township
Council to have that person's eligibility restored. The Township Council
may restore the eligibility of a person who:
(1) Acts within the public interest; and
(2) Demonstrates that he made a good faith effort to comply with the
provisions of this chapter and P.L. 2007, c. 1209 (N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.60 et seq.), and all other applicable laws and regulations,
or had no fraudulent intentions.
A. Established; composition; administrator. There is hereby established in
the Township a State Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency to
be known as the "West Milford Township Uniform Construction Code
Enforcing Agency," consisting of a Construction Official, building
subcode official, plumbing subcode official, electrical subcode official,
fire protection subcode official, and such other subcode officials for
such additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of
Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of
the State Uniform Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be
the chief administrator of the enforcing agency.
B. Qualifications for official position. Each official position created in
Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a person qualified for such
position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq., as
amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23; provided that, in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contact pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq., and N.J.A.C.
5:23 to hold each such position.
§ 101-9 WEST MILFORD CODE § 110-1
94:230
§ 110-2. Fees. [Amended 4-16-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-6; 9-19-1990
by Ord. No. 1990-32; 11-21-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-42; 2-20-1991 by
Ord. No. 1991-11; 12-18-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-66; 8-20-1992 by
Ord. No. 1992-32; 6-16-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-19; 12-19-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-46; 4-3-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-9; 9-4-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-32; 8-6-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-33; 9-21-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-14; 6-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-005; 12-5-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-030]
Fees related to the uniform construction codes are located in Chapter 135,
Fees and Costs.
§ 110-3. Construction Board of Appeals.
C. Public business at one location. The public shall have the right to do
business with the enforcing agency at one office location except for
emergencies, and unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances.
D. Biannual fee schedule report. The Construction Official shall, with the
advice of the subcode officials, prepare and submit biannually to the
Township Council a report recommending a fee schedule based on the
operating expenses of the agency, and any other expenses of the
Township fairly attributable to the enforcement of the State Uniform
Construction Code Act.
A. Established; composition. There is hereby established a Construction
Board of Appeals to hear appeals from decisions by the enforcing
agency. Such Board shall consist of five members. At least one Board
member shall be a registered architect or licensed professional
engineer of building construction experience, and at least one Board
member shall be as qualified as a plumbing subcode official, and one as
qualified as an electrical subcode official. No more than two Board
members shall be selected from the same business or profession. Each
Board member shall have had at least three years' experience in
construction, design or supervision as a licensed engineer or registered
architect; or, in the alternative, five years' experience in construction,
design or supervision as an architect or engineer with a bachelor's
degree in architecture or engineering, respectively, from an accredited
institution of higher education; or, as a further alternative, 10 years'
experience in construction, design or supervision as a journeyman in a
construction trade or as a construction contractor, subcontractor or
inspector.
B. Appointment; term; vacancies. The Township Council shall appoint the
Board members and any alternate members. For the members first
appointed, the Township Council shall designate the appointees' terms
so that one shall be appointed for a term of one year, one for a term of
two years, one for a term of three years, and two for a term of four
years. At the expiration of such terms and thereafter, appointments
§ 110-1 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 110-3
94:231
§ 110-4. Site plan review for detached single-family dwellings.
The following procedure shall be followed for detached single-family
dwellings:
shall be made for terms of four years. Vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired term.
C. Alternates. The Township Council shall appoint such number of
alternates, as may be appropriate, for terms not to exceed four years; or
may, in the alternative, appoint alternates on a case-by-case basis.
D. Disqualification. No regular or alternate Board member may be a
member of the enforcing agency, the decisions of which are subject to
the review of the Board.
E. Compensation. Regular or alternate Board members shall serve without
compensation.
A. Copies submitted. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for any
single-family dwelling, the applicant for the permit shall submit to the
Building Inspector for his approval two copies of a detailed site plan at
a scale of one inch equals 30 inches, sheet size 8 1/2 inches by 14
inches, prepared by a licensed professional engineer, architect or
licensed land surveyor, showing the existing contour lines at two-foot
intervals of the plot on which the dwelling is to be constructed, final
elevations in accordance with U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey Datum
proposed for the corners of the plot, corner and floor levels of the
structure to be erected thereon. In addition, the detailed site plan shall
show swales, brooks, streams, springs, retaining walls, terraces,
sidewalks, slopes, major rock formations, existing easements, building
line setback, and elevation at the curb where existing, and if no curb,
elevation at existing opposite lot corners and center line of driveway
where building is to be located, and all provisions for the proper
drainage thereof shall be shown on the plan. [Amended 9-17-1986 by
Ord. No. 1986-24]
B. Review of site plan. All site plans shall be reviewed by the Township
Engineer within 10 days of filing date (excluding Saturdays, Sundays
and legal holidays). He shall determine whether or not adequate
provisions have been made by way of proper grading to prevent wet
basements, muddy yards, eroding banks and other conditions injurious
to the block and lot for which application for the building permit is
made, and further adequate provisions have been made considering the
relationship of the lot in question with other adjoining properties, for
the surface drainage away from the dwelling and lot in question on a
sound neighborhood development basis and without adverse effect
upon adjoining properties or public streets. Upon making such
determination, the Township Engineer shall forward to the Building
Inspector the site plan with his findings. No permit shall be issued
unless the report of the Township Engineer is favorable.
§ 110-3 WEST MILFORD CODE § 110-4
94:232
§ 110-5. Fire districts.
C. Relocation. If, after excavation of the property shown on the site plan,
subsurface conditions, by way of rock shelf, underground streams or
other natural obstacles shall prevent the location of the dwelling, as
shown on the site plan, and the applicant shall deem it an emergency
and that it is necessary to move the location of the dwelling to a place
other than shown on the site plan, then, the applicant shall
communicate with the Township Engineer and request an emergency
approval for such relocation which shall be acted upon by the Township
Engineer within three days (excluding Saturday, Sunday and legal
holidays) of the receipt of the notice by the Township Engineer.
D. Issuance of certificate of occupancy. An application shall be submitted
to the Township Engineer, prior to the issuance of any certificate of
occupancy for any dwelling shown on the submitted site plan, for
approval of same after completion of the items shown on the proposed
site plan. In the event that the Township Engineer shall find that the
premises, as completed by the applicant, shall not have been in
substantial compliance with the site plan submitted showing the
aforementioned items to be completed, such report shall be forwarded
to the Building Inspector, and a copy to the applicant, and no certificate
of occupancy shall be issued until substantial compliance with the work
on the site, in accordance with the site plan submitted at the time of the
application for the building permit, shall have been made.
E. Exceptions. A site plan shall not be required for a proposed addition to
an existing dwelling unless such proposed addition would reduce the
area of the unimproved portion of the lot by more than 500 square feet.
A. The Township shall be divided into two fire districts as described in the
code, Fire District No. 1, which shall include all areas of the Township
designated as industrial zones according to the Zoning Maps of the
Township, and Fire District No. 2, which shall include all other areas of
the Township.
B. The fire and general safety requirements as provided for in the code,
together with any amendments or supplements, shall be enforced
therein. Nothing in this code shall invalidate any provisions of the Fire
Prevention Code as adopted by the Township.44 In the event of any
conflict, the code with the greater standard shall prevail.
C. The Building Division of the Planning and Building Department in the
enforcement of the fire and general safety requirements shall consult
with the Bureau of Fire Prevention and the Division of Fire Suppression
in seeking their aid and assistance in carrying out the provisions of this
code.
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 152, Fire Prevention.
§ 110-4 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 110-6
94:233
§ 110-6. Fees waived for improvements to promote accessibility.
[Added 12-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-22]
No person shall be charged a construction permit surcharge fee or
enforcing agency fee for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement designed and undertaken solely to promote accessibility by
disabled persons to an existing public or private structure or any of the
facilities contained therein.
§ 110-7. Additional requirements for properties located in lake
communities. [Amended 5-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-019; 12-7-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-016]
A. Applicability. All applicants for zoning, building and/or construction
permits for a property located within the boundaries of a lake
community in the Township of West Milford shall, in addition to the
requirements for obtaining zoning, building and/or construction
permits through the Township Planning and Building Department
("Department"), and pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code and/or
the Land Development ordinances of the Township of West Milford,
provide proof to the Department that they have provided notice to the
respective property owners' association of the filing of an application
for a zoning, building and/or construction permit. For purposes of this
section, "properties within the boundaries of a lake community" shall be
defined as those properties (consisting of blocks and lots) contained on
the Township's Lake Community Master List, which is on file with the
Township's Building Department.
B. Proof of the notice required by Subsection A, above, shall be the
submission of a receipt that the notification was sent certified mail,
return receipt requested. Such proof may be established by presenting
a receipt of certified mail shipped by the United States Post Office.
C. Applications for zoning, building and or construction permits for
properties located in lake communities which are not accompanied by
the proof of notice required pursuant to Subsections A and B of this
section will be deemed incomplete and will not be considered until such
proof of notice has been provided.
D. The provisions of Subsections A and B above shall include, but not be
limited to, applications for a permit to construct a deck, wall, fence,
shed or any other structure or improvement on a lot but shall not
otherwise apply to those applications for zoning, building and/or
construction permits which do not, in any manner, involve the
construction or erection of a structure or improvement or increase the
lot coverage or impervious coverage of a lot.
E. Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the
Township Construction Code Official, the Zoning Official and/or his or
her respective designee.
§ 110-6 WEST MILFORD CODE § 110-7
94:234
Chapter 122
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
§ 122-1. Advertisement, display and sale prohibited.
No persons shall advertise, display, sell or offer to sell any type of syringe,
needle, eye dropper, spoon, pipe, testing kit, rolling paper, or other
paraphernalia, appliances or accessories designed for or ordinarily used
in smoking, testing, weighing, measuring, injecting, cooling or sniffing
marijuana, cocaine, opium, hashish or other controlled dangerous
substances as defined by N.J.S.A. 24:21-1 et seq.
§ 122-2. Maintenance of premises for illegal purposes.
It shall constitute a common nuisance to maintain any building, conveyance
or premises whatever which is resorted to by persons for the manufacture,
distribution, dispensing, administration or use of any type of syringe,
needle, eye dropper, spoon, pipe, testing kit, rolling paper, or other
paraphernalia, appliance or accessory designed for or ordinarily used in
smoking, testing, weighing, measuring, injecting, cooking or sniffing
marijuana, cocaine, opium, hashish or other controlled dangerous
substances as defined by N.J.S.A. 24:21-1 et seq.
§ 122-3. Definition of paraphernalia.
Not by way of limitation of the provisions of the foregoing §§ 122-1 and
122-2 of this chapter, but within the context thereof, the term
"paraphernalia" shall include, but not be limited to, any instrument used,
designed for use, or intended for use in ingesting, smoking, administering,
or preparing marijuana, hashish, hashish oil, cocaine or other controlled
dangerous substances, and includes:
F. Violations and penalties. Any person or persons, firm, association or
corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties imposed in Chapter 1,
Article III, General Penalty, of the Township Code. For the purposes of
this chapter, failure to provide the required proof of notice for each
application for a zoning, building or construction permit for a property
subject to the terms of this chapter shall be considered a separate
offense.
A. Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic marijuana or
hashish pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish
heads, or punctured metal bowls;
B. Water pipes designed for use or intended for use with marijuana,
hashish, hashish oil, or cocaine;
C. Carburetion tubes and devices;
§ 110-7 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 122-3
122:235
§ 122-4. Violations and penalties.
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
Article III, General Penalty, of the Code of the Township of West Milford.
Chapter 135
FEES AND COSTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land development fees — See Ch. 414.
§ 135-1. Fees and costs established.
Fees and costs hereafter charged by the Township, and authorized by the
Code of the Township of West Milford, as amended, are hereby established
and shall be imposed in such amounts as are provided by this chapter.
All references herein are to chapters of the Code of the Township of West
Milford.
D. Smoking and carburetion masks;
E. Roach clips;
F. Separation gins designed for use or intended for use in cleaning
marijuana;
G. Cocaine spoons and vials;
H. Chamber pipes;
I. Carburetor pipes;
J. Electric pipes;
K. Air driven pipes;
L. Chilams;
M. Bongs;
N. Ice pipes or chillers;
O. Cigarette rolling papers; or
P. Other instruments or devices whose primary purpose is to facilitate the
sale, use or storage of a controlled dangerous substance and any
instrument or device which is accompanied by advertising, instructions
or other descriptive materials stating, directly or indirectly, its function
in the sale, use or storage of a controlled dangerous substance.
§ 122-3 WEST MILFORD CODE § 135-2
122:236
§ 135-2. Department of Community Services and Recreation.
[Amended 3-26-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-005; 8-26-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-013; 4-18-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-005; 3-6-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-002]
The Department of Community Services and Recreation is authorized to
charge the following fees:
A. Bubbling Springs membership and badge: [Amended 2-17-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-002; 2-15-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-004; 3-26-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-002; 3-6-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-002]
Resident Rate
Non-Resident
Rate
(1) Family membership
[Consists of parent(s) and all
children, up to and including
full-time students living at
home]
$265 $365
(2) Parent/child membership
(One adult and one child
under the age of 18 living in
the same residence)
$225 $325
(3) Individual membership
(Ages 13 to 61)
$125 $175
(4) Senior individual member
(Age 62+)
$25 $35
(5) Senior couple membership $40 $60
(6) Swim team First child $100; each additional
child $90
B. Bubbling Springs Park guest membership (per person, per day):
[Amended 2-17-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-002; 2-15-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-004; 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-002; 3-6-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-002]
(1) A person under two years of age: no charge.
(2) A person from two years to 17 years of age: $5.
(3) A person from 18 to 61 years of age: $10.
(4) Seniors (ages 62+): $3.
C. Swim lessons:
(1) Lake member.
§ 135-2 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 135-2
122:237
(a) All children:
[1] One session: $60.
[2] Two sessions: $110.
[3] Three sessions: $160.
(2) Nonmember.
(a) All children:
[1] One session: $70.
[2] Two sessions: $130.
[3] Three sessions: $185.
(3) Swim team.
(a) First child: $95.
(b) Each additional child: $90.
D. Day Camp: children entering kindergarten through eighth grade.
[Amended 3-18-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-002; 2-17-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-002; 2-15-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-004; 3-26-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-002; 3-6-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-002]
(1) Fees.
(a) Early bird through April 15: 10% off regular price when paid in
full at time of registration.
Full
8 Weeks Weekly
Before
Care After Care
Regular
Price
(through
May 31)
$1,220 $165 $35/week $35/week
Late fee
(After June
1)
$1,420 $190 $40/week $40/week
(b) Camp hours: 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
(c) Before care: 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
(d) After care: 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(2) Fees for off-site field trips: a range between $15 and $50 per
person, per trip.
§ 135-2 WEST MILFORD CODE § 135-2
122:238
E. Teen Camp: children entering seventh and eighth grade. [Amended
3-18-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-002]
(1) Teen Camp fees. [Amended 2-17-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-002;
2-15-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-004]
Full 8
Weeks Weekly
Before
Care After Care
Early Bird
Through
April 3,
2017
$990 $145 $30/week $30/week
Regular
Price
April 4,
2017 to
June 5,
2017
$1,110 $155 $30/week $30/week
Late Fee
After June
5, 2017
$1,330 $175 $35/week $35/week
(a) Camp hours: 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
(b) Before care: 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
(c) After care: 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(2) Fees for off-site field trips: a range between $15 and $50 per
person, per trip.
F. Day/Teen Camp registration incentives. [Added 3-18-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-00245]
(1) Sibling discount: $25 off weekly registration fee per child after first
child; not to be applied to before-care or after-care pricing.
(2) Full season discount: A discount of 20% will be offered to
participants who enroll in the full eight weeks of Day Camp upon
initial registration. The discount will not apply when participants
choose to re-enroll for additional weeks and will be void if
participants choose to enroll in fewer than eight weeks at a later
time.
(3) The discount will not apply to off-site field trips.
G. Muppet camp: children ages three and four not entering kindergarten:
$110.
45.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Subsection F, regarding early dropoff
and late pickup fees. See now Subsections D and E.
§ 135-2 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 135-2
122:239
H. A nonrefundable maintenance fee of $25 shall be charged for each
group use permit that requires the opening, closing and/or cleaning of a
facility.
I. Permit fees: Bubbling Springs members will be charged a
nonrefundable administrative/user fee of $30 for guest groups
numbering more than 25 people. Permits must be filled out at the Parks
and Recreation office. Groups of under 25 do not need to have a permit
or pay a maintenance fee. They must make arrangements with the Lake
Director prior to the party.
J. PRIDE: $15 per day, not to exceed $60 per week.
K. Preschool: $290 per seven-week session. [Amended 3-6-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-005]
L. Friday Fun Day: $185 per seven-week session.
M. Use of teen center/coffee house. [Added 11-13-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-022]
(1) Event permits may be issued for use of the West Milford teen
center/coffee house by the Community Services and Recreation
Department. The fee for such use shall be a one-time fee of $150 for
a four-hour rental. Time exceeding the initial four hours shall be
charged at the rate of $25 per hour. Each event shall require a
security deposit of $200.
(2) Use of the teen center shall be subject to all requirements
associated with the issuance of event permits under Township
policy, and the Township’s caretaker must be present during any
event.
(3) After-school program at Teen Center. This program is for Middle
School students only, Grades 7 and 8. [Added 7-15-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-009]
(a) Per-week registration fee: $35.
(b) Per-month registration fee: $125.
N. Use of West Milford Recreation Center. [Added 10-21-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-015]
(1) $25 per hour, per gym rental fees to local nonprofit organizations
upon the issuance of permits and proof of proper insurance has
been provided. Local nonprofit organizations are defined as
registered organizations under § 501c3 of the Federal Tax Code,
with an established business address in West Milford Township.
(2) $50 per hour, per gym rental fees to nonlocal not-for-profit
organizations based outside the Township of West Milford.
§ 135-2 WEST MILFORD CODE § 135-2
122:240
§ 135-3. Department of Public Works and Engineering.
The Department of Public Works and Engineering is authorized to charge
the following fees:
Nonprofit organizations are defined as registered organizations
under § 501c3 of the Federal Tax Code.
(3) $50 per hour, per gym rental fees to local for-profit organizations
upon the issuance of permits and proof of proper insurance has
been provided.
(4) Exemptions:
(a) Fees will not be assessed to local nonprofit organizations
defined in Subsection N(1) if requested use occurs during
regular operating hours of the West Milford Recreation Center,
as established by the Township of West Milford, Department of
Community Services.
(b) Fees will not be assessed to the West Milford Police Athletic
League so long as the agreement between the Township of
West Milford and West Milford PAL, dated June 3, 2015,
remains in full effect.
A. Preparation of tax maps:
(1) Miscellaneous plans and maps (24 inches by 36 inches): $5.
(2) Tax map set: $260.
B. Preparation of a copy of Base Map: $9.
C. Preparation of a copy of Zoning Map: $9.
D. Preparation of a flood determination letter: $9.
E. Preparation of a private/public road letter: $6.
F. Site inspection:
(1) Residential site inspection (per unit): $120.
(2) Commercial site inspection (per unit): $320.
G. Recycling fees: [Amended 5-28-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-024;
12-16-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-027]
(1) Resident noncommercial and commercial vehicles not engaged in
lawn care, landscaping or tree removal services: no charge for
compost site decal.
(2) Resident commercial vehicle engaged to provide lawn care,
landscaping, or tree removal services: $250 for five compost site
passes. Each pass is good for one load of material.
§ 135-2 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 135-3
122:241
§ 135-4. Department of Health. [Amended 3-26-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-005; 4-18-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-005]
The Department of Health is authorized to charge the following fees.
(3) Resident commercial vehicles exceeding 12,0000 pounds GVW and
not engaged in lawn care, landscaping or tree removal services will
be charged $50 for one compost site pass good for one load of
material.
(4) Resident commercial vehicles engaged in lawn care, landscaping or
tree removal services and towing a trailer shall be charged an
additional $50 for one compost site pass, good for one load of
material, if both the vehicle and trailer are loaded.
(5) Motorcycle and wheelbarrow tires, with or without rims: $1 per
tire.
(6) Passenger car tires, without rims: $2 per tire.
(7) Passenger car tires, with rims: $2.50 per tire.
(8) Truck tires, up to 23 inches, with or without rims: $5 per tire.
(9) Truck tires, 24 inches or larger, with or without rims: $11 per tire.
(10) Used motor oil: $0.25 per gallon.
A. Public health programs:
(1) S.M.A.C. blood screening clinic: $25. [Amended 9-20-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-012]
(2) Female cancer screening program: $50.
(3) Male cancer screening program: $55.
(4) Skin cancer screening program: $21.
(5) Ear wax screening: $16.
(6) Stroke prevention and diabetes screening: $31.
B. Vaccine programs:
(1) Flu: $12.
(2) Pneumovax: $16.
(3) Hepatitis A (series of two): $50.
(4) Hepatitis B (series of three), adults: $99.
(5) Hepatitis B (series of three), children: $99.
(6) Twinrix-hepatitis A/hepatitis B combo: $45.
§ 135-3 WEST MILFORD CODE § 135-4
122:242
§ 135-5. Department of Planning and Building; construction fees.
The Planning and Building Department is authorized to charge the following
fees:
(7) Tdap (tetanus, diptheria and pertussis): $16.
(8) Menactra: $16.
(9) Shingles vaccine: $154.
A. Construction permit fees, sum of subcode fees. The fee for a
construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees listed in the
following subsections and shall be paid before the permit is issued:46
(1) Building subcode fees.
(a) Fees for new construction shall be based on the volume of the
structure. The new construction fee shall be in the amount of
$0.036 per cubic foot of volume with a minimum of $1,500.
[1] Use Group U shall be a minimum fee of $100.
[2] Residential utility sheds under 150 square feet shall be a
minimum fee of $50.
[3] Use Groups U, S1, S2 for agricultural use as defined under
N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d) shall be a minimum fee of $100 and
$0.036 per cubic foot of volume.
[4] Use Group S1 and S2 for commercial; and Use Group F1
and F2 shall be charged $0.036 per cubic foot of volume
with a minimum fee of $250.
[5] Residential roof R-3/R-4: flat fee of $70.
[6] Residential siding R-3/R-4: flat fee of $70.
(b) For renovations, alterations and repairs or minor work as
defined: $30 per $1,000 of estimated cost of the work, provided
that the minimum fee shall be $70.
(c) Additions for all use groups: $0.036 per cubic foot of building
or structure volume for the added portion, provided that the
minimum fee shall be $150.
(d) For combinations of renovations and additions, the sum of the
fees computed separately as renovations and additions.
(e) Swimming pools will be a flat fee of $100 for aboveground and
in-ground pools.
46.Editor's Note: See § 110-6, Fee waived for improvements to promote accessibility, for
waiver of certain fees for construction , reconstruction, alteration or improvements
designed to promote accessibility by disabled persons.
§ 135-4 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 135-5
122:243
(f) For residential elevators, dumbwaiters or hoists in R-3 or R-4
Use Group shall be $70.
(g) For structures of temporary uses: $70 for a period up to 90
days.
(h) Asbestos abatement: a flat fee of $70.
(i) Lead hazard: a flat fee of $70.
(j) Application for variation: $150.
(k) Retaining wall permits: $30 per $1,000 of estimated cost,
provided that the minimum fee shall be $70.
(l) Annual construction permits.
[1] The annual fee to be charged for an annual construction
permit shall be a flat fee based upon the number of
maintenance workers employed by a facility, and who are
primarily engaged in work that is governed by a subcode.
Managers, engineers and clerical personnel shall not be
considered maintenance workers for the purpose of
establishing the annual construction permit fee. Permits
may be issued for building protection, electrical and
plumbing subcodes.
[2] Prior to the issuance of an annual construction permit, a
training registration fee of $100 per subcode shall be
submitted by the applicant to the Department of
Community Affairs, Construction Code Element, Training
Section along with a copy of the construction permit (form
F-170). Fees shall be made payable to "Treasurer, State of
New Jersey."
[a] One to 25 maintenance workers: $425 per worker.
[b] For each additional worker over 25: $165 per worker.
[c] Training registration: $100 per worker.
(m) Demolition permit fee.
[1] The fee for a permit for demolition of a building or
structure shall be $100 for structures of all use groups.
[2] Demolition of all flammable or combustible storage tanks
residential shall be $80.
[3] Demolition of all flammable or combustible storage tanks
commercial shall be $200.
(n) The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be $2 per square
foot of the surface area of the sign, provided that the minimum
§ 135-5 WEST MILFORD CODE § 135-5
122:244
fee shall be $70. In the case of double-faced signs, the area
of the surface of only one side of the sign shall be used for
purposes of the fee computation.
(o) Certificate of occupancy fees.
[1] Certificate of continual occupancy: $200 (upon request
only). The fee for a letter requesting that no certificate of
continual occupancy is required: $20.
[2] Certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to change of
use: $100.
[3] Certificate of occupancy: $100.
[4] Certificate of occupancy for asbestos abatement: $100.
[5] Temporary certificate of occupancy. There shall be no fee
for the first issuance of a temporary certificate of
occupancy, provided that a certificate of occupancy fee
was paid. Each renewal after the first issuance shall be a
fee of $100.
(2) Plumbing subcode fees.
(a) The fee shall be in the amount of $30 per fixture, piece of
equipment or appliance connected to the gas piping or oil
piping system.
(b) The fee shall be $80 per special device for the following:
grease traps, oil separators, refrigeration units, utility service
connections, backflow preventors, steam boilers, hot water
boilers, active solar systems, sewer pumps and interceptors.
There shall be no inspection fee charged for gas service
entrances.
(c) The minimum plumbing subcode fee shall be $70.
(3) Electrical subcode fees.
(a) Electrical fixtures and devices:
[1] Receptacles and fixtures:
[a] First 25 fixtures: $70.
[b] Each additional 25 will be $30.
(b) Each motor or electrical device greater than one HP and less
than or equal to 10 HP and for transformers and generators
greater than 1 KW and less than or equal to 10 KW: fee is $30
each.
(c) Each motor or electrical device greater than 10 HP and less
than or equal to 50 HP for each service panel, service entrance
§ 135-5 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 135-5
122:245
or subpanel less than or equal to 200 amperes and for all
transformers and generators greater than 11 KW and less
than or equal to 45 KW and for each utility load management
devices: the fee is $70.
(d) Each motor or electrical device greater than 50 HP and less
than or equal to 100 HP for each service panel, service
entrance or subpanel greater than 200 amperes and less than
or equal to 1,000 amperes and for each transformer or
generator greater than 45 KW and less than or equal to 112
KW: fee is $130 each.
(e) Each motor or electrical device greater than 100 HP, for each
service panel, service entrance or subpanel greater than 1,000
amperes and for each transformer or generator greater than
112 KW: fee is $600.
(f) The fee for the annual electrical inspection of swimming pools,
spas or hot tubs shall be $70.
(g) Each pool bonding inspection shall be a flat fee of $70.
(h) The minimum electrical subcode fee shall be $70.
(4) Fire subcode fees.
(a) Alarm/supervisory/signaling (smoke, heat, pulls, water/flow):
[1] One to six: $70.
[2] Each additional five: $20.
(b) Fire suppression system. For the installation of either a wet or
dry suppression system:
[1] One to 20 sprinkler heads: $80.
[2] Twenty-one to 100 sprinkler heads: $140.
[3] One hundred one to 200 sprinkler heads: $260.
[4] Two hundred one to 400 sprinkler heads: $640.
[5] Four hundred one to 1,000 sprinkler heads: $950.
[6] One thousand one and over sprinkler heads: $1,200.
(c) Standpipe: $200.
(d) Pre-engineered systems.
[1] Wet chemical: $125.
[2] Dry chemical: $125.
[3] CO2 suppression: $125.
§ 135-5 WEST MILFORD CODE § 135-5
122:246
[4] Foam suppression: $125.
[5] FM 200 suppression: $125.
(e) Commercial hood exhaust system: $100.
(f) Smoke control system: $70.
(g) Gas and oil-fired appliance which is not connected to a
plumbing system: $80.
(h) Central air-conditioning unit or ducts: $70.
(i) Incinerators: $500.
(j) Crematoriums: $500.
(k) The fees for the issuance of a permit for a flammable or
combustible storage tank installation shall be as follows:
[1] One to 1,000 gallons: $80.
[2] One thousand one to 3,000 gallons: $200.
[3] Three thousand one to 5,000 gallons: $300.
[4] Five thousand one and over gallons: $400.
(l) The fee for each solid-fuel-burning appliance such as a
fireplace, woodstove or pellet stove shall be $80.
(m) The minimum fire subcode fee shall be $70.
(5) Any change of contractor shall be $70 per subcode.
(6) Elevator subcode fees. The elevator subcode inspection fees shall
be the actual costs incurred by the Township in accordance with
the state fee schedule as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20, plus an
administration fee of 15%.
B. Plan review fee. The fee for plan review shall be 20% of the amount to
be charged for the construction permit and shall be paid before the
plans are reviewed. The amount paid for this fee shall be credited
toward the amount of the fee to be charged for the construction permit.
C. Surcharge fee for new construction.
(1) Collection of State of New Jersey training fees. In order to provide
for the training and certification and technical support programs
required by the act, and enforcing agency, including the
Department when acting as the local agency, shall collect a
surcharge fee to be based upon the volume of new construction
within the Township. Said fee shall be accounted for and forwarded
to the Bureau of Housing Inspection in the manner herein provided.
§ 135-5 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 135-5
122:247
§ 135-6. Police Department records.
(2) Fees. This fee shall be in the amount of $0.0016 per cubic foot
volume of new construction. Volume shall be computed in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28.
(3) Remitting and reporting.
(a) The Township shall remit such fees to the Bureau on a
quarterly basis, in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19, ending
March, June, September and December.
(b) A monthly report is transmitted to the Department of
Community Affairs.
D. Reinspection fees. Whenever it shall be necessary for a reinspection of
any type to be made because of noncompliance with this chapter,
Chapter 110, Construction Codes, Uniform, or the building code, then
and in such case a reinspection fee of $25 for each reinspection shall be
paid by the contractor, or the person to whom the building permit has
been issued. The Building Inspector shall have the right to withhold
reinspection until such fee is paid. No certificate of occupancy shall be
issued until all reinspection fees are paid.
E. Bonds.
(1) The owner or person to whom a permit has been issued to wreck or
demolish a building shall provide a bond in the amount of $3 per
$1,000 valuation, which bond shall require the completion of the
work, the clearing and filling in of the site, and shall protect and
indemnify the Township against loss or damage.
(2) The owner of a building to be moved shall furnish a surety bond in
the amount of $2,000 which shall require the completion of the
work and the restoration of the site, and protect and indemnify the
Township against loss or damage. The owner shall pay for police
protection required during the aforesaid work.
F. Renewal of building permit fee. Whenever it shall become necessary for
the renewal of a building permit, then and in such case, the fee shall not
exceed the sum of $25.
A. Reports by mail: $5.
B. Audio cassettes: $1.
C. CD's:
(1) Recording manufacturer's recommended compact disc: $2.70.
(2) Standard quality compact disc: $0.60.
D. Videotape copy: $2.85.
§ 135-5 WEST MILFORD CODE § 135-6
122:248
§ 135-7. Finance.
§ 135-8. Planning.
§ 135-9. Administration; public records.
Reference Chapter 15, Administration of Government, Article XXVIII, Public
Records.
E. DVD copy: $1.95.
F. Police reports. [Amended 9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-012]
(1) Letter size or smaller: $0.05 per page.
(2) Legal size or larger: $0.07 per page.
G. Fees for accident reports. The fee for providing a copy of an accident
report through the mail, by the West Milford Police Department, shall
be $5. [Amended 11-6-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-018]
H. In the event the Police Department is requested to incur extraordinary
expenditures of time and effort to accommodate a discovery request,
the Township may charge a special service charge based upon the cost
of retrieving and producing such records.
A. Nonsufficient funds (returned checks): $20.
B. Redemption certificate: $25.
C. Tax assessment:
(1) Duplicate bills: $5.
D. There is hereby established a fee for the use of credit cards for the
payment of taxes, interest, penalties and municipal charges or other
fees and charged by the Township of West Milford, which shall equal a
percentage fee on the amount of payment charged as set by a financial
institution chosen by the Township to process said credit card
payments. Said percentage fee shall not exceed, in any event, 2.5% of
the total amount of the payment. [Added 8-6-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-036]
E. Request for redemption calculation; third and subsequent request in a
calendar year: $50 per request. [Added 4-21-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-002]
F. Lien redemption calculation: $50. [Added 4-21-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-002]
A. Open space plan: $50.
§ 135-6 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 135-9
122:249
§ 135-10. Alcoholic beverage licenses. [Amended 4-21-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-002]
Reference Chapter 63, Alcoholic Beverages, Article II, Licensing;
Regulations.
§ 135-11. (Reserved)47
A. Fees for photocopies. The fee for providing copies of records shall be as
follows: [Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-005; 11-13-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-022]
(1) Per page: $0.05.
B. CD's:
(1) Recording manufacturer's recommended compact disc: $2.70.
(2) Standard quality compact disc: $0.60.
(3) The Township will only copy such information utilizing CD's
purchased by the Township or CD's provided by the public that are
in the original package.
A. The annual fees for the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages in the
Township shall be as follows:
(1) Plenary retail consumption license: $600. [Amended 11-13-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-022]
(2) Club license: $165.
B. Transfer of license fees. The fees to transfer a liquor license, per the
Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control of the State of New Jersey, shall
be as follows:
(1) Transfer of plenary retail consumption license: [Amended
11-13-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-022]
(a) Person-to-person transfer: $60.
(b) Place-to-place transfer: $60.
(2) Transfer of club license: $16.50.
C. Fees for plenary retail distribution licenses are hereby established:
[Added 8-16-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-008]
(1) Plenary retail distribution license annual fee: $1,000.
(2) Plenary retail distribution license transfer of license:
(a) Person to person transfer: $100.
(b) Place to place transfer: $100.
§ 135-9 WEST MILFORD CODE § 135-12
122:250
§ 135-12. Animals.
Reference Chapter 71, Animals.
A. License and registration tag fees for dogs. The person applying for the
license and registration tag shall pay an annual license and registration
tag fee of $11, which shall include $6.80 municipal license fee; $3
Animal Population Control Fund fee; $1 registration tag fee; and $0.20
Pilot Clinic Fund fee; provided, however, that where the owner shall
provide the registering authority with proof in writing signed by a
veterinarian or another recognized agency of this state or another state
that the said dog has been neutered, then in that event the license and
registration fee for each such dog shall be $6. Effective January 1, 2008,
the municipal portion of the dog license fee will be increased to $10 for
neutered/spayed dogs and $20 for unneutered/unspayed dogs.
(1) For each renewal, the fee for the license and registration tag shall
be the same as for the original license and tag. Licenses,
registration tags and renewals thereof shall expire on the last day
of January of the year following the issuance of the license.
(2) The fee for each replacement tag license shall be $4.
(3) Potentially dangerous dogs. The license fee for potentially
dangerous dogs pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq. shall be $500.
B. Delinquent dog license fees. Any person who shall own, keep or harbor
an unlicensed dog of licensing age after the last day of January of each
year shall be required to pay a delinquent license fee of $8 in addition to
the cost of each license or license renewal.
C. Kennels and pet shops. The annual license fees for kennel and pet shop
licenses shall be as follows:
(1) Kennel accommodating 10 or less dogs: $10.
(2) Kennel accommodating more than 10 dogs: $25.
(3) Pet shop: $10.
(4) Shelter or pound: no fee.
D. Impounded animals. The owner or person keeping or harboring any
animal taken into custody and impounded by the Animal Control Officer
or his authorized agents shall pay the following fees:
(1) An impoundment or pickup fee of $15 for any stray animal taken
into custody.
(2) Maintenance or detention costs, not to exceed $4 per day.
47.Editor’s Note: Former § 135-11, Amusements, as amended, was repealed 2-21-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-001.
§ 135-12 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 135-12
122:251
§ 135-13. Auctioneers.
Reference Chapter 78, Auctioneers.
§ 135-13.1. through § 135-13.4. (Reserved)
§ 135-13.5. Charitable clothing bins. [Added 7-22-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-012]
The annual permit fee for charitable clothing bins is $25 per bin and will
be used to offset the costs involved in enforcing Chapter 101, Charitable
Clothing Bins.
§ 135-14. Fertilizer application.
In accordance with Chapter 138, Fertilizers, Application of, the license fee
for all commercial landscapers and/or fertilizer applicators shall be $50,
which shall be paid annually. A separate copy of the license will be issued
for each vehicle owned or used by the applicant for an additional fee of $5
per additional vehicle. The license fee shall not be prorated.
(3) For animals released into the custody of the Animal Control Officer
or his authorized agents:
(a) A fee of $25 for an adult dog or litter of puppies.
(b) A fee of $10 for an adult cat.
(c) A fee of $15 for a litter of kittens.
(d) For the purposes of this section, a litter of puppies or kittens
shall be defined as animals under three months of age.
E. Cats.
(1) The annual license and registration tag fees for cats shall be $10
for neutered/spayed cats and $20 for unneutered/unspayed cats;
the license shall expire on the last day of July of the year following
the issuance of the license.
(2) The fee for each replacement tag and license shall be $4.
(3) A delinquent fee of $8 shall be assessed for late license and
registration.
F. Swine. The annual license fee for the maintenance of swine is $500.
A. The annual license fee to act as an auctioneer or conduct a public
auction is $1,000.
§ 135-12 WEST MILFORD CODE § 135-15
122:252
§ 135-15. Filming. [Amended 4-18-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-005]
The schedule of fees for the issuance of permits authorized by Chapter 141,
Filming, are as follows:
§ 135-16. Firearm ranges.
In accordance with Chapter 146, Firearm Ranges, the permit fee for the
operation of a firearm range is $250.
§ 135-17. Fire prevention. [Amended 4-21-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-002; 12-15-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-015; 11-13-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-022]
A. Basic filming permit: $100.
B. Filming permit for nonprofit applicants filming for educational
purposes: $25.
A. A permit shall be obtained from the Fire Official to use, install, conduct
processes or carry on operations involving or creating conditions
deemed hazardous to life or property as per a list of operations listed in
the Uniform Fire Code. The permit fees shall be as specified in the
Uniform Fire Code, which shall be amended as follows:
(1) Hot tar roofing permit: $50 per job.
(2) Type 1 permits: $55.
B. Application for a certificate of smoke detector and carbon monoxide
compliance inspection fee as required by N.J.A.C. 5:70-4.19 et seq.:
When Certificate of
Compliance Required
(number of business days prior
to closing) Fee
More than 10 $50
4 to 10 $85
Less than 4 $140
(1) Certificate of smoke detector and carbon monoxide compliance
reinspection fee: $40.
C. Annual non-life-hazard inspection fees. In addition to the registration
fees required pursuant to the Uniform Fire Code, the following
additional annual fees shall be required for annual inspections, except
that the fees established pursuant to this section shall not be assessed
against life hazard uses. The following fees shall also apply to all vacant
buildings:
§ 135-15 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 135-17
122:253
§ 135-18. Food establishments.
The following fees shall apply for licenses required under Chapter 163, Food
Establishments, Retail:
§ 135-19. Garage sales. [Amended 4-21-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-002]
Occupancy
(square feet) Fee
Up to 999 $50
1,000 to 4,999 $75
5,000 to 9,999 $140
10,000 to 14,999 $265
15,000 and over $365
D. Violation of fire lane: $60.
E. Any form of haunted amusements (shall include hay mazes, haunted
structures, etc.): $80.
F. Illegal burning: not to exceed $1,000 per offense.
A. Temporary retail food establishment and agricultural markets: $40.
[Amended 3-26-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-005]
B. Mobile retail food establishments: $100 annually.
C. All other retail food establishments shall be $150 annually, except that
for establishments which only offer prepackaged food for sale (for a
period of seven days), the fee shall be $40 annually. [Amended
3-26-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-005]
D. There shall be an additional fee of $25 for each reinspection of any
license.
E. Community residence and bed-and-breakfast retail food
establishments: $100 per year.
F. Nonprofit food license: $40 per year. [Amended 3-26-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-005]
G. Risk Type 1: $105. [Added 3-26-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-005]
H. Risk Type 2: $160. [Added 3-26-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-005]
I. Risk Type 3: $250. [Added 3-26-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-005]
J. Risk Type 4: $250. [Added 3-26-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-005]
A. The fee for a garage sale license issued pursuant to Chapter 174,
Garage Sales, is $10.
§ 135-17 WEST MILFORD CODE § 135-19
122:254
§ 135-20. Junk, junkyards and motor vehicle junkyards.
Reference Chapter 195, Junk, Junkyards and Motor Vehicle Junkyards. The
license fee for junkyards and recycling centers, required by Chapter 195,
Junk, Junkyards and Motor Vehicle Junkyards, shall be $500 for the whole
or any part of the license year.
§ 135-21. Licensing, general. [Amended 4-21-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-002]
The fee to transfer a license issued by the Township in accordance with
Chapter 203, Licensing, General, from place to place shall be $25.
§ 135-21.1. through § 135-21.2. (Reserved)
§ 135-21.3. Marriage, civil union and domestic partnership
ceremonies. [Added 5-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-020]
The Township shall impose a fee of $100 for marriage, civil union and/
or domestic partnership ceremonies conducted by the Mayor pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 37:1-13 et seq. Said fee shall be collected by the office of the
Township Registrar.
§ 135-22. Municipal Building. [Amended 4-21-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-002]
The fee for a permit to use the Municipal Building or the Municipal Building
grounds as described in Chapter 220, Municipal Building and Grounds, Use
of, is $50.
§ 135-23. Parades.
In accordance with Chapter 244, Parades, there shall be paid at the time of
filing the application for a parade permit a fee of $5.
§ 135-24. Parks, recreation areas and open spaces. [Amended
4-18-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-005]
In accordance with Chapter 256, Parks, Recreation Areas and Open Spaces,
the administrative fee for a group permit shall be as established in this
Chapter 135. A nonrefundable maintenance fee of $25 shall be charged for
each group use permit that requires the opening, closing and/or cleaning of
a facility.
§ 135-25. Peddling and soliciting.
B. The fee for additional garage sale signs is $1 each.
A. In accordance with Chapter 263, Peddling and Soliciting, Article I,
Peddlers, Hawkers and Vendors, the annual fee for a peddler's license
shall be $100.
§ 135-19 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 135-25
122:255
§ 135-26. Pesticides.
In accordance with Chapter 268, Pesticides, any person desiring notification
of outdoor ornamental pesticide applications shall register with the
Township Clerk and shall pay an annual fee therefor of $5.
§ 135-27. (Reserved)48
§ 135-28. Public Defender application.
Reference Chapter 15, Administration of Government, Article XIV,
Municipal Court. Any person applying for representation by a Municipal
Public Defender shall pay an application fee in an amount no greater than
$200, in order to offset the costs of Municipal Public Defender service.
§ 135-29. Sewage disposal systems, individual subsurface.
[Amended 3-26-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-005]
B. In accordance with Chapter 263, Peddling and Soliciting, Article II,
Canvassers and Solicitors, the fee for a canvasser's or solicitor's license
shall be $100.
A. In accordance with Chapter 300, Sewers, Article I, Individual
Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems, septic installation fees and
charges shall be as follows:
(1) Soil log: for observation of tests by the licensed professional
engineer or by the Health Officer, or registered environmental
health specialist designated by the Township, for purposes of
meeting the requirements of an application for an individual
sewage disposal system, either to locate and construct one, or for
subdivision approval, the sum of $120, and for the alteration of an
existing one, the sum of $90.
(2) Plan review: for the filing and review of an application and plans to
locate and construct a new individual sewage disposal system, the
sum of $240, and for the alteration of an existing one, the sum of
$185.
(3) Plan revision: for the review of a revised application and plans to
locate and construct a new individual sewage disposal system, the
sum of $90, and for the alteration of an existing system, the sum of
$85.
(4) Installation permit: for the issuance of a permit to locate and
construct a new individual sewage disposal system, the sum of
$185, or a permit for the alteration of an existing one, the sum of
$185.
48.Editor’s Note: Former § 135-27, Poolrooms and billiard rooms, as amended, was repealed
2-21-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-001.
§ 135-25 WEST MILFORD CODE § 135-29
122:256
§ 135-30. Sewer systems.
In accordance with Chapter 300, Sewers, Article II, Sewer Systems, the
following fees and charges apply:
§ 135-31. Sanitary sewer line connections.
In accordance with Chapter 300, Sewers, Article III, Connection to Sanitary
Sewer Lines, the fee for the issuance of a permit for each house connection
to an approved sewer system is $15.
§ 135-32. Site plan review.
(5) Installation permit, repair: for the filing of an application and
issuance of a permit to repair an existing system, the sum of $90.
(6) For each reinspection of an individual sewage disposal system, or
part thereof, caused by the failure of the permitted to locate and
construct, alter or repair the same in accordance with the terms of
the permit issued or the terms of the aforesaid code, no charge.
(7) For the issuance of a license to engage in the business of
constructing, reconstructing or extending septic tanks or other
individual sewage disposal systems in accordance with § 300-6,
Installer's license; bond, a fee of $120 shall be charged.
(8) Renewal of installation permits: for the renewal of an installation
permit, the sum of $65.
B. In accordance with Chapter 300, Sewers, Article VI, Individual
Subsurface Sewage Disposal System Management, the following fees
and charges are herewith established: For the issuance of a license to
remove the septic sludge from the individual or nonindividual sewage
disposal systems in accordance with § 300-42, the septic sludge
removal operator shall pay a flat fee of $100 to cover all of the
operator's vehicles for the license period.
A. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to locate and
construct a sewer system: $20.
B. For the issuance of a permit, or for a certification to locate and
construct a sewer system, including a sewerage plant, in compliance
with Chapter 300, Sewers, Article II, Sewer Systems: $230.
C. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to alter or extend
a sewer system: $10.
D. For the issuance of a permit, or for a certification to alter or extend a
sewer system: $40.
E. For each house connection to an approved sewer system: a permit fee of
$15.
§ 135-29 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 135-32
122:257
§ 135-33. Street excavations.
In accordance with Chapter 332, Streets and Sidewalks, Article I, Street
Excavations, the applicant for a street excavation permit shall pay a fee of
$20, and an inspection fee determined by the total amount of square yards
of road opening multiplied by the rate of $0.20 per square yard, but in no
case shall the inspection fee be less than $30. These fees are in addition to
the deposit required by Chapter 332, Article I.
§ 135-34. Swimming pools. [Amended 3-26-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-005]
§ 135-35. Tattoo parlors and tattoo artists. [Amended 3-26-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-005]
In accordance with Chapter 348, Tattoo Parlors and Tattoo Artists, the
following license fees apply:
§ 135-36. Taxicabs. [Amended 3-26-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-005;
4-21-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-002]
In accordance with Chapter 353, Art. I, Taxicabs, the following fees apply:
A. Site plan review and inspection fee for new buildings: $250.
B. Site plan review and inspection fee for additions and accessory
buildings: $125.
A. In accordance with Chapter 344, Swimming Pools, Article I, Swimming
Pool Code, the annual permit fee to be paid by the applicant for each
public swimming pool shall be $105.
B. In accordance with Chapter 344, Swimming Pools, Article II, Public
Bathing Places, the annual permit fee to be paid by the applicant for
each public bathing place shall be $105.
A. An application for an initial license to engage in the business of
operating an establishment where tattooing is performed shall be
accompanied by a fee in the amount of $205.
B. The renewal license fee for engaging in the business of operating a
tattoo establishment shall be $105 per year. The late fee for failure to
renew the license shall be $50 a month if not paid by the final due date
of April 30 annually.
A. Taxicab owner's license. The annual license fee per vehicle shall be
$100.
B. Taxicab driver's license.
(1) The application for an initial taxicab driver's license shall be
accompanied by a fee of $50 for the initial license period.
§ 135-32 WEST MILFORD CODE § 135-36
122:258
§ 135-37. Towing and storage of vehicles. [Amended 12-16-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-030]
§ 135-38. Tree removal.
In accordance with Chapter 371, Tree Removal, upon application for a
permit, the applicant shall pay to the Township the following fees:
§ 135-39. Vital statistics; certified copies of certificates. [Amended
3-26-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-005]
In accordance with Chapter 385, Vital Statistics, the Registrar of Vital
Statistics shall receive for the Township the following fees:
(2) The fee for the renewal of a taxicab driver's license is $50.
A. In accordance with Chapter 366, Towing and Storage of Vehicles, a
license fee in the amount of $100 shall be paid prior to the issuance of
any license under Chapter 366.
B. A schedule of the current rates shall be available to the public in the
office of the Township Clerk during normal business hours. In
accordance with Chapter 366, Towing and Storage of Vehicles, the
charge for transportation, hauling or service of disabled vehicles by
approved wreckers, including towing services and vehicle storage
services are as follows:
(1) Towing within the Township: $115 (no mileage fee).
(2) Towing out of the Township: $90 plus $4.50 per mile after first mile
from shop to out-of-town destination.
(3) Storage outside, secured: $35 per day, automobiles.
(4) Lot fee: $45.
(a) Moved totaled vehicles to outside for insurance purposes.
(b) Cleaning of accident debris from lot.
(5) Labor after first 1/2 hour: $80 per hour, chargeable in one-quarterhour
increments.
(6) Emergency road service: $45 (includes mileage).
(7) Cleanup of small spills at scene: $25, for spills of one gallon or less,
includes one twenty-five-pound bag of speedy dry.
A. For any application consisting of five acres or less: $25.
B. For each additional acre: $5.
C. There is no maximum permit fee.
§ 135-36 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 135-39
122:259
§ 135-40. Water.
A. Certified copy of birth certificate: $10.
B. Certified copy of marriage certificate: $10.
C. Certified copy of domestic partnership certificate: $10.
D. Certified copy of death certificate: $10.
A. In accordance with Chapter 390, Water, Article I, Water Supply
Systems, the following fees apply:
(1) For the filing of an application and plans and for the issuance of a
permit to locate and construct a water supply system: $25.
(2) For each reinspection of a water supply system, or part thereof,
caused by the failure of the applicant to locate and construct in
accordance with the terms of the certification or the terms of the
aforesaid standards: $5.
(3) For the issuance of a certification to connect a realty improvement
to an existing approved public water supply system: $3.
B. In accordance with Chapter 390, Water, Article IV, Individual and
Semipublic Water Supply, the following fees apply:
(1) License to engage in the business of installing water pumps or
supplies: $10 per year.
(2) The following fees and charges apply:
(a) For the filing of an application and plans, for the issuance of a
permit to locate and drill or dig a well: $160. [Amended
3-26-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-005]
(b) For the issuance of a permit to install a pump and supply for an
individual water supply system: $55. [Amended 3-26-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-005]
(c) For each house connection to an approved water supply system
serving three or more consumers: a permit fee of $15.
(d) For each reinspection of any water supply system or part
thereof caused by the failure of the permittee to locate and
construct or alter the same in accordance with the terms of the
permit issued or the terms of the Individual and Semipublic
Water Supply Code of New Jersey (1966): an inspection fee of
$20 shall be charged.
(e) The sum of $40 is hereby fixed as a fee or charge to be
collected by the Department of Health for certification of an
existing individual water supply system, which includes one
§ 135-39 WEST MILFORD CODE § 135-40
122:260
§ 135-41. Water and sewer service.
In accordance with Chapter 394, Water and Sewer Service, the following
charges apply:
Chapter 138
FERTILIZERS, APPLICATION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pesticides — See Ch. 268.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 325.
Soil removal and soil fill — See Ch. 460.
water sample. No certificate shall be issued until such fee or
charge is paid at the time of the application thereof.
(f) For the renewal of a permit to locate and drill or dig a well: a
fee of $55 shall be charged. [Amended 3-26-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-005]
C. In accordance with Chapter 390, Water, Article V, Public Water System
Connection, the fee to connect to a Township-owned and operated
public water supply is $1,200.
A. Water service.
(1) Postbrook Water System. There shall be an annual charge for the
use of water from said water supply system in the amount of $190.
(2) Parkway Water System. There shall be an annual charge for the use
of water from said water supply system in the amount of $200.
(3) Birch Hill Water System. There shall be an annual charge for the
use of water from said water supply system in the amount of $200.
B. Sewer service.
(1) Birch Hill Sewer System. There shall be an annual charge for
sewage service from the said sewer system in the amount of $300.
C. Charge for turn-on. When supply has been cut off for any purpose
except for repairs not chargeable to the consumer, it shall not be turned
on again until all arrears and charges then due, including a service
charge in the amount of $5, shall have been paid.
D. Charges for hookup. The hookup fee for the water systems for the
connection from the main to the structure is $400, and a hookup fee for
the sewer system is $1,000.
§ 135-40 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 138-1
122:261
§ 138-1. Purpose.
The Township of West Milford has determined that the surface water quality
of the lakes and streams within the Township is being negatively affected
by phosphorous loadings in part by fertilizers entering the waterways from
stormwater runoff. The purpose of this chapter is to decrease the amount of
phosphorous in our waterways by limiting the use of fertilizers, especially
the use of fertilizers containing phosphorous within the Township.
§ 138-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL FARM — A farm management unit of no less than five
acres producing agricultural or horticultural products worth $2,500 or
more annually, which has been devoted to such activities for at least two
successive years and which satisfies the criteria for differential property
taxation pursuant to the Farmland Assessment Act of 1964, P.L. 1964 c. 48
(N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq.).
FERTILIZER — Any fertilizer material, mixed fertilizer or any other
substance containing one or more recognized plant nutrients, which is used
for its plant nutrient content, which is designed for use or claimed to have
value in promoting plant growth, and which is sold, offered for sale, or
intended for sale.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. This term shall
be used to include any highway, street, sidewalk, parking lot, driveway, or
other material that prevents infiltration of water into the soil.
PHOSPHOROUS FERTILIZER — Any fertilizer that contains phosphorous,
expressed as P2O5 with a guaranteed analysis of greater than zero; except
that it shall not be considered to include animal (including human) or
vegetable manures, agricultural liming materials or woodashes that have
been amended to increase their nutrient content.
SOILS TEST — A technical analysis of soil conducted by an accredited
soil testing laboratory following the protocol for such a test established by
Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension.
§ 138-3. Prohibited conduct.
A. No person, firm, corporation, franchise or other entity shall do the
following:
(1) Apply phosphorous fertilizer in outdoor areas except as
demonstrated to be needed for the specific soils and target
vegetation in accordance with a soils test and the associated annual
fertilizer recommendation application issued by Rutgers
Cooperative Research and Extension Service.
§ 138-1 WEST MILFORD CODE § 138-3
122:262
§ 138-4. Commercial landscapers; licensure required.
No person, firm, corporation, franchise or entity shall engage the services
of a landscaper or fertilizer applicator to apply fertilizer within West Milford
Township, unless such landscaper or applicator is licensed in accordance
with this chapter.
§ 138-5. Commercial fertilizer application license.
(2) Deposit leaves or other vegetative material on roads or within any
lake or stormwater drainage system.
(3) Apply fertilizer when a runoff-producing rainfall is occurring or
predicted and/or when soils are saturated and a potential for
fertilizer movement off-site exists.
(4) Apply fertilizer to an impervious surface. Fertilizer inadvertently
applied to an impervious surface must be swept or blown back into
the target surface or returned to either its original or another
appropriate container for reuse.
(5) Apply fertilizer more than 15 days prior to the start of or at any
time after the end of the recognized growing season (March 1
through November 15).
B. Exceptions.
(1) Application of phosphorous fertilizer needed for the establishing of
vegetation for the first time, such as after land disturbance,
provided the application is in accordance with the requirements
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39
et seq.
(2) Application of phosphorous fertilizer needed from the
reestablishing or repair of a turf area.
(3) Application of phosphorous fertilizer that delivers liquid or
granular fertilizer under the soil's surface, directly to the feeder
roots.
(4) Application of phosphorous fertilizer to residential container
plantings, flower beds, or vegetable gardens.
C. Buffer zone. Any fertilizer applications shall not be made within 10 feet
of any wetland or body of water, lake, stream, pond, storm drainage
system or watercourse.
A. License required. No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall
engage in the business of fertilizer application within the Township
unless a municipal license has been obtained from the West Milford
Township Department of Health as provided herein.
§ 138-3 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 138-5
122:263
B. Licensing procedure. Applications for a commercial fertilizer applicator
license shall be submitted to the West Milford Township Department of
Health. The application shall consist of the following:
(1) Identification: name, address, telephone number of applicant and
any individuals authorized to represent the applicant, and New
Jersey commercial pesticide application license number (if
licensed).
(2) Fertilizer formula: a copy of the formula for fertilizer mixtures
meeting the limitations of the definition of "phosphorus fertilizer"
in § 138-2 to be applied within the Township shall be submitted,
along with the initial application for a license, and, thereafter, at
least 30 days before fertilizer composition changes are
implemented.
(3) License fee. The license fee for all commercial landscapers and/or
fertilizer applicators shall be as set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and
Costs, which shall be paid annually. The license shall be effective
from January 1 until December 31 of the year in which the license
was applied for. A separate copy of the license will be issued for
each vehicle owned or used by the applicant for an additional fee as
set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs. The license fee shall not
be prorated.
C. Conditions of license. Fertilizer application licenses shall be issued
subject to the following conditions, which shall be specified on the
license form:
(1) Random sampling. Commercial fertilizer applicators shall permit
the Township to sample any commercial fertilizer mixture to be
applied within the Township at any time after issuance of the initial
license. The licensee shall pay the cost of such sampling.
(2) Possession of license. The commercial fertilizer application license
or a copy thereof shall be in the possession of any party employed
by the fertilizer applicator when making fertilizer applications
within the Township.
D. Revocation or suspension of license. All licenses issued under this
section shall be deemed to be granted upon the express condition that,
in addition to any other sanction or penalty, the Health Officer may:
(1) After due notice by personal service or certified mail, and after a
due process hearing before the Township Administrator and Heath
Officer, suspend or revoke the license of any person for violating
any provision of this section.
(2) Suspend temporarily, pending a hearing or notice thereof, any such
license when deemed by the Health Officer to be immediately
necessary to prevent emergent danger to the public welfare. Any
§ 138-5 WEST MILFORD CODE § 138-5
122:264
§ 138-6. Exemptions.
§ 138-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation or franchise violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed
$2,000, imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days or by a period of
community service not to exceed 90 days or by any combination thereof.
Such penalties may be in addition to the revocation or suspension of the
license, as provided in § 138-5D. Each incident or violation (as measured on
a daily basis) shall be considered a separate offense. However, in the case of
a violation that is issued to a property owner who is not required to obtain
a commercial license, a written warning shall be issued for a first offense.
Chapter 141
FILMING
§ 141-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILMING — The taking of still or motion pictures either on film or videotape
or similar recording medium, for commercial or educational purposes
intended for viewing on television, in theaters or for institutional uses. The
provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to include the "filming" of
news stories within the Township of West Milford.
PUBLIC LANDS — Any and every public street, highway, sidewalk, square,
public park or playground or any other public place within the Township
which is within the jurisdiction and control of the Township of West Milford.
§ 141-2. Permit required; application.
such temporary suspension without a hearing shall be for a period
not longer than 20 days.
A. During the initial growing season, newly established turf areas shall be
exempt from the provisions of § 138-3A of this chapter for a period not
to exceed three months.
B. Recreational (public, private and golf course) field owners shall be
exempt from the provisions of § 138-3A of this chapter upon a showing,
through a Township-approved testing procedure, that there is a need
for phosphorus in excess of the limits herein or other demonstrable
necessity.
C. Commercial farms, as defined in this section, shall be exempt from the
provisions of § 138-3A for a period of two years after the enactment of
this chapter.
§ 138-5 FILMING § 141-2
141:265
§ 141-3. Issuance of permits; bond requirement; regulations.
A. No person or organization shall film or permit filming on public
property within the Township of West Milford without first having
obtained a permit from the office of the Township Clerk, which permits
shall set forth the approved location of such filming and the approved
duration of such filming by specific reference to day or dates. Said
permit must be readily available for inspection by Township officials at
all times at the site of the filming.
B. All permits shall be applied for and obtained from the office of the
Township Clerk during normal business hours. Application for such
permits shall be in a form approved by the Township Clerk and be
accompanied by a permit fee in the amount established pursuant to this
chapter in § 141-4 herein.49
C. One permit shall be sufficient to authorize outdoor or indoor filming for
a period not to exceed five days, provided that the maximum number of
permits that may be authorized in any calendar year for premises
located in a residential zone shall not exceed two without a waiver
pursuant to § 141-3 of this chapter.
D. If a permit is issued, and due to inclement weather or other good cause,
filming does not in fact take place on the dates specified, the Township
Clerk may, at the request of the applicant, issue a new permit for
filming on other dates subject to full compliance with all other
provisions of this chapter. No additional fee shall be paid for this
permit.
A. No permits will be issued by the Township Clerk unless applied for prior
to 10 days before the requested shooting date; provided, however, that
the Township Administrator may waive the ten-day period if, in his
judgment, the applicant has obtained all related approvals and adjacent
property owners or tenants do not need to be notified. [Amended
9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
B. No permit shall be issued for filming upon public lands unless the
applicant shall provide the Township with satisfactory proof of the
following:
(1) Proof of insurance coverage as follows:
(a) For bodily injury to any one person in the amount of $500,000
and any occurrence in the aggregate amount of $1,000,000.
(b) For property damage for each occurrence in the aggregate
amount of $300,000.
(2) An agreement, in writing, whereby the applicant agrees to
indemnify and save harmless the Township of West Milford from
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. 135, Fees and Costs, for the current permit fees.
§ 141-2 WEST MILFORD CODE § 141-3
141:266
any and all liability, expense, claim or damages resulting from the
use of public lands.
(3) The posting of a cash bond of $500 or a maintenance bond of
$1,000, running in favor of the Township and protecting and
insuring that the location utilized will be left, after filming, in a
satisfactory condition, free of debris, rubbish and all equipment,
and that due observance of all Township ordinances, laws and
regulations will be followed. Upon the completion of the filming,
the Township will return the bond if there has been no damage to
public property or public expense caused by the filming.
(4) The hiring of an off-duty West Milford police officer for the times
indicated on the permit.
C. The holder of the permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize
interference with the free passage of pedestrians and traffic over public
lands and shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the West
Milford Police Department with respect thereto.
D. The holder of a permit shall conduct filming in such a manner as to
minimize the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property owners
attributable to such filming and shall, to the extent practicable, abate
noise and park vehicles associated with such filming off the public
streets. The holder shall avoid any interference with previously
scheduled activities upon public lands and limit, to the extent possible,
any interference with normal public activity on such public lands.
Where the applicant's production activity, by reason of location or
otherwise, will directly involve and/or affect any businesses, merchants
or residents, these parties shall be given written notice of the filming at
least three days prior to the requested shooting date and be informed
that objections may be filed with the Township Clerk, said objections to
form a part of applicant's application and be considered in the review of
the same. Proof of service of notification to adjacent property owners
shall be submitted to the Township Clerk within two days of the
requested shooting date.
E. Filming in residential zones shall be permitted Monday through Friday
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or sunset, whichever is
earlier, provided that night scenes can be approved in the permit, and
hours can be extended if the police officer on the scene determines that
there is legitimate delay and the time extension will not greatly
inconvenience neighbors.
F. The Township Administrator may refuse to issue a permit whenever he
determines, on the basis of objective facts and after a review of the
application and a report thereon by the Police Department and by other
Township agencies involved with the proposed filming site, that filming
at the location and/or the time set forth in the application would violate
any law or ordinance or would unreasonably interfere with the use and
enjoyment of adjoining properties, unreasonably impede the free flow
§ 141-3 FILMING § 141-3
141:267
of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or otherwise endanger the public's
health, safety or welfare. Further, the Township reserves the right to
require one or more on-site patrolmen in situations where the proposed
production may impede the proper flow of traffic, the cost of said
patrolman to be borne by the applicant as a cost of production. Where
existing electrical power lines are to be utilized by the production, an
on-site licensed electrician may be similarly required if the production
company does not have a licensed electrician on staff. [Amended
9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
G. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Township Administrator
denying or revoking a permit or a person requesting relief pursuant to
Subsection H may appeal to the Township Council. A written notice of
appeal setting forth the reasons for the appeal shall be filed with the
Administrator. An appeal from the decision of the Administrator shall be
filed within 10 days of the Administrator's decision. The Township
Council shall set the matter down for a hearing within 30 days of the
day on which the notice of appeal was filed. The decision of the
Township Council shall be in the form of a resolution supporting the
decision of the Township Council at the first regularly scheduled public
meeting of the Township Council after the hearing on the appeal, unless
the appellant agrees in writing to a later date for the decision. If such a
resolution is not adopted within the time required, the decision of the
Administrator shall be deemed to be reversed, and a permit shall be
issued in conformity with the application, or the relief pursuant to
Subsection H shall be deemed denied. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-6]
H. The Township Council may authorize a waiver of any of the
requirements or limitations of this chapter, and may authorize filming
other than during the hours herein described or may extend the
duration of a permit beyond five days or may permit filming at a
particular location in a residential zone on more than two occasions
during any one calendar year or may waive any other limitation or
requirement of this chapter whenever it determines that strict
compliance with such limitations will pose an unreasonable burden
upon the applicant and that such a permit may be issued without
endangering the public's health, safety and welfare.
I. Copies of the approved permit will be sent to the Police and Fire
Departments before filming takes place and the New Jersey Film
Commission. The applicant shall permit the Fire Prevention Bureau or
other Township inspectors to inspect the site and the equipment to be
used. The applicant shall comply with all safety instructions issued by
the Fire Prevention Bureau or other Township inspectors.
J. In addition to any other fees or costs mentioned in this chapter, the
applicant shall reimburse the Township for any lost revenue, such as
parking meter revenue, repairs to public property or other revenues
that the Township was prevented from earning because of filming.
§ 141-3 WEST MILFORD CODE § 141-4
141:268
§ 141-4. Fees.50
The fees for the issuance of permits authorized by this chapter are set forth
in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs.
§ 141-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-7-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-25; 8-23-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-01251]
Any person violating this chapter or these rules and regulations, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalties imposed in Chapter 1,
Article III, General Penalty, of the Township Code. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
Chapter 146
FIREARM RANGES
§ 146-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREARM RANGES — Any place designed, used or intended to be used for
the discharge of a rifle, pistol, shotgun or other firearm defined in N.J.S.A.
2C:39-1f.[Amended 10-20-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-29]
§ 146-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to open, operate, or maintain, or cause
to be opened, operated or maintained any rifle range, as herein defined,
within the limits of the Township without first having obtained a permit to
do so and without first complying with the standards and regulations herein
stated.
§ 146-3. Application procedure.
In addition to the provisions of § 203-2, the following shall apply:
A. The name and address of the record owner of the real estate upon
which such range is located.
B. The name and address of the person in charge of and responsible for
the maintenance of the range.
C. A description by way of map or sketch of the range, including the lot
and block numbers, as shown on the tax assessment map, upon which
the range is located. The location upon the lot of the range, stating the
distance in feet between the firing points and the furthest targets,
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 141-4 FIREARM RANGES § 146-3
146:269
§ 146-4. Issuance of permit; fee; display of permit. [Amended
3-17-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-7; 4-16-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-6;
6-6-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-19; 5-2-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-01352]
Upon receipt of the application from the Chief of Police with his
endorsement thereon approving the same, and the resolution of the
Township Council authorizing the issuance of the permit, the Township
Clerk shall issue the permit upon the payment of a fee by the applicant
for the range to be licensed. The amount of the permit fee is set forth in
Chapter 135, Fees and Costs. The permit shall be conspicuously exhibited
upon the premises licensed thereunder.
§ 146-5. Regulations; bullet stops; safety precautions.
between the targets and the nearest property line, and between the
firing points and the nearest property line and direction of firing; and
a full and complete description of the plan for construction of the place
for stopping and controlling bullets. The sketch or description shall also
show all houses, barns or other buildings and all streets or highways
within 2,000 feet and in direction of fire of any part of the range and
1,000 feet on either side of the direction of fire.
A. The following shall apply:
(1) No permit shall be issued for any range, unless, in addition to any
other requirements and specifications provided in this chapter,
such range is so constructed and maintained so as to prevent any
shot, bullet or missile going beyond the property line on which the
range is located. [Amended 10-20-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-29]
(2) The applicant shall provide proper bullet stops, which may be
natural slopes, or of such artificial construction so as to insure that
no shot, bullet or missile will go beyond such stops.
(3) No bullet stops shall consist of brick, stone or concrete walls.
(4) Proper stops and wings shall be provided so as to prevent the
ricochet of bullets, shots and missiles.
(5) The applicant shall comply with the specifications of the National
Rifle Association of America, or equivalent, in the construction of
bullet stops, ranges, and adopt its recommendations for safety.
[Amended 10-20-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-29]
B. The failure of the applicant to maintain such bullet stops, or to take the
above precautions, shall subject the applicant to a revocation of the
range permit after due hearing on notice has been held. Each range
shall be under the supervision of qualified persons. The Chief of Police
is authorized to qualify the type of rifle or weapon to be used on a
range, his qualifications to be based on the proper bullet stops and
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 146-3 WEST MILFORD CODE § 146-5
146:270
§ 146-6. Inspection.
The Chief of Police is empowered to make regular inspections of at least
three-month intervals in order to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
Where in his opinion a range is being conducted contrary to the provisions
of this chapter, is not under qualified supervision, and is not conducted
in accordance with the rules and regulations hereof, and such a violation
constitutes a danger to the safety of the public and adjacent property
owners, he shall have the right to direct the discontinuance temporarily of
the use of the range, in which case he shall submit his report in writing
to the Township Council for appropriate action under this chapter. The
Township Council after hearing on due notice to the applicant may revoke
or suspend the permit granted for failure to comply with the terms of the
above section, or any of the rules or regulations relating to the use of the
rifle range.
§ 146-7. Hours and days of operation. [Amended 10-20-1982 by Ord.
No. 1982-29; 1-3-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-2]
No person shall open or operate under this chapter before 9:00 a.m.
prevailing time, on any weekday, or before 10:00 a.m. prevailing time on
Sunday, and not later than 4:00 p.m. during the months of November,
December, January and February, not later than 6:00 p.m. during the
months of March, April, May, September, and October, and not later than
7:00 p.m. during the months of June, July and August. No person shall open
or operate under this chapter on the following holidays: Easter, New Year's
Day and Christmas. During the prohibited hours above listed, no range or
any premises for which a permit has been issued pursuant to the provisions
hereof shall be used for any event wherein shotguns, pistols, revolvers or
other firearms are used; the discharge of any type of weapon on a range
during the prohibited hours shall constitute a violation under this chapter.
§ 146-8. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the members of the Police
Department of the Township, the members of any municipal, county or State
of New Jersey Police Department, detectives of the office of the Prosecutor
of the Police of Passaic County, conservation officers of the State of New
Jersey, or any other person authorized by the statutes of New Jersey to carry
firearms, when firearms shall be used in the performance of their duties.
Any ranges set up by them in the Township shall comply with the safety
regulations as provided for in this chapter.
wings installed, and the safety precautions provided and taken.
[Amended 10-20-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-29]
§ 146-5 FIREARM RANGES § 146-8
146:271
Chapter 151
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 152. Hazardous materials — See Ch. 181.
§ 151-1. Payment of fire insurance proceeds.
No insurance company shall pay any claim in excess of $2,500 for fire
damage on any real property located within the Township of West Milford
pursuant to any fire insurance policy issued or renewed after the adoption
of this chapter and after its filing with the State Commissioner of Insurance,
except as follows:
§ 151-2. Request for official certificate of search.
Any request for an official certificate of search for municipal liens pursuant
to this chapter shall specify that the search concerns fire-damaged property.
§ 151-3. Priority of municipal claim.
The Township's claim made in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter shall be paramount to any other claims on the proceeds of the
fire insurance policy, except as provided in N.J.S.A. 17:36-12, as it may be
amended from time to time.
§ 151-4. Appeals.
In the event that an appeal is taken on the amount of any lien or charge,
other than an appeal based upon the assessed valuation of real property
A. The insured individual or entity submits an official certificate of search
for municipal liens pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-12 certifying that all taxes,
assessments or other municipal liens or charges, levied and assessed
and due and payable against said property, have been paid; and
B. The insured person or entity has submitted a certification
acknowledged by a notary public commissioned in the State of New
Jersey that all demolition costs have been paid or that demolition is not
required; or
C. The Township provides the insurer with a certified resolution pursuant
to which the Township has entered into an agreement with the owner of
the fire-damaged property to pay in full all delinquent taxes,
assessments or other municipal liens by installments pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 for the redemption of any tax sale lien by installment
payments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-65 et seq., or the payment by
installment of any anticipated costs of demolition.
§ 146-8 WEST MILFORD CODE § 151-4
146:272
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:3-21, the insurance company shall comply with the
procedures set forth in N.J.S.A. 17:36-10 as it may be amended from time to
time.
Chapter 152
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 94.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 110.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 151.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 181.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 285.
§ 152-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Fire Prevention Code of the
Township of West Milford" and is herein referred to as the "code."
§ 152-2. Local Enforcement of Uniform Fire Code.
Adoption and local enforcement of the State of New Jersey Uniform Fire
Code:
A. Local enforcement. Pursuant to Section 11 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202) of the
Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383), the New Jersey Uniform Fire
Code shall be locally enforced in the Township of West Milford.
B. Local enforcing agency. The local enforcing agency shall be the Division
of Fire Prevention in the Township of West Milford Department of
Public Safety. The Fire Marshal shall serve as Chief of the Division of
Fire Prevention.
C. Duties. The local enforcement agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire
Safety Act53 and the codes and regulations adopted under it in all
buildings, structures and premises within the established boundaries of
the Township of West Milford, except owner-occupied one- and twofamily
dwellings used exclusively for dwelling purposes, and shall
faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act
and the Uniform Fire Code.54
D. Life hazard uses. The local enforcing agency established by Subsection
B of this section shall carry out the periodic inspections of life hazard
uses required by the Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner
of the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
53.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
54.Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:70 et seq.
§ 151-4 FIREARM RANGES § 152-2
146:273
§ 152-3. Red light display over Division of Fire Suppression
connection.
A red light shall be illuminated 24 hours per day over any Division of
Fire Prevention connection. In such suppression systems that have siamese
connections supply zoned areas of suppression, the red light shall flash
intermittently over the siamese connection of the activated zone. The rate
of flash shall not be less than 60 flashes per minute.
§ 152-4. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement agency shall
have the right to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of Passaic
County.
§ 152-5. Permit and inspection fees.
Permit fees, smoke detector inspection and reinspection fees and annual
inspection fees are set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs.
§ 152-6. Violations and penalties; false alarms; tampering with
equipment.
E. Organization. The local enforcing agency established by Subsection B
of this section shall be under the direct supervision and control of the
Fire Marshal, who shall report to the Director of Public Safety.
F. Legal counsel. The Township Attorney shall provide legal counsel to the
Division of Fire Prevention pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:70 et seq.
A. Penalties and enforcement shall be as provided for in the Uniform Fire
Code.
B. False alarms.
(1) The following penalties shall be assessed for false alarms occurring
within a thirty-day time period:
(a) First two alarms: warning only.
(b) Third alarm: $200.
(c) Fourth alarm: $300.
(d) Fifth through seventh alarm: $400.
(e) Over seven alarms: $1,400.
(2) The failure to pay a penalty assessed under this section within 30
days of the occurrence shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
(3) All penalties collected pursuant to this section shall be placed in
the Division of Fire Prevention trust account.
§ 152-2 WEST MILFORD CODE § 152-6
146:274
§ 152-7. Designation of fire lanes.
§ 152-8. Fire watch.
Whenever a determination is made by the Fire Marshal that an increased
potential of fire, life, or property loss is present at any building, there may
be ordered a protective fire watch to be performed by trained personnel
from the ranks of the Division of Fire Prevention or Fire Department. The
requirement for such watch shall consider the status of occupancy and use,
fire protection equipment, structural damage from fire or accident, and the
potential for fire from all sources. The cost for this watch shall be borne by
the owner of the involved property or the persons responsible for creating
such hazard and shall be paid within 30 days of received written proof of
cost and personnel hours. Uncollected fees are subject to the jurisdiction
of the Township Municipal Court and may be pursued through the Penalty
Collection Act.55
C. Blocking, interfering, tampering with suppression equipment. Blocking
access, interfering, tampering with or causing malicious damage to any
fire alarm, suppression system, fire communications system, fire
detection, first-aid fire-fighting system, device, unit or part thereof shall
result in a mandatory fine of $50 per day per violation. During an actual
alarm, such a violation shall result in a mandatory fine of $200 per day
per violation. Fines shall remain in effect until conditions are deemed
corrected by the Fire Marshal. Failure to comply shall result in an
issued summons to appear in court.
A. Whenever it is deemed necessary for public safety, the Fire Marshal of
the Township of West Milford may order and require the owner or the
owner's agent of any multiple dwelling unit, place of public assembly,
school, shopping center, business establishment, house of worship or
commercial or industrial zoned property to designate as fire zones,
driveways, parking areas or other areas necessary for fire department
access and fire safety. Upon issuing such written order, the Fire
Marshal shall, at the same time, require the owner or the owner's agent
of such premises to provide, erect and maintain metal signs and
markings in paint upon the pavement, designating such location as a
fire zone and that no parking shall be permitted therein. Such metal
signs and markings shall be of a design and quality approved by the
Fire Marshal.
B. No person shall at any time park a vehicle or in any other manner
obstruct any area that has been designated as a fire lane pursuant to an
order issued by the West Milford Division of Fire Prevention. Failure to
abide by this order will result in a fine of $54.
55.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.
§ 152-6 FIREARM RANGES § 152-9
146:275
§ 152-9. Vacant buildings.
Building or tenant areas that are not occupied shall be inspected by the
Division of Fire Prevention. An annual non-life hazard inspection fee may
be assessed on the building or premises based upon the building type and
hazard. Such charges are reflected in § 135-17 of this code.
§ 152-10. Recovery of costs.
§ 152-11. Illegal burning.
A. Costs incurred by the Township of West Milford Fire Department for
items damaged and/or destroyed, and/or used in connection with the
suppressing, control or cleanup of a fire or emergency situation shall be
reimbursed to the Township of West Milford by the property owner or
responsible parties involved.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Township of West
Milford Division of Fire Prevention. Such charges for reimbursements
shall be made at the discretion of the Fire Marshal.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:
CHIMINEA, OUTDOOR FIREPLACE or OUTDOOR FIRE PIT — As
defined by the manufacturers, approved containers for open burning.
FIREWOOD — Trunks and branches of trees and bushes, but does not
include leaves, needles, vines or brush smaller than three inches in
diameter.
NUISANCE — Any odor, emission, or event that prevents the
reasonable use and enjoyment of one's property.
OPEN BURNING — An outdoor fire where wood or any combustible
materials are burned for entertainment. Open burning is allowed at
single-family homes, duplexes and townhomes without a permit,
provided the regulations set forth herein are met.
TREATED LUMBER — Dry wood which has been milled and dried
and has been treated or combined with any petroleum product, glue,
chemical, preservative, adhesive, stain, paint or other substance.
UNTREATED LUMBER — Dry wood which has been milled and dried
but which has not been treated or combined with any petroleum
product, glue, chemical, preservative, adhesive, stain, paint or other
substance.
B. Open burning regulations.
(1) Open burning in approved containers shall be allowed without a
permit at single-family homes, duplexes, townhomes, subject to the
regulations contained herein.
§ 152-9 WEST MILFORD CODE § 152-11
146:276
Chapter 158
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Soil removal and soil fill — See Ch. 460. Zoning — See Ch. 500.
(2) Fires shall be limited to a maximum three-foot diameter and twofoot
height, and must be contained in a noncombustible chiminea,
outdoor fireplace, fire pit or other method, approved by the Fire
Prevention Officer.
(3) All openings in the container or fire pit must be covered with wire
mesh or other screening materials that will prevent the passage of
sparks or embers.
(4) Fires must be kept at least 10 feet from any structure or
combustible exterior wall.
(5) Fires must be constantly attended.
(6) No such fire or container used for open burning may be used on any
porch, deck, balcony or any other portion of a building; within any
room or space; under any building overhang.
(7) The burning of yard waste, leaves, brush, vines, evergreen needles,
branches smaller than three inches in diameter, treated lumber,
garbage, paper products or anything other than firewood as set
forth herein is prohibited.
(8) All open fires as set forth herein shall be extinguished at the
discretion of the Fire Prevention Officer or Police Department.
(9) The Fire Prevention Officer or police officer may order any open
fire, or use of a chiminea, outdoor fireplace or fire pit which creates
a nuisance, to be extinguished.
C. Enforcement.
(1) This section shall be administered by the Division of Fire
Prevention and the Police Department.
(2) Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this section, shall be liable to a fine not exceeding the sum of
$1,250, or to imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both.
§ 152-11 FIREARM RANGES § 152-11
146:277

ARTICLE I
Authorization; Findings; Purposes
§ 158-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the governing body of West Milford Township,
Passaic County, of New Jersey does ordain as follows.
§ 158-2. Findings of fact.
§ 158-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
A. The flood hazard areas of West Milford Township are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood-blight areas;
G. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
§ 158-1 FIREARM RANGES § 158-3
146:279
§ 158-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 158-3 WEST MILFORD CODE § 158-4
146:280
ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 158-5. Definitions. [Amended 2-13-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-002]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Township Zoning Officer's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH Zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map with a one-percent or greater
chance of flooding to an average depth of one foot to three feet, where
a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within an area of special flood
hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the elevated
floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts
and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water; and adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area of special flood
hazard, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill
or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
§ 158-5 FIREARM RANGES § 158-5
146:281
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided in which
the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Insurance Rate Map and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
B. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance
and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power.
The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than 0.2 of a foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
(4)
§ 158-5 WEST MILFORD CODE § 158-5
146:282
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in
violation of other applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the
required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a
"recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into
two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation
adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
START OF CONSTRUCTION —
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; and
(3)
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
(4)
For other than new construction or substantial improvements
under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. No. 97-348), includes
substantial improvements and means the date the building permit
was issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual
(1)
§ 158-5 FIREARM RANGES § 158-5
146:283
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or
a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above the ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair
work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
start" means either the first placement of permanent construction
of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such
as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for
a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the "actual start of construction" means
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part
of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
(2)
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement officer and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
"historic structure."
(2)
§ 158-5 WEST MILFORD CODE § 158-5
146:284
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 158-6. Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Township of West Milford, Passaic County, New Jersey.
§ 158-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 158-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-030]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to the penalties imposed in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, of
the Township Code; and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved
in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township of West
Milford from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation.
§ 158-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of West Milford,
Community No. 340411, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report titled "Flood Insurance Study,
Passaic County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated September
28, 2007.
(2) Flood Insurance Rate Map for Passaic County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as shown on index and panel number(s) 0010, 0015,
0016, 0017, 0018, 0019, 0028, 0030, 0036, 0037, 0038, 0039,
0041, 0042, 0043, 0084, 0092, 0105, 0107, 0110, 0111, 0112,
0116, 0117, 0118, 0119, 0126, 0127, 0128, 0129, 0136, 0138;
whose effective date is September 28, 2007.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at the
Township Clerk's office, 1480 Union Valley Road, West Milford, NJ
07480.
§ 158-6 FIREARM RANGES § 158-9
146:285
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 158-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 158-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free
from flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of West Milford
Township, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 158-9 WEST MILFORD CODE § 158-11
146:286
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 158-12. Establishment of development permit; application.
[Amended 2-13-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-002]
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in § 158-7.
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the Township Zoning Officer and may include, but not be limited to,
plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
§ 158-13. Designation of local administrator.
The Township Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 158-14. Duties and responsibilities of local administrator.
[Amended 2-13-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-002]
A. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any structure has been
floodproofed;
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 158-17G; and
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review. The Zoning Officer shall;
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in a floodway.
(4) Assure that the encroachment provisions of § 158-18A are met.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data have not been provided in accordance with § 158-7,
§ 158-12 FIREARM RANGES § 158-14
146:287
§ 158-15. Variance procedure.
Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the Township
Zoning Officer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or
other source, in order to administer § 158-17F, Specific standards,
residential construction, and § 158-17G, Specific standards,
nonresidential construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained. The Zoning Officer shall:
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 158-12C.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses. The Zoning Officer shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Floodplain Management Section, and
the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. The Zoning Officer shall make
interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual
field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in § 158-15.
A. Appeal board.
(1) The Planning Board as established by the Mayor and Council of the
Township of West Milford shall hear and decide appeals and
requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
§ 158-14 WEST MILFORD CODE § 158-15
146:288
(2) The Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Township Zoning Officer in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of New
Jersey, Law Division, Passaic County as provided for in Court Rule
4:69.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection A(4) and the
purposes of this chapter, the Planning Board may attach such
§ 158-15 FIREARM RANGES § 158-15
146:289
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) The Township Zoning Officer shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or
less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the
items in Subsection A(4) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in Subsection A(4),
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 158-15 WEST MILFORD CODE § 158-15
146:290
ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 158-16. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are required:
§ 158-17. Construction materials and methods.
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
A. Materials; equipment; methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
B. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
C. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
§ 158-16 FIREARM RANGES § 158-17
146:291
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
D. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other covering
or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
E. Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood
elevation data have been provided as set forth in § 158-7, Basis for
establishing areas of special flood hazard, or in § 158-14B, Use of other
base flood and floodway data, the following standards are required.
F. Residential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to or above base flood elevation;
(2) Require within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified). And, require adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
G. Nonresidential construction.
§ 158-17 WEST MILFORD CODE § 158-17
146:292
§ 158-18. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 158-7 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles,
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base
flood elevation; or
(2) Require within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in
feet (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). And, require
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures; or
together with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, shall:
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 158-14C(2).
H. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 158-16A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
§ 158-17 FIREARM RANGES § 158-18
146:293
B. If Subsection A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Article V, Provisions for Flood Hazard
Reduction, of this chapter.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood evaluation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 of a foot at any point.
§ 158-18 WEST MILFORD CODE § 158-18
146:294
Chapter 163
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL
§ 163-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a retail food establishment
as defined in N.J.A.C. 8:24 without obtaining a license from the Health
Department and displaying that license in a conspicuous place within the
establishment.
§ 163-2. Compliance with retail food establishment provisions of
State Sanitary Code.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a retail food establishment
without complying with all the provisions of the retail food establishment
provisions of the State Sanitary Code a as set forth in N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et
seq.
§ 163-3. Fees. [Amended 9-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-1456]
The fees for licenses required under this chapter are included in Chapter
135, Fees and Costs.
§ 163-4. License period; renewal; transferability.
Chapter 169
GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 169-1. Bingo and raffles conducted by certain organizations;
authority of Township Clerk.
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire
annually on June 30 of each year, and application for renewal together
with the required fee shall be submitted prior to June 30 of each year.
B. A certificate or license issued by another health department is not
transferable.
A. Games of chance, commonly known as "bingo" and "raffles," as
provided by the Laws of the State of New Jersey, 1954, Chapters V and
VI,57 may be conducted in the Township, on the first day of the week
commonly known and designated as Sunday, provided the applicant for
the license to conduct such game otherwise qualifies under the
provisions of the aforementioned statutes and the Rules and
Regulations of the Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
57.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq., respectively.
§ 158-18 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL § 169-1
163:295
Chapter 174
GARAGE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctioneers — See Ch. 78.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 263.
Zoning — See Ch. 500.
§ 174-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALES — All sales entitled "garage sale," "lawn sale," "attic sale,"
"rummage sale" or "flea market sale," or any similar casual sale of tangible
personal property which is advertised by any means whereby the public at
large is or can be made aware of the sale.
GOODS — Any goods, warehouse merchandise or other property capable of
being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
§ 174-2. License required. [Amended 3-17-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-7]
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale in the Township,
without first filing with the Township Clerk the information hereinafter
specified and obtaining from the Clerk a license in the form of a garage sale
license sign.
§ 174-3. Limitation on number of licenses; fee; display of license.
[Amended 3-17-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-7; 6-6-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-19]
and, specifically, providing that the organization conducting the games
is a charitable, religious, educational, patriotic, fire company or first aid
organization, or other type of organization specifically qualifying under
the provisions of the aforementioned statutes.
B. The Township Clerk shall issue and approve the granting of bingo and
raffle licenses pursuant to the above-mentioned statutes. Fees shall be
charged in accordance with those established by the State of New
Jersey Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission (LGCCC).
A. No more than two licenses shall be issued to any one person or for
property on which the sale is to be conducted, within a twelve-month
period, and no license shall be issued for more than nine consecutive
calendar days.
B. The fee for a license is set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs. Each
license issued under this section shall be prominently displayed on the
§ 169-1 WEST MILFORD CODE § 174-3
163:296
§ 174-4. Application information. [Amended 3-17-1982 by Ord. No.
1982-7]
The application shall contain the following information:
§ 174-5. Hours of sale.
All sales shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
only, prevailing time.
§ 174-6. Signs. [Amended 3-17-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-7]
§ 174-7. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
premises upon which the garage sale is conducted throughout the
entire period of the licensed sale. [Amended 5-2-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-013; 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030]
A. Name of owner of property on which the sale is to be conducted, and
consent of the owner if the applicant is other than the owner.
B. Number of days of sale.
C. Sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the
information therein given is full and true known to him to be so.
A. All persons are prohibited from making, causing to be made or erecting
signs other than those signs provided by the Township. One sign shall
be provided by the Township and shall constitute the garage sale
license. Additional signs may be purchased from the Township.
B. The signs shall be uniform in size and form and shall have a space
allotted for the name and address of the person running the sale.
C. All signs are to be removed within 48 hours after the completion of the
sale.
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal
property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five in number.
D. Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication or other
communication media who publishes or broadcasts in good faith
without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character or
§ 174-3 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL § 174-7
163:297
§ 174-8. Enforcement; order and decorum.
§ 174-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person conducting any sale or similar activity without being properly
licensed therefor or who shall violate any of the other items and regulations
of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not exceeding $200
or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 10 days for each violation.
Each day that the sale shall continue without being duly licensed shall be
considered a separate violation.
without knowledge that the provisions of this chapter have not been
complied with.
E. Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business
establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would be
permitted by the zoning regulations of the Township, or under the
protection of the nonconforming use section thereof58 or any other sale
conducted by a manufacturer, dealer or vendor and which sale would be
conducted from properly zoned premises and not otherwise prohibited
in the Code of the Township of West Milford.
F. Any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural, or
governmental institution or organization. The burden of establishing
the exemption under this subsection shall be on the organization or
institution claiming such exemption.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Administrator. It shall be
the duty of the Zoning Administrator to investigate any violations of this
chapter coming to his attention, whether by complaint or arising from
his own knowledge, and if a violation is found to exist, he shall
prosecute a complaint before the local Municipal Court pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the Police Department
to bring to the attention of the Zoning Administrator for further
investigation any violations of this chapter of which the Department
becomes aware during the course of its normal duties.
B. The person to whom the license is issued and the owner or tenant of the
premises on which the sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly and
severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum
on the premises during all hours of the sale or activity. No person shall
permit any loud or boisterous conduct on the premises nor permit
vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets in the
area of such premises. All persons shall obey the reasonable orders of
any member of the Police Department or Division of Fire Suppression of
the Township to maintain the public health, safety and welfare.
58.Editor's Note: See Ch. 500, Zoning.
§ 174-7 WEST MILFORD CODE § 174-10
163:298
§ 174-10. Annual Town-wide garage sale. [Added 11-12-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-010; amended 2-15-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-005]
Each year on the third Friday, Saturday and Sunday of September there
shall be a Town-wide garage sale. For the three days of the Town-wide
garage sale the permit, fee and sign requirements contained in this chapter
shall be waived. During such sales all nonproperty owners must obtain
approval from the property owner to participate in the Town-wide garage
sale. All other provisions of the chapter shall prevail during the Town-wide
garage sale.
Chapter 181
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 152.
§ 181-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the replacement and/or
reimbursement of specialized and sometimes disposable equipment
required by state and federal law to be available in the Township of West
Milford in order to clean up a discharge, leak, spill or release of hazardous
materials. This chapter shall also entitle the Township of West Milford to
reimbursement for labor costs incurred in any such cleanup process.
§ 181-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COLLECTING AGENCY — The Township of West Milford.
DISCHARGE — Any intentional or unintentional action or omission resulting
in the releasing, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying
or pumping of hazardous substances into any waters which flow within
the jurisdiction of the Township or any land within the jurisdiction of this
Township or into the waters or land outside the jurisdiction of the Township
when damage may result to the people, lands, waters, or natural resources
within the jurisdiction of the Township.
EXPENDABLE ITEMS — Any items used to extinguish or prevent any
hazardous material or fire or stop or contain any leak, release or spill
involving any hazardous material which cannot be reused or replenished
without cost after that particular incident. These expendable items include,
but are not limited to, fire-fighting foam, chemical extinguishing agents,
absorbent materials, sand, recovery drums, and any protective equipment
and clothing, to include but not be restricted to chemical protective suits,
§ 174-10 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 181-2
181:299
gloves, boots, goggles and any other item owned or controlled by the
Township of West Milford or owned or controlled by any volunteer
organization or other municipal organizations rendering assistance.59
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, solid, liquid or gas, listed as a
hazardous substance or material, including but not necessarily limited to
the NFPA Guide of Hazardous Materials, the Department of Transportation
Guide Book, the list of hazardous substances and toxic pollutants
designated by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to Section
311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendment of 1972, as
amended by the Clean Water Act of 1977 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and
the list of toxic pollutants designated by Congress or the EPA pursuant
to Section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, and hospital
or medical waste, including but not limited to syringes, bandages and
discarded pharmaceutical products and any material warranting removal
or cleanup in the opinion of the West Milford Township Office of the Fire
Official.60
TOWNSHIP — Includes the Township of West Milford's employees, agents,
officers, officials and supporting units as directed by the Township Fire
Official.61
VEHICLE — Any motorized equipment, registered or unregistered,
including but not limited to a passenger car, motorcycle, truck, tractor
trailer, construction equipment, farm machinery, watercraft, aircraft, and
trains.
VESSEL — Any container, drum, box, cylinder, bottle or tank used to hold,
contain, carry or store any hazardous materials, whether or not said
container was manufactured for the containment of hazardous material.
VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATION — Any duly incorporated volunteer fire,
ambulance, first aid, emergency or rescue company or squad.
§ 181-3. Reimbursement of costs to Township.
A. Costs incurred by the Township of West Milford for the following items
in connection with the suppressing, control or cleanup of a fire, leakage
or spillage involving any hazardous materials shall be reimbursed to the
Township of West Milford by the responsible parties as set forth in
§ 5.27.5 below:
(1) The cost of replacement of expendable items.
(2) The expenses incurred by the Township for the wages (regular and/
or overtime) paid to its employees/agents, as a result of a
hazardous material incident.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 181-2 WEST MILFORD CODE § 181-3
181:300
§ 181-4. Discharge prohibited; notice; liability for costs.
(3) Any and all medical costs incurred by responding personnel.
(4) Any and all environmental tests required to ensure a hazard-free
environment (soil-water-air).
(5) A fixed hourly rate for the use of apparatus at incidents computed
at the rate of $100 for use of a ladder truck and $50 for use of any
other vehicles.
(6) Services rendered by any recovery company, towing company or
other technical assistance called for by the Fire Department to
handle such incidents.
B. This article also provides a penalty for the violation of the article for
either committing a spill or for failure to report the same.
A. The discharge of hazardous substances is prohibited within the
Township. This article shall not apply to discharge of hazardous
substances pursuant to and in compliance with the conditions of a
federal or state permit.
B. Any person who may be subject to liability for a discharge or who
becomes aware of a discharge which occurred prior to or after the
effective date of this article shall immediately notify the Township of
West Milford's Fire Official during normal business hours or through
the West Milford Township Police Department after business hours.62
C. Whenever any hazardous substance is discharged, the Township may, in
its discretion, act to remove or arrange for the removal of such
discharge.
D. Any person who has discharged a hazardous substance or who has
failed to report a discharge or who is in any way responsible for any
hazardous substance which has been or shall be removed by the
Township shall be strictly liable, jointly and severally, without regard to
fault, for all cleanup and removal costs and shall be liable for the costs
associated with the use of Township or volunteer organization vehicles,
expendable items and equipment and for the wages (regular and
overtime) paid to Township employees, agents, and servants and those
persons from local municipalities who render nonvolunteer services as
a result of an incident involving a hazardous material fire or leak,
release or spill of a hazardous material and for the costs of medical and
hospital treatment for injuries incurred by agents, servants and
employees of the Township of West Milford as well as those persons
who render voluntary service as part of a volunteer organization and/or
those persons who render nonvoluntary service for the Township of
West Milford as a result of the incident.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 181-3 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 181-5
181:301
§ 181-5. Parties responsible.
Reimbursement to the Township for expendable items used shall be made
by the owner or operator of the vehicle responsible for any hazardous
material fire or leak or spill of hazardous material; the owner or person
responsible for the vessel containing the hazardous material involved in
such fire, leak or spill on public or private property, whether stationary
or in transit and whether accidental or through negligence; the owner
or person responsible for any property from which any leak or spill of
hazardous material emanates, whether accidental or through negligence;
and any person responsible for any hazardous material fire, leak or spill
of hazardous material on public or private property, whether accidental or
through negligence.
§ 181-6. Reimbursement for services.
Any person causing any hazardous material fire or leak, spill or release
involving a hazardous material must provide reimbursement for services
rendered by any recovery company, towing company or any other technical
assistance called for by the Township to handle such incident as expressed
in § 181-3 above. In the event of a vehicle having been responsible for
an incident, such vehicle shall be impounded until such time as it has
been deemed safe to proceed by the responsible official in conjunction
and cooperation with the Township of West Milford and until such time
arrangements have been made to reimburse the Township and the towing
company for their expenditures under the terms of this chapter.
§ 181-7. Period for payment.
The person or entity responsible for any fire, leak or spill of hazardous
materials shall reimburse the Township the full price of expendable items
and costs used to extinguish such fire, or to stop or contain such leak, or
to control such spill, within 30 days after receipt of a bill therefor. In the
event the person or entity responsible does not reimburse the Township
within 30 days, the Township shall have the right to charge interest at the
then applicable rate and to initiate a collection action against such person
or entity, costs of such collection action to be the sole responsibility of
such person or entity. The collections agency shall utilize its best efforts
to collect costs hereunder and shall reimburse its agents or the local units
for amounts collected. In the event that the collection agency is not able to
collect said costs or only a portion thereof, the collection agency shall not be
responsible to its agents or the local units for the full amount of the same.
§ 181-8. Violations and penalties.
The person or entity responsible for any fire, leak or spill of hazardous
material who or which fails to reimburse the Township within the time
required shall be subject to a fine of not less than $300 nor more than
$500 per day or to imprisonment for a period of not more than six months,
or both. The person or entity responsible for committing a spill, or who
§ 181-5 WEST MILFORD CODE § 181-8
181:302
or which fails to report the same, will be liable for the same penalties as
aforesaid stated.
§ 181-9. Enforcement.63
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Township of West
Milford Fire Official, Police Department, Fire Prevention Bureau or any
other official designated by the Mayor and Township Council.
Chapter 188
ICE SLEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles, skates, skateboards and
scooters — See Ch. 84.
Motor-driven and recreational vehicles — See
Ch. 379.
§ 188-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SLED — Any sled, boat or other contrivance which is propelled by motordriven
propellers, and which is used to convey persons on the surface of ice.
§ 188-2. Propeller guards required.
All sled propellers shall be enclosed by a guard of a suitable design to
prevent them from coming in contact with persons who may be in the way
of a sled.
§ 188-3. Propeller guard construction.
Every propeller guard shall have a frame and support of sufficient strength
to resist the weight of a person struck by or thrown against the guard. No
propeller guard shall have an opening at its point or edge greater than two
inches square.
§ 188-4. Automatic shutoff device.
All motors shall have an automatic device in the ignition system, which will
permit the motor to operate only when the operator is at the control of the
sled so that the motor shall shut off automatically when the operator leaves
the control.
Chapter 195
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 181-8 ICE SLEDS § 188-4
188:303
JUNK, JUNKYARDS AND MOTOR VEHICLE JUNKYARDS
§ 195-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNK — Any old or used scrap metal, excluding auto parts, old papers,
old rags, old refrigerators and appliances, old rubber, old glass, used or
secondhand building materials and any other material of similar character
except that toxic materials shall not be considered "junk."
JUNK SHOP or RECYCLING CENTER — Any premises, yard or part thereof
set aside for the purpose of storing, purchasing or selling, repairing,
dismantling, recycling or refacing junk, provided that the terms do not apply
to recycling centers established by the Township for the separation and
collection of designated recyclable materials pursuant to the Mandatory
Recycling Act, P.L. 1987, Ch. 102; provided further that nonprofit civic
organizations need only comply with § 195-7, Regulations. Under no
circumstances shall toxic materials be stored or processed.
MOTOR VEHICLE JUNKYARD — A place where automobiles or other motor
vehicles are kept and dismantled for the purpose of storing, selling or
offering for sale parts or as junk, metal or material.
§ 195-2. License required; term; renewal.
§ 195-3. License fee. [Amended 6-6-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-19;
5-2-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-01364]
The fee for the licenses required by this chapter for the whole or any part
of the license year is included in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs.
§ 195-4. Application for license.
In addition to the information specified in § 203-2 of the Township Code, an
application for a license under this chapter shall include the following:
A. No person shall keep, maintain or operate a motor vehicle junkyard
without obtaining a motor vehicle junkyard license, in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. No person shall keep, maintain or operate
a junk shop or recycling center without a junk shop and recycling
center license, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any person from
holding both licenses.
B. All licenses provided for in this chapter shall expire on October 31 at
12:00 midnight prevailing time. Applications for renewal of licenses
shall be made not later than October 1 prior to the new licensing year.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 188-4 WEST MILFORD CODE § 195-4
195:304
§ 195-5. Investigation of application and premises.
§ 195-6. Issuance of license; limitation on number of licenses.
A. A map of the land and premises drawn at a scale of at least 50 feet per
inch, showing the dimensions thereof and the location of fencing,
buildings, landscaping, access drives, parking, storage areas for the
various types of junk, buffer areas and all other physical aspects of the
operation.
B. Proof of ownership of the licensed premises or proof of a lease covering
the license period.
C. If the applicant is not the owner of the land and premises, the consent
of the owner for the use thereof for the establishment, operation or
maintenance of a motor vehicle junkyard, junk shop or recycling center,
as defined by this chapter, shall be appended to the application.
D. Any other information which the Township Council may deem necessary
and proper for the full protection of the public.
A. Upon receipt of an application for a license under this chapter, the
Township Clerk shall forward copies of the application to the Chief of
Police, Construction Official, Fire Official, Zoning Officer and Health
Officer.
(1) The Chief of Police or his designee shall conduct an investigation of
the proposed licensed premises and of the persons named on the
application to determine the truth of the facts set forth therein.
(2) The Construction Official, Fire Official and Health Officer shall
review the application and inspect the premises to determine
whether the proposed licensed premises complies with existing
state and Township regulations and codes within their respective
jurisdictions.
(3) The Zoning Officer shall inspect said application and map to
determine whether it is in compliance with the Land Development
Ordinance of West Milford Township.65
B. Within a reasonable time, the Chief of Police, Construction Official, Fire
Official, Zoning Officer and Health Officer shall forward a written
report on the application and proposed licensed premises to the
Township Clerk on a form prescribed by the Township Administrator.
The Township Clerk shall present said application and accompanying
reports to the Township Council at its next meeting. [Amended
9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
A. In passing upon an application for a license under this chapter, the
Township Council shall take the following matters into consideration:
65.Editor's Note: See Part III, Land Development Legislation, of the Township Code.
§ 195-4 JUNK, JUNKYARDS AND MOTOR VEHICLE § 195-6
195:305
§ 195-7. Regulations.
The following shall apply except to the extent that any regulation conflicts
with state statute or regulation:
(1) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime or crimes
bearing upon the applicant's qualifications for the maintenance and
operation of a junkyard, junk shop or recycling center.
(2) Whether the maintenance and operation of a junkyard at the
proposed location would be materially injurious to the public
health, morals, comfort, prosperity, convenience or otherwise
detrimental to the general welfare of the surrounding properties or
to the inhabitants of the Township of West Milford.
(3) Whether the maintenance and operation of a junkyard at the
proposed location would produce or be likely to produce a
condition materially offensive to the senses of sight, hearing and
smell and thus injure the public welfare.
(4) Whether the maintenance and operation of a junkyard cannot be
conducted at the proposed location in full compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
B. If any of the aforementioned criteria are answered in the affirmative,
the application shall be denied.
C. Considering the land area and population of the Township, the
availability of other existing junkyards, junk shops and recycling
centers in neighboring communities, the size and potential for nuisance
of such operations, the character of the Township as a predominantly
residential community containing within its borders substantial stateowned
property, including Greenwood Lake, and the regulatory
requirements necessitated by the existence of junkyards, junk shops
and recycling centers in the Township, no more than three motor
vehicle junkyard licenses nor more than three junk shop or recycling
center licenses shall be issued and outstanding at the same time.
D. If, on the basis of the information contained in the application and
reports, the Township Council determines that the applicant and the
proposed licensed premises has complied with the requirements of this
chapter and all other Township ordinances and all applicable state
statutes and regulations, the license shall be granted.
A. No motor vehicle junkyard, junk shop, recycling center or business
thereof shall be located or maintained within 200 feet of a dwelling
house, other than the dwelling located on the licensed premises, or
within 200 feet of a school or church, or within 200 feet of the right-ofway
line of a public road.
B. Every junkyard shall be and remain blocked or screened from the view
of passersby on the public thoroughfares on which the junkyard shall
§ 195-6 WEST MILFORD CODE § 195-7
195:306
abut and from the view of persons on the ground level of adjacent
properties, by a solid fence securely supported, surrounding the portion
of the licensed premises on which the junkyard is conducted, said
fence being no less than 200 feet from any public street, road or other
thoroughfare, of a height of eight feet from the average ground level
of the yard and screened by approved planting of such kind, height,
proximity of planting and density of growth as shall effectively, in
conjunction with the fence, screen the yard in all seasons of the years.
No fence or planting shall be required where a building of one story or
more in height located in, along or near the perimeter of the yard shall
itself furnish, in conjunction with fence or planting, an effective screen.
No fence or planting shall be required where entrances to or exits from
the yard are provided, provided that the entrances and exits shall be
equipped with solid gates of a height of six feet above the adjacent
sidewalk.
C. It shall be unlawful to stack, pile or place motor vehicles, parts of motor
vehicles or any other junk or materials upon such premises in such a
manner as to create a place for the harboring or breeding of mice, rats
or other vermin or to stack, pile or place junk above the height of the
boundary fence surrounding the premises.
D. Entrance and exit gates shall be maintained in good working order and
condition. They and the posts on which they hang shall be painted when
erected and at least every three years thereafter. The gate or gates
shall be securely closed and locked so as to prohibit any entrance to the
said enclosure when the said enclosure may or shall be unattended;
provided, however, that the Division of Fire Suppression must have
access to the junkyard at all times. A key shall be issued to the fire
company responsible for fire protection of that particular site.
E. The granting of a license shall not confer approval of any state statute
or local ordinance, and the applicant shall present proof that such use is
permitted.
F. No material of any explosive nature shall be maintained or stored or
detonated on any premises, except as done in accordance with the
existing regulations of the West Milford Fire Prevention Bureau.
G. No more than one sign shall be permitted, which sign shall be no more
than 25 square feet in dimension.
H. The premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary manner, free
from infestation by rodents or other pests and in a manner which will
not constitute a nuisance to the surrounding properties or to the public
at large and which will not be detrimental to the health, safety and
welfare of the surrounding properties or to the public at large.
I. No junkyard, junk shop or recycling center shall be operated before
7:30 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m., but this section shall not preclude the
departure from the yard between 7:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. of one or
more loaded trucks carting junk from the yard nor the admission into
§ 195-7 JUNK, JUNKYARDS AND MOTOR VEHICLE § 195-7
195:307
§ 195-8. Monitoring wells.
the yard of one or more trucks bringing junk to it between 7:00 p.m.
and 7:30 a.m.; nor shall it preclude the entry into the yard of trucks
owned or controlled by the proprietor, whether loaded or empty, at any
hour of the day, except that they shall not be loaded or unloaded before
7:30 a.m. nor after 7:00 p.m.
J. The licensee and/or operator of said junkyard shall not burn or cause to
be burned any of the junk or refuse resulting from the operation of the
said junkyard, or in the process of dismantling and/or breaking up of
any junk. The licensee and/or operator of said junkyard shall not cause,
or permit to be caused, any obnoxious fumes and/or odors to emanate
from the operation of the said junkyard.
K. Any motor vehicle junkyard, junk shop, recycling center or business
thereof, used for the storage, dismantling, or source-separation of
materials which contain fluids for the operation of motors and/or
engines, shall establish, maintain and utilize a staging area,
constructed of an impervious material, for the collection of said fluids
during any dismantling or source-separation.
L. The licensee shall maintain sufficient fire extinguishers on the licensed
premises at all times, and shall also establish fire protection according
to standards recommended by the National Board of Fire Underwriters
and the Fire Prevention Code of the Township of West Milford66 for such
premises.
M. In the case of motor vehicle junkyards, dismantling of motor vehicles
shall be prohibited on Sundays, but sale of motor vehicle parts shall be
permitted.
N. Any licensee convicted of possession of stolen goods or any crime
bearing upon the licensee's qualifications shall have his license
revoked. No person convicted of possession of stolen goods or a similar
or related crime shall be employed by or be associated with a licensee.
O. All storage areas should have a buffer for purposes of screening around
them of a strip not less than 25 feet wide, consisting of a mixture of
existing vegetation, new plant materials, fences, walls and/or berms.
P. No license issued under this chapter shall be assigned or transferred to
any other person, firm, association, partnership or corporation, or
transferred from one location to another.
A. Monitoring wells, of a type and quality recognized by the N.J.
Department of Environmental Protection, as reliable, shall be required
at all licensed premises within three years of the effective date of this
chapter or upon one of the following events, whichever occurs first:
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. 152, Fire Prevention.
§ 195-7 WEST MILFORD CODE § 195-8
195:308
§ 195-9. Inspection of premises; revocation of license.
Chapter 203
LICENSING, GENERAL
§ 203-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a uniform set of procedures for
administering the issuance, renewal and revocation of all licenses issued
by the municipality, except alcoholic beverage licenses, dog licenses, and
taxicab licenses.
§ 203-2. Applications and application fee.
All applications for licenses shall be accompanied by the required fee
and shall be made upon forms provided, and shall contain the following
information:
(1) Transfer of the license from person to person;
(2) Transfer of the license from place to place or an expansion of
property;
(3) Within 90 days after a transfer of a majority of stock of a licensed
corporation.
B. All monitoring wells shall be sampled, by an independent professional
hydrologist or other person approved by the State Department of
Environmental Protection to test wells, within 90 days of each license
renewal and a status report shall be submitted to the Health
Department of the Township at least 30 days prior to the date of license
renewal for review and comment thereon.
A. Any and all Township departments shall be hereby authorized and
directed, during reasonable business hours, to make no less than an
annual inspection of all licensed premises and buildings for the purpose
of ascertaining that the business is being conducted on the licensed
premises in accordance with the provisions hereof, and that no laws,
rules and regulations are violated. Every Township department shall
submit a written report on its annual inspection to the Township
Administrator. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
B. Any violation of applicable statutes, codes, regulations, Township
ordinances or regulations herein stated shall constitute sufficient
grounds for revoking and removing said license by the Township
Council, in accordance with the provisions of §§ 203-9, 203-10 and
203-11 of the Township Code.
A. Name and permanent and local address of the applicant. If the
applicant is a corporation, the name and address of its registered agent.
§ 195-8 LICENSING, GENERAL § 203-2
203:309
§ 203-3. Investigation of applicants. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-6]
Each application shall be referred to the Chief of Police or a police officer
designated by him, who shall immediately institute whatever investigation
of the applicant's business responsibility, moral character and ability to
properly conduct the licensed activity as he considers necessary for the
protection of the public. He shall communicate his findings in writing
to the department issuing the license within a reasonable time after the
application has been filed. If the investigator decides that the applicant's
character, ability or business responsibility are unsatisfactory, or the
products, services or activity are not free from fraud, he shall disapprove
of the application in writing, with appropriate explanatory remarks, and the
B. If the licensed activity is to be carried on at a fixed location, the address
and description of the premises.
C. If a vehicle is to be used, its description, including the license number.
D. If the applicant is employed by another, the name and address of the
employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship.
E. The days of the week and the hours of the day during which the licensed
activity will be conducted.
F. A description of the nature of the business and the goods, property or
services to be sold or supplied.
G. A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime or the violation of any municipal ordinance other than traffic
offenses and, if so, the date and place of conviction, the nature of the
offense, and the punishment or penalty imposed.
H. Appropriate evidence as to the good character and business
responsibility of the applicant so that an investigator may properly
evaluate his character and responsibility.
I. The applicant shall be fingerprinted if the Chief of Police determines
that fingerprints are necessary for proper identification. Fingerprint
records shall be immediately processed for classification and
identification.
J. Applications by partnerships shall be signed by all partners with the
information required by this section supplied in detail as to each
partner, and applications of corporations shall have attached individual
statements containing all of the information required by this section
relating to each employee or agent who shall engage in the licensed
activity, and shall be signed by each employee or agent.
K. Two photographs, not over one year old, showing applicant's face, front
and profile, of a minimum size of two inches by two inches. The
photographs shall be affixed to the application.
§ 203-2 WEST MILFORD CODE § 203-3
203:310
department shall refuse to issue the license and shall so notify the applicant.
In the case of an application for a solicitor's, peddler's, or canvasser's
license, the license may be issued immediately subject to the investigation.
In the event of the refusal of the issuance of a license, the applicant
may appeal to the Administrator for hearing. The appeal must be filed,
in writing, with the Administrator within 14 days after notification of the
refusal. The Administrator shall hold its hearing within 10 days thereafter.
The decision of the Administrator shall be final.
§ 203-4. Contents of license.
Licenses shall be in a form which the Council shall prescribe by resolution,
and shall contain the following information:
§ 203-5. License record.
The issuing department shall keep a record of all licenses issued under this
chapter. The record shall contain the same information as is required by
§ 203-4 to be contained in the license. It shall also indicate the amount of
the fee paid for the licenses, the date upon which payment was received, the
date of the issuance of the license, and whether the license is a new license
or a renewal.
§ 203-6. Display of license.
When the licensed activity is conducted at a fixed location, or from a vehicle,
the license shall be prominently displayed at the location or on the vehicle.
In all other cases the licensee shall have the license in his possession at
all times and shall display it upon the request of any police officer or any
person with whom he is doing business.
A. The name and address of the licensee.
B. The number and type of the license and the nature of the licensed
activity.
C. The address at which the licensed activity is conducted, if the activity is
carried on at a fixed location.
D. If the licensed activity is conducted from a vehicle, the make, model and
license number of the vehicle.
E. The expiration date of the license.
F. Any other appropriate information which the Mayor and Council may,
by resolution, require.
§ 203-3 LICENSING, GENERAL § 203-7
203:311
§ 203-7. Transferability.67
Every license shall apply only to the person to whom it was issued and shall
not be transferable to another person. Licenses may be transferred from
place to place, in cases where the licensed activity is conducted at a fixed
location, but only with the approval, by resolution, of the Council. The fee
for the transfer of a license from place to place is set forth in Chapter 135,
Fees and Costs.
§ 203-8. Expiration date; renewal; proration of fees.
§ 203-9. Revocation of license or permit; causes. [Amended
9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
Any license or permit issued by the Township may be revoked by the
Administrator after notice and a hearing for any of the following causes:
§ 203-10. Notice of revocation hearing.
Notice of a hearing for the revocation of a license or permit shall be given
in writing by the issuing department. The notice shall specifically set forth
A. Except where expressly provided otherwise, all licenses shall expire on
December 31 of the year of issue at 12:00 midnight local time.
Applications for the renewal of licenses shall be made not later than
December 1 of the year of issue.
B. When an application for a license is made during the course of any
calendar year, the fee shall be prorated to the nearest month. Any
period of time greater than 1/2 of a month shall be considered as a full
month for this purpose.
A. Fraud or misrepresentation in any application for a permit or license.
B. Fraud, misrepresentation or other dishonesty in the conduct of the
licensed activity.
C. A violation of any provision of the Township Code.
D. Conviction of the licensee for any felony or high misdemeanor or a
misdemeanor or disorderly person's offense involving moral turpitude.
E. Conduct of the licensed activity whether by the licensee himself or his
agents or employees in an unlawful manner or in a manner that
constitutes a breach of the peace or a menace to the public health,
safety or general welfare.
F. Whenever a license has been issued immediately upon an application,
pending the results of the investigation provided for by this chapter, the
license may be summarily revoked if the result of the investigation
would have resulted in denial of the application.
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 203-7 WEST MILFORD CODE § 203-10
203:312
the grounds upon which the proposed revocation is based and the time and
place of the hearing. It shall be served by mailing a copy to the licensee at
his last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least
five days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 203-11. Hearing; determination.
At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to appear and be heard, to
be represented by an attorney, to present witnesses in his own behalf, to
cross-examine opposing witnesses and to have a permanent record made of
the proceedings at his own expense. The Council shall revoke or suspend
the license if it is satisfied by a preponderance of the evidence that the
licensee is guilty of the acts charged.
§ 203-12. Reinstatement of revoked licenses.
The Council may issue another license to a person whose license has been
revoked or denied as provided in this chapter if after hearing it is satisfied
by clear and convincing evidence that the acts which led to the revocation
or denial will not occur again; otherwise, no person whose license has been
revoked or denied, nor any person acting for him, directly or indirectly, shall
be issued another license to carry on the same activity.
§ 203-13. Power to make rules and regulations.
The Council may, by resolution, make rules and regulations which interpret
or amplify any provision of this chapter or for the purpose of administering
the provisions of this chapter or making them more effective. No regulation
shall be inconsistent with or alter or amend any provision of this chapter,
and no regulation shall impose any requirement which is in addition to or
greater than the requirements that are expressly or by implication imposed
by any provision of this chapter.
Chapter 208
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 230.
Unsolicited printed matter — See Ch. 279.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 285.
Solid waste; recycling — See Ch. 321.
§ 208-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
§ 203-10 LITTERING § 208-1
208:313
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof,
including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap, or
detachable tab of any bottle, jar, or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming or manufacturing.[Amended 10-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-19]
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of
litter.[Added 10-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-19]
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.[Added 9-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-15]
PUBLIC PLACE — All streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public
ways, and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial waste.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible wastes, consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard,
tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar
materials.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transferred or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively on stationary rails or tracks.
§ 208-2. General prohibitions. [Amended 10-18-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-19]
A. Littering prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop,
discard or otherwise place any litter of any nature upon public or
private property other than in a litter receptacle, or having done so, to
allow such litter to remain. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded
or allowed to fall from a vehicle or boat in violation of this chapter, the
operator or owner, or both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be
deemed to have violated this chapter. [Amended 9-21-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-15]
B. Illegal dumping. [Amended 10-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-22]
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, regardless of intent, to engage
or be permitted to engage in the disposal of solid waste in excess of
0.148 cubic yards of solids or 30 United States gallons of liquid,
whether for profit or otherwise.
§ 208-1 WEST MILFORD CODE § 208-2
208:314
§ 208-3. Use of litter receptacles; placing litter in receptacles.
[Amended 10-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-19]
(2) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this subsection of the
Township's Code, any person who is convicted of this specific
subsection shall be subject to a fine of not less than $2,500 for a
first offense, not more than $5,000 for a second offense and not
more than $10,000 for a third and every subsequent offense. In
addition, the individual convicted of such violation must make
restitution in the form of reimbursement to the Township for all
costs and expenses incurred from the storage and/or disposal of
such materials that are to be legally disposed. Each day during
which the violation continues constitutes an additional, separate
and distinct offense.
(3) This subsection shall not apply in the instance where solid waste is
disposed at a solid waste facility or a disposal site which has
authorization from the appropriate state regulatory agency having
jurisdiction over solid waste management to accept solid waste for
disposal.
(4) The provisions of this subsection may be enforced by a police
officer of the municipality, a representative of the Township Health
Department, and or the Department of Public Works and
Engineering.
C. Open or overflowing waste disposal bins. It shall be unlawful for any
residential or commercial property owner to permit open or
overflowing waste disposal bins on his or her property.
D. Uncovered vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any vehicles to be driven,
moved, stopped or parked on any highway unless such a vehicle is
constructed or loaded to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting,
leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom. Any person operating a
vehicle from which any glass or objects have fallen or escaped, which
could cause an obstruction, damage a vehicle, or otherwise endanger
travelers or public property, shall immediately cause the public
property to be cleaned of all glass or objects and shall pay the costs
therefor.
E. Additional prohibitions in residential districts. In residentially zoned
areas, it shall be unlawful:
(1) To store any bulky household items, such as appliances, furniture
or mattresses, except in a fully enclosed structure or during days
designated for the collection of bulky items; and
(2) To store tires, except in a fully enclosed structure.
A. Litter receptacles and their servicing are required at the following
public places which exist in the Township: sidewalks used by
pedestrians in active retail commercially zoned areas, such that at a
§ 208-2 LITTERING § 208-3
208:315
§ 208-4. Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited; containerization of
sweepings. [Amended 10-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-19]
No person, including merchants owning or occupying a place of business,
shall sweep into or deposit in a gutter, road, right-of-way or other public
place within the Township the accumulation of litter from a building or
lot or from a public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalk and drainage swale in front
of their premises free of litter, including leaves. This shall not apply to
placement of leaves when duly authorized. All sweepings shall be collected
and properly containerized for disposal.
§ 208-5. Transportation from outside Township.
No person shall bring, cart, remove, transport or collect any litter from
outside the Township and bring it into the Township for the purpose of
dumping or disposing thereof. No truck or other vehicle containing litter in
the Township shall be parked or allowed to remain standing on any street in
the Township or on any public or private property.
§ 208-6. Handbills.68
Advertisements, handbills, circulars and papers may be distributed in the
Township only if they are so securely placed at each dwelling that they
will not be blown away by the wind; otherwise no person shall place any
advertisement, handbill, circular or paper on or in any public street,
sidewalk, building or vehicle within the Township.
minimum there shall be no single linear quarter-mile without a
receptacle; buildings held out for use by the public, including schools,
government buildings, and railroad and bus stations; parks; drive-in
restaurants; all street vendor locations; self-service refreshment areas;
construction sites; gasoline service station islands; shopping centers;
parking lots; campgrounds and trailer parks; marinas, boat moorage
and fueling stations, boat launching areas; public and private piers
operated for public use; beaches and bathing areas; and at special
events to which the public is invited, including sporting events,
parades, carnivals, circuses, and festivals. The proprietors of these
places or the sponsors of these events shall be responsible for providing
and servicing the receptacles such that adequate containerization is
available.
B. Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in a manner which prevents the litter from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon a public place or upon
private property.
68.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 285, Printed Matter, Unsolicited.
§ 208-3 WEST MILFORD CODE § 208-7
208:316
§ 208-7. Construction sites. [Added 10-18-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-19; amended 7-5-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-24]
§ 208-8. Commercial establishments and residences. [Added
10-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-19]
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in
charge of any structure to keep and cause to be kept the sidewalk and curb
abutting the building or structure free from obstruction or nuisances of
every kind, and to keep sidewalks, areaways, backyards, courts and alleys
free from litter and other offensive material.
§ 208-9. Abatement by Township; recovery of costs. [Added
10-18-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-19]
In the event that the owner or possessor of private property or lands shall
refuse or neglect to abate or remedy the condition which constitutes a
violation of § 208-2C, 208-4, 208-7 or 208-8, the Township may cause the
condition to be abated and remedied. Upon the removal of any materials
prohibited to be stored or abandoned on lands by this chapter by or under
the direction of an appointed officer or officers of this jurisdiction, in cases
where the owner or tenant shall have refused or neglected to remove same
in manner and within five days of receiving a notice of violation, such officer
shall examine the certificate, and if found correct shall cause the cost as
shown thereon to be charged against said lands, and same will be added to
and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon
said lands. The same shall bear interest at the same rate as taxes and shall
be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same manner as
taxes.
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, or contractor in charge of a
construction or demolition site to permit the accumulation of litter
before, during, or after completion of any construction or demolition
project. It shall be the duty of the owner, agent, or contractor in charge
of a construction site to furnish containers adequate to accommodate
flyable or nonflyable debris or trash at areas convenient to construction
areas, and to maintain and empty the receptacles in such a manner and
with such a frequency as to prevent spillage of refuse.
B. It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or contractor in charge of a
construction or demolition site to dispose of construction site debris
without obtaining a receipt from an approved solid waste disposal
company or facility and presenting said receipt to the Township. The
Township Construction Official may grant an exception to this
requirement for small jobs, the debris from which can be disposed of by
regular garbage collection.
§ 208-7 LITTERING § 208-10
208:317
§ 208-10. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-18-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-19; amended 7-5-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-24]
In addition to the remedies provided in § 208-9, any person who violates any
provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to:
§ 208-11. Reward. [Added 7-5-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-24]
A reward of between $100 and $1,000 may be paid to any person or persons
providing information leading to the detection and apprehension of any
person found guilty of violating this chapter. The reward is payable after
conviction out of a fund established for this purpose, but no such reward
may be paid to any public employee whose duty it is to investigate or to
enforce the law. The Health Officer is authorized to award the reward with
the consent of the Township Council.
§ 208-12. Enforcement. [Added 9-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-15]
All police officers of the Township, regular and special, and the Health
Officer or his/her duly authorized designee, are hereby given full power and
authority and are charged with the duty to enforce all provisions of this
chapter.
Chapter 212
(RESERVED)
Chapter 220
MUNICIPAL BUILDING AND GROUNDS, USE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tobacco use in public buildings, parks and
recreation facilities — See Ch. 357.
§ 220-1. Permit required.
No group or individual shall use the Township Municipal Building or its
grounds for any nonofficially sanctioned event or use, nor shall any group or
individual place any monuments, signs, or other materials in the Municipal
A. A fine not less than $100 nor exceeding $2,000. [Amended 12-7-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-25; 8-23-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-012]
B. In addition to the fine, the court in its discretion may impose:
(1) A term of imprisonment not exceeding 90 days.
(2) Performance of community service not exceeding 90 days.
§ 208-10 WEST MILFORD CODE § 220-1
220:318
Building or the Municipal Building grounds without having obtained a
permit as hereinafter provided.
§ 220-2. Application for nonofficially sanctioned event.
Anyone wishing to occupy or assemble with others on municipal grounds
for any purpose or event other than an event officially sanctioned by the
Township of West Milford shall submit an application requesting permission
for such use. Application for such a proposed purpose shall contain the
reason for the proposed use, the number of individuals expected, and the
date and time of the proposed use.
§ 220-3. Application for placement of monument or sign.
Anyone wishing to alter or make improvements to any portion of the
Township Municipal Building or the Municipal Building property shall
submit an application describing in sufficient detail for the meaningful
evaluation of the requested use the proposed alterations and improvements.
§ 220-4. Procedure for application. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-6]
A. All applications for the use of the Municipal Building or the Municipal
Building grounds shall be submitted at least 10 working days prior to
the date of the proposed use to the Township Administrator who shall
process the application.
B. The Township Administrator may grant approval where the proposed
use is unlikely to result in either:
(1) Damage or loss of value to Township property or inconvenience the
public or municipal officials or employees; or
(2) An addition to or alteration of the grounds such as plantings, signs,
or structures.
C. Those applications not granted approval by the Township Administrator
shall be referred to the governing body.
D. The governing body may refer any application referred to it to any one
or more Township agencies, offices, boards, or advisory committees,
including the beautification/recycling program task force committee for
its recommendation prior to acting on the application.
E. Approvals by either the Township Administrator or the governing body
shall be conditioned upon the posting of an insurance policy adequately
protecting the Township or deposit of escrow monies to reasonably
cover all or a portion of the Township's expenses directly attributable to
the applicant's requested use.
§ 220-1 MUNICIPAL BUILDING AND GROUNDS, USE § 220-5
220:319
§ 220-5. Fee.69
The fee for a permit to use the Municipal Building or the Municipal Building
grounds as described in this chapter is set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and
Costs.
§ 220-6. Violations and penalties.
Anyone who fails to obtain a permit for his or her use of the Municipal
Building or Municipal Building grounds is subject to a fine not to exceed
$500, together with a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days.
Chapter 226
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise from animals — See Ch. 71.
Nuisances — See Ch. 230.
Noise in parks, recreation areas and open
spaces — See Ch. 256.
Noise from peddlers and solicitors — See Ch.
263.
Mufflers on boats and other motor-driven
vehicles — See Ch. 379, Art. I.
§ 226-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms
not defined in this chapter have the same meanings as those defined in
N.J.A.C. 7:29.
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action, including demolition of buildings or structures.
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, destruction or removal of buildings,
structures, or roadways.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work or action necessary to deliver essential
public services, including, but not limited to, repairing water, gas,
electricity, telephone, sewer facilities, or public transportation facilities,
removing fallen trees on public rights-of-way, dredging navigational
waterways, or abating life-threatening conditions.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Either a single pressure peak or a single burst
(multiple pressure peaks) that has a duration of less than one second.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is propelled other than by human or
animal power on land.
69.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 220-5 WEST MILFORD CODE § 226-1
220:320
MUFFLER — A properly functioning sound-dissipative device or system for
abating the sound of escaping gasses on equipment where such a device is
part of the normal configuration of the equipment.
MULTI-DWELLING-UNIT BUILDING — Any building comprising two or
more dwelling units, including, but not limited to, apartments,
condominiums, co-ops, multiple-family houses, townhouses, and attached
residences.
MULTI-USE PROPERTY — Any distinct parcel of land that is used for more
than one category of activity. Examples include, but are not limited to:
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER — An employee of:
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound that can be detected by a person using
his or her unaided hearing faculties. As an example, if the sound source
under investigation is a portable or personal vehicular sound amplification
or reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic bass component of the
music is sufficient to verify plainly audible sound. The noise control officer
need not determine the title, specific words, or the artist performing the
song.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
nongovernmental entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are owned,
leased, or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Either:
A commercial, residential, industrial or public service property having
boilers, incinerators, elevators, automatic garage doors, air
conditioners, laundry rooms, utility provisions, or health and
recreational facilities, or other similar devices or areas, either in the
interior or on the exterior of the building, which may be a source of
elevated sound levels at another category on the same distinct parcel
of land; or
A.
A building which is both commercial (usually on the ground floor) and
residential property located above, behind, below or adjacent.
B.
A local, county or regional health agency which is certified pursuant
to the County Environmental Health Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.) to
perform noise enforcement activities; or
A.
A municipality with a Department-approved noise control ordinance
and the employee has received noise enforcement training and is
currently certified in noise enforcement. The employee must be acting
within his or her designated jurisdiction and must be authorized to
issue a summons in order to be considered a noise control officer.
B.
§ 226-1 MUNICIPAL BUILDING AND GROUNDS, USE § 226-1
220:321
WEEKDAY — Any day that is not a federal holiday, and beginning on Monday
at 7:00 a.m. and ending on the following Friday at 6:00 p.m.
WEEKEND — Beginning on Friday at 6:00 p.m. and ending on the following
Monday at 7:00 a.m.
§ 226-2. Applicability.
The imaginary line including its vertical extension that separates one
parcel of real property from another;
A.
The vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is part of
a multi-dwelling-unit building; or
B.
On a multi-use property, the interface between the two portions of the
property on which different categories of activity are being performed
(e.g., if the multi-use property is a building which is residential upstairs
and commercial downstairs, then the "real property line" would be the
interface between the residential area and the commercial area).
C.
A. This chapter applies to sound from the following property categories:
(1) Industrial facilities;
(2) Commercial facilities;
(3) Public service facilities;
(4) Community service facilities;
(5) Residential properties;
(6) Multi-use properties;
(7) Public and private rights-of-way;
(8) Public spaces; and
(9) Multi-dwelling-unit buildings.
B. This chapter applies to sound received at the following property
categories:
(1) Commercial facilities;
(2) Public service facilities;
(3) Community service facilities;
(4) Residential properties;
(5) Multi-use properties; and
(6) Multi-dwelling-unit buildings.
C. Sound from stationary emergency signaling devices shall be regulated
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.4, except that the testing of the
§ 226-1 WEST MILFORD CODE § 226-2
220:322
§ 226-3. Declaration of findings and policy.
§ 226-4. Noise control officers.
electromechanical functioning of a stationary emergency signaling
device shall not meet or exceed 10 seconds. [Amended 2-17-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-001]
A. Whereas excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health,
welfare, safety, and the quality of life; and whereas a substantial body of
science and technology exists by which excessive sound may be
substantially abated; and whereas the people have a right to, and
should be ensured of, an environment free from excessive sound;
B. Now therefore, it is the policy of Township of West Milford to prevent
excessive sound that may jeopardize the health, welfare, or safety of the
citizens or degrade the quality of life.
C. This chapter shall apply to the control of sound originating from
sources within the Township of West Milford.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by noise control
officers. A person shall be qualified to be a noise control officer if the
person meets the criteria set forth in the definition above and
completes, at a frequency specified by the Department in N.J.A.C.
7:29-2.11, a noise certification and recertification course which are
offered by the Department of Environmental Sciences of Cook College,
Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey or any other noise
certification or recertification course which is offered by an accredited
university and approved by the Department.
B. Sound measurements made by a noise control officer shall conform to
the procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-2, except that interior sound
level measurements shall also conform to the procedures set forth in
§ 226-5B and C of this chapter and with the definition of "real property
line" as contained herein.
C. Noise control officers shall have the power to:
(1) Coordinate the noise control activities of all departments in
Township of West Milford and cooperate with all other public
bodies and agencies to the extent practicable;
(2) Review the actions of Township of West Milford and advise of the
effect, if any, of such actions on noise control;
(3) Review public and private projects, subject to mandatory review or
approval by other departments or boards, for compliance with this
chapter;
(4) Investigate and pursue possible violations of this chapter for sound
levels which equal or exceed the sound levels set forth in Tables I
§ 226-2 MUNICIPAL BUILDING AND GROUNDS, USE § 226-4
220:323
§ 226-5. Maximum permissible sound levels.
§ 226-6. Restricted uses and activities.
and II,70 when measured at a receiving property located within the
designated jurisdiction of the noise control officer, in accordance
with § 226-7 below; and
(5) Cooperate with noise control officers of adjacent municipalities in
enforcing one another's municipal noise ordinances.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any
source of sound on any source property listed in § 226-2A above in such
a manner as to create a sound level that equals or exceeds the sound
level limits set forth in Tables I and II when measured at or within the
real property line of any of the receiving properties listed in Tables I
and II, except as specified in Subsection B below.
B. When measuring total sound or residual sound within a multi-use
property, or within a residential unit when the property line between it
and the source property is a common wall, all exterior doors and
windows shall be closed and the measurements shall be taken in the
center of the room most affected by the noise. Residual sound shall be
measured in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.9(b)2. When measuring
total sound or residual sound, all sound sources within the dwelling unit
must be shut off (e.g., television, stereo). Measurements shall not be
taken in areas which receive only casual use such as hallways, closets
and bathrooms.
C. Indoor measurements shall only be taken if the sound source is on or
within the same property as the receiving property, as in the case of a
multi-use property (e.g., sound generated within a commercial unit of a
multi-use property building and received within a residential unit of the
same building) or multi-dwelling-unit building. In addition, indoor
measurements shall be taken if the property line between the receiving
property and the source property is a common wall, such as in a multidwelling-
unit building. The allowable sound level standards for indoors
are as shown in Tables I and II.71
D. Impulsive sound. Between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., impulsive sound
shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels. Between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., impulsive sound which occurs less than four times in any hour
shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels. Impulsive sound which repeats
four or more times in any hour shall be measured as impulsive sound
and shall meet the requirements as shown in Table I.
70.Editor's Note: Tables I and II are located at the end of this chapter.
71.Editor's Note: Tables I and II are located at the end of this chapter.
§ 226-4 WEST MILFORD CODE § 226-6
220:324
A. Except as provided in Subsection C below, the provisions of this chapter
shall not apply to the exceptions listed at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.5. [Amended
2-17-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-001]
B. Construction and demolition activities are exempt from the sound level
limits set forth in Tables I and II, except as provided for in Subsection C
below.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of Tables I and II, the following
standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set forth
below:
(1) Noncommercial or nonindustrial power tools and landscaping and
yard maintenance equipment shall not be operated between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., unless such activities can meet
the applicable limits set forth in Tables I and II. All motorized
equipment used in these activities shall be operated with a muffler.
At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply
to noncommercial or nonindustrial power tools and landscaping
and yard maintenance equipment.
(2) Commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment, excluding emergency work, shall not be
operated on a residential property or within 250 feet of a
residential property line when operated on commercial or
industrial property, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
on weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
weekends or federal holidays, unless such activities can meet the
limits set forth in Tables I and II. In addition, commercial or
industrial power tools and landscaping and yard maintenance
equipment, excluding emergency work, utilized on commercial or
industrial property shall meet the limits set forth in Tables I and II
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. All motorized
equipment used in these activities shall be operated with a muffler.
At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply
to commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment.
(3) Construction and demolition activity, excluding emergency work,
shall not be performed between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
on weekends and federal holidays, unless such activities can meet
the limits set forth in Tables I and II. All motorized equipment used
in construction and demolition activity shall be operated with a
muffler. At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do
not apply to construction and demolition activities.
(4) Motorized snowblowers, snow throwers, and lawn equipment with
attached snow plows shall be operated at all times with a muffler.
§ 226-6 MUNICIPAL BUILDING AND GROUNDS, USE § 226-6
220:325
§ 226-7. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(5) An exterior burglar alarm of a building or motor vehicle must be
activated in such a manner that the burglar alarm terminates its
operation within five minutes for continuous airborne sound and 15
minutes for impulsive sound after it has been activated.
(6) Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or
reproduction equipment shall not be operated in such a manner
that it is plainly audible at a residential property line between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(7) Personal vehicular music amplification equipment shall not be
operated in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of
50 feet in any direction from the operator between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(8) Self-contained, portable, hand-held music or sound amplification or
reproduction equipment shall not be operated on a public space or
public right-of-way in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a
distance of 50 feet in any direction from the operator between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m., sound from such equipment shall not be plainly
audible by any person other than the operator;
(9) Sound levels exceeding the limits set forth in Table I and Table II
shall be prohibited between residential units within the same multidwelling-
unit building. Measurements shall be taken indoors as per
§ 226-5B and C.
A. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be cause for an
enforcement document to be issued to the violator by the Township
police officer or the noise control officer according to procedures set
forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.7. The recipient of an enforcement document
shall be entitled to a hearing in Municipal Court having jurisdiction to
contest such action. [Amended 2-17-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-001]
B. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a civil penalty for each offense of not more than $2,000. If the violation
is of a continuing nature, each day during which it occurs shall
constitute an additional, separate, and distinct offense. [Amended
2-18-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-001]
C. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to impair any common
law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any
person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or
from other law.
§ 226-6 WEST MILFORD CODE § 226-7
220:326
Chapter 230
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution — See Ch. 57.
Animals — See Ch. 71.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 94.
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 163.
Littering — See Ch. 208.
Noise — See Ch. 226.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 285.
§ 226-7 NUISANCES § 226-7
230:327

ARTICLE I
Abatement of Nuisances
[Adopted as Sec. 19-1 of the 1976 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 230-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FOOD — Natural or prepared food, beverages and all other items intended
for human consumption.
OWNER — Any person having any interest, legal or equitable, either alone
or in combination with others, in any premises.
PERSON IN CONTROL OF PREMISES — Any person responsible for the
maintenance and upkeep of any premises, whether as tenant, lessee or
occupant, or as agent of any of them or as agent of an owner or otherwise.
PREMISES — Any building, structure, lot of land or part thereof.
§ 230-2. Notice to abate nuisance.
§ 230-3. Abatement by Health Officer.
If the owner or person in control of the premises upon being notified does
not comply with the notice within the time specified and fails to remove
or abate the nuisance or condition, the Health Officer or his agents or
employees shall proceed to abate the nuisance or condition or may cause it
to be removed or abated in a summary manner by such means as shall be
deemed proper.
§ 230-4. Recovery of costs.
A. Whenever anything declared by this article to be a nuisance or any
unsanitary or unhealthy condition is found on any premises within the
Township, notice shall be given to the owner or person in control of the
premises to remove or abate it within the time specified but not less
than five days from the date of service.
B. Whenever anything declared by this article to be a nuisance or any
unsanitary or unhealthy condition is found on any public property or on
any highway or other public premises or place, notice shall be given to
the person in charge to remove or abate the same within the time
specified.
A. Whenever any cost or expense is incurred by the Township as a result of
the Health Officer, his agents or employees abating or removing or
causing to be abated or removed any nuisance or unsanitary or
unhealthy condition, such costs and expenses may be recovered in the
following manner:
§ 230-1 NUISANCES § 230-4
230:329
§ 230-5. Manner of giving notice.
Notice required by the provisions of this article shall be in writing and shall
be given to all the persons affected by it. Notice shall be served personally
upon the person affected or by leaving a copy at his usual or last known
place of abode or by mailing it to him at his usual or last known place
of abode. Where the notice relates to any premises, a duplicate of it shall
be left with one or more of the tenants or occupants. If the owner of the
premises in question cannot be notified speedily, notice may be given by
leaving it with one of the tenants or occupants by posting it in a conspicuous
place on the premises.
§ 230-6. Emergency powers.
Whenever the Health Officer finds that the public safety will not permit
delay, he may exercise one or more of the following powers without having
to resort to legal proceedings:
(1) In all cases where permitted by law, such costs may be certified to
the Tax Collector and shall be a part of the taxes next assessed
upon the premises upon which the nuisance or unsanitary or
unhealthy condition was located.
(2) Where the Township is not permitted by law to proceed under
Subsection A(1) above, the cost or expense shall be recovered by an
action at law in any court of competent jurisdiction, which action
shall be instituted by the Health Officer in the name of the
Township.
B. Regardless of how costs are actually recovered, they shall be in addition
to and shall not affect the imposition of any penalties for the violation of
this article.
A. Power to prevent the sale of food. The Health Officer may prohibit the
importation into the Township or sale of any food, drink or other item
intended for human consumption or use from a source suspected of
being infected, contaminated, unsanitary, unhealthy or dangerous.
B. Power to seize and destroy unwholesome food. The Health Officer may
order the seizure and destruction of any unstamped meat and of any
food, drink or other item intended for human consumption which is
unwholesome or dangerous or likely to cause sickness or injury to
persons who consume it.
C. Suspension of licenses. The Health Officer may suspend temporarily the
license of any person required to be licensed by any of the provisions of
this article if he finds that the licensed activity is being conducted in
such manner as to endanger the health or safety of the public.
§ 230-4 WEST MILFORD CODE § 230-7
230:330
§ 230-7. Inspection of premises.
The Health Officer, his agents and employees shall have the right to inspect
any premises in the Township if they have reason to believe that any
provision of this article is being violated or as part of a regular program of
inspection.
§ 230-8. Search warrant.
If the owner or occupant of any premises refuses to permit entry for the
purpose of inspection, the Department of Health may apply to the Municipal
Judge for a search warrant. The application shall be based upon an affidavit
setting forth that the inspection is part of a regular program of inspection or
that conditions and circumstances provide a reasonable basis for believing
that a nuisance or unsanitary or unhealthy condition exists on the premises.
If the Judge is satisfied as to the matters set forth in the affidavit, he
shall authorize the issuance of a search warrant permitting access to and
inspection of the premises.
§ 230-9. Rules and regulations.
The Health Officer shall have the power to make whatever written rules and
regulations he may decide are necessary for the proper administration and
enforcement of this article, but no rule or regulation shall conflict with or in
any way alter, amend or supersede any of the provisions of this article.
§ 230-10. Enforcement.
The Health Officer shall enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 230-11. Special health reporting officers.
There shall be, when appointed by the Council, special health reporting
officers who shall promptly report to the Department every violation of
health ordinances, rules and regulations which may come within their
observation or knowledge. The police and fire officers and members of the
Department of Health of the Township may be designated special health
reporting officers.
§ 230-7 NUISANCES § 230-11
230:331

ARTICLE II
Public Health Nuisances
[Adopted as Sec. 19-12 of the 1976 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 230-12. Adoption of code by reference.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance, prohibiting certain noises or sounds,
requiring the proper heating of apartments, prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings, prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks, authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcement official, providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Health Department in
removing or abating such nuisances and prescribing penalties for violations
is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69 to 26:3-69.6. A copy of the
code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of the
text herein.
§ 230-13. Title of code.
The code established and adopted by this article is described and commonly
known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)."
§ 230-14. Public record.
Three copies of the Public Health Nuisance Code (1953) have been placed
on file in the office of the Township Clerk for the use and examination of the
public.
§ 230-12 NUISANCES § 230-14
230:333
Chapter 235
OBSCENE MATERIALS
§ 235-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OBSCENE MATERIAL — Any obscene material as defined in N.J.S.A.
2C:34-3.
RETAILER — Any person who operates a store, newsstand, booth,
concession or similar business with unimpeded access for persons under
18 years old, who is in the business of making sales of periodicals or other
publications at retail containing pictures, drawings or photographs.
§ 235-2. Display of obscene material by retailers.
No retailer may display or permit to be displayed at his business premises
any obscene material at a height of less than five feet and without a blinder
or other covering placed or printed on the front of the material displayed.
Public display of the obscene material shall constitute presumptive evidence
that the retailer knowingly made or permitted the display.
§ 235-3. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this chapter shall be a petty disorderly persons offense and
subject to the penalties as provided for under Title 2C, New Jersey Code of
Criminal Justice.
Chapter 239
OPEN SPACE, RECREATION, AND FARMLAND AND HISTORIC
PRESERVATION TRUST FUND
§ 239-1. Open Space, Recreation, and Farmland and Historic
Preservation Trust Fund establishment.
There is hereby established an account which shall be known and
designated as the "Open Space, Recreation, and Farmland and Historic
Preservation Trust Fund" which shall be maintained in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:12-15.7 et seq.
§ 239-2. Funding; utilization of funds.
A. The Open Space, Recreation, and Farmland and Historic Preservation
Trust Fund shall be funded through the dedication to the fund of an
amount of $0.0054 per $100 of assessed valuation of each annual tax
levy commencing with the year 2012. The fund shall also be permitted
to accept donations and testamentary bequests.
§ 230-14 WEST MILFORD CODE § 239-2
235:334
§ 239-3. Administration of fund.
The Open Space, Recreation, and Farmland and Historic Preservation Trust
Fund created by this chapter shall be administered in accordance with
the applicable statutory provisions, including, without limitation, N.J.S.A.
40:12-15.1 et seq.
Chapter 244
PARADES
§ 244-1. Permit required.
No person shall engage in, form or start any parade in the Township
without obtaining a permit from the Chief of Police. No permit shall be
issued to permit a parade on Sunday, except in connection with a religious
procession.
§ 244-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARADE — Any assemblage of 25 or more persons engaged in an organized
procession of any duration along a public street or highway, following a
certain route, whether predetermined or not.
B. The funds accumulated within the trust fund may be utilized only for
the acquisition of lands for recreation and conservation purposes and
the payment of debt service on indebtedness issued or incurred by the
Township for the purpose of acquisition of lands for recreation and
conservation purposes and, for the funds collected beginning January 1,
2014, allocated as follows:
(1) At least 33.33% of open space trust funds for the acquisition of
properties.
(2) Up to 33.33% of open space trust fund monies for the development
of or capital improvements to lands acquired for recreation
purposes at the discretion of the Township Council.
(3) Up to 33.33% of open space trust fund monies for the improvement
of lands acquired for conservation or historic preservation
purposes at the discretion of the Township Council.
C. Lands acquired by the Township of West Milford using revenue raised
pursuant to this tax authorization shall be held in trust and shall be
used exclusively for the purposes authorized under N.J.S.A. 40:12-15.1
et seq. The governing body of the Township of West Milford may change
the spending allocation for a given calendar year; however, it must be
approved by five affirmative votes of the Township Council.
§ 239-2 PARADES § 244-3
244:335
§ 244-3. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to:
§ 244-4. Application for permit.
A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with
the Chief of Police on forms provided by such officer.
A. Funeral processions.
B. Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate
supervision and direction of the proper school authorities.
C. A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
A. Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the
Chief of Police not less than five days nor more than 90 days before the
date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade.
B. Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the
following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct.
(2) If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and
responsible head of such organization.
(3) The date when the parade is to be conducted.
(4) The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point.
(5) The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles
which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals, and
description of the vehicles.
(6) The hours when such parade will start and terminate.
(7) The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade.
(8) Any additional information which the Chief of Police shall find
reasonably necessary for a fair determination as to whether a
permit should be issued.
C. Late applications. The Chief of Police, where good cause is shown
therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder
which is filed less than five days before the date the parade is proposed
to be conducted.
§ 244-3 WEST MILFORD CODE § 244-4
244:336
§ 244-5. Action by Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police shall act upon the application for a parade permit within
three days after the filing thereof.
§ 244-6. Duties of permittee.
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade
chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the
parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade.
§ 244-7. Public conduct during parades.
D. Fee. There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for a parade
permit the fee set forth in Chapter 135, Fees.72
A. Notice of rejection. If the Chief of Police disapproves the application, he
shall mail to the applicant within three days after the date upon which
the application was filed, a notice of his action, stating the reasons for
his denial of the permit.
B. Alternative permit. The Chief of Police, in denying an application for a
parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the
parade on a date, at a time or over a route different from that named by
the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall,
within one day after notice of the action of the Chief of Police, file a
written notice of acceptance with the Chief of Police. An alternate
parade permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the
effect of a parade permit under this chapter.
A. Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede
or interfere with any parade or parade assembly, or with any person,
vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade.
B. Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the
vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons
are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade.
C. Parking on parade route. The Chief of Police shall have the authority,
when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of
vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route
of a parade. The Chief of Police shall post signs to this effect, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in
violation thereof.
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 244-4 PARADES § 244-7
244:337
Chapter 250
PARKING RESTRICTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic — See Ch. 10. Parades — See Ch. 244.
§ 250-1. General findings.73
The operation and parking of motor vehicles in close proximity to buildings
devoted for public uses, including shopping centers, nursing homes,
schools, public buildings, churches and similar uses, constitute a danger
to public health, safety and welfare, in that the approach, operation and
departure of fire equipment, ambulances, police vehicles and the like are
impeded by such operation and parking of motor vehicles.
§ 250-2. No-parking zones; fire zones. [Amended 12-21-1983 by
Ord. No. 1983-34]
The Department of Police is authorized to establish no-parking zones along
the curbs or in the roadways, and with the recommendation of the Division
of Fire Suppression, establish fire zones, and to establish entrance and exit
ways, on properties in the Township, devoted for public uses, included but
not limited to shopping centers, nursing homes, schools, public buildings,
churches and similar uses, where the operation and parking of motor
vehicles in close proximity to buildings located on such properties, or
the use of improper ways, would prevent adequate ingress, egress and
operation of fire equipment, ambulances, police vehicles and other
emergency vehicles. These zones and entrance and exit ways shall be
approved and so designated on maps adopted by resolution of the Township
Council which shall be retained in the Township Clerk's office.
§ 250-3. Signs.
The no-parking zones and the entrance and exit ways, to be established
pursuant to the above section, shall be designated in such areas of such
public properties, by signs or by white lines or by other means of
designation, as will insure the fire equipment, ambulances, police vehicles
and other emergency vehicles unobstructed means of ingress, egress and
operation to such properties in the event of fire or other emergency. No
person shall park a vehicle in the no-parking zone, so established, parking
to be limited to stalls or areas provided for parking, and within painted lines
marked on the pavement or by other approved designation. No person shall
use any ways for entrance or exit, except as those indicated by appropriate
signs.
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 244-7 WEST MILFORD CODE § 250-4
250:338
§ 250-4. Determination of zones.
The number, location, width and marking of the no-parking zones shall
be determined, and the entrance and exit ways fixed, by the Department
of Police, with the recommendation of the Division of Fire Suppression
for fire zones subject to approval by resolution adopted by the Council.
Such determination and approval shall be based upon the size, type or
construction, location of the building or buildings involved; the use to which
the property, building or buildings is put; the number of motor vehicles
operated or parked upon the property; the number of persons using and
occupying the property, building or buildings; the existing means of ingress
and egress to and from the property, building or buildings; the total area
of the property, including the size of the parking lot; and all other factors
which are relevant to the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants
of the Township, and to the users of the property.
§ 250-5. Additional regulations.
The Department of Police, with the recommendations of the Division of
Fire Suppression, and subject to the approval by resolution adopted by the
Council, is further authorized to promulgate regulations limiting, restricting
and prohibiting the operation or parking of motor vehicles within fire zones
authorized to be established pursuant to this chapter.
Chapter 256
PARKS, RECREATION AREAS AND OPEN SPACES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution — See Ch. 57.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 63.
Animals — See Ch. 71.
Bicycles, skates, skateboards and
scooters — See Ch. 84.
Littering — See Ch. 208.
Noise — See Ch. 226.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 263.
Tobacco use in public buildings, parks and
recreation facilities — See Ch. 357.
Motor-driven and recreational vehicles — See
Ch. 379.
§ 256-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words
have the meanings given herein:
DIRECTOR — The Director of Parks and Recreation of the Township of West
Milford.[Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030]
OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION AREA — Any property owned or leased
by the Township of West Milford which is either open space or utilized for
active recreation purposes and which is open to the public either without
§ 250-4 PARKING RESTRICTIONS § 256-1
250:339
charge or on a fee basis. The term includes but is not limited to open space,
playgrounds, parks, ballfields, swimming areas, beaches, nature education
facilities, and any paths, roadways, sidewalks and parking areas therein or
adjacent thereto.[Amended 9-17-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-39]
§ 256-2. Hours of operation.
Except as otherwise posted, all open space and recreation areas shall open
1/2 hour before sunrise and shall close 1/2 hour after sunset. No person
shall enter upon or remain within an open space and recreation area except
during its hours of operation.
§ 256-3. Trees, shrubbery and other physical features.
§ 256-4. Buildings and other property.
§ 256-5. Pollution and refuse.
No person in an open space and recreation area shall:
A. No person in an open space and recreation area shall damage, deface,
cut, carve, transplant, remove any tree or plant or injure the bark, or
pick the flowers, fruits, berries or seeds, of any tree or plant. Nor shall
any person attach any rope, wire, or other contrivance to any tree or
plant.
B. No person in an open space and recreation area shall dig in or
otherwise disturb grass areas or in any other way injure or impair the
natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
C. No person shall excavate or remove any rock, soil, stone or sand from
an open space and recreation area.
A. No person in an open space or recreation area shall willfully mark,
deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove, any
building, bridge, table, bench, fireplace, railing, paving or paving
material, water line or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances
thereof, sign, notice or placard, whether temporary or permanent,
monument, stake, post or other boundary marker, or other structure or
equipment, facilities or property or appurtenances whatsoever.
B. No person in an open space and recreation area shall construct or erect
any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or
temporary in character.
A. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters
of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water in or adjacent
to any open space and recreation area of any tributary, stream, storm
sewer or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing,
liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters;
or
§ 256-1 WEST MILFORD CODE § 256-5
250:340
§ 256-6. Alcoholic beverages.
No person shall possess, use or consume any alcoholic beverage in an
open space and recreation area except in accordance with the provisions
of Ordinance No. 1979-26 of the Township of West Milford (Article I,
Consumption in Public Places, of Chapter 63, Alcoholic Beverages, of the
Code of the Township of West Milford), which regulates the possession and
consumption of alcoholic beverages in public and semipublic places.
§ 256-7. Animals.
No person shall allow a dog, cat or other animal to run at large within an
open space and recreation area. All such animals shall be restrained at all
times on adequate leashes not greater than six feet in length. Horses shall
be allowed only on trails and other areas designated for horseback riding.
§ 256-8. Bathing and swimming.
§ 256-9. Boating.
B. Have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken
glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or
refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any
waters in or contiguous to any open space and recreation area, or left
anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper
receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are not so
provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the open
space and recreation area by the person responsible for its presence,
and properly disposed of elsewhere.
A. Designated areas. No person shall swim, bathe or wade in any waters or
waterways in or adjacent to an open space and recreation area, except
in such waters and at such places as are provided therefor, and in
compliance with such regulations as are set forth herein or may be
hereafter adopted. No person shall frequent any waters or places
customarily designated for the purpose of bathing, or congregate
thereat, when such activity is prohibited by the Director upon a finding
that such use of the water would be dangerous or otherwise
inadvisable.
B. Bath houses. No person in an open space and recreation area shall
dress or undress on any beach, or in any vehicle, toilet or other place,
except in such bathing houses or structures as may be provided for that
purpose.
A. Designated areas. No person shall launch, land, use or operate any
boat, canoe, raft or other watercraft in or on any waters within or
adjacent to an open space and recreation area, unless such body of
water shall have been designated by the Director for such purpose.
Such activity shall be in accordance with regulations as have been or
§ 256-5 PARKING RESTRICTIONS § 256-9
250:341
§ 256-10. Fishing.
No person shall fish in any waters, whether by the use of hook-and-line,
net, trap, or other device, except in waters designated by the Director for
that use and under such regulations and restrictions as have been or may
hereafter be adopted.
§ 256-11. Motor vehicles.
The use of motor vehicles in open space and recreation areas shall be in
accordance with Article II, Vehicles in Recreational Areas, of Chapter 379,
Vehicles, Motor-Driven and Recreational, of the Code of the Township of
West Milford.
§ 256-12. Weapons.
No person shall have in his possession, use or discharge any firearm or
weapon in an open space and recreation area.
§ 256-13. (Reserved)74
§ 256-14. Fires and flammable material.
No person shall ignite or attempt to ignite a fire within an open space and
recreation area except in such areas and under such regulations as may be
designated by the Director. No such fires shall be ignited or attempted to be
ignited except in a camp stove or fireplace provided for that purpose.
§ 256-15. Merchandising; advertising signs.75
may hereafter be adopted. The launching or landing of boats, canoes,
rafts or other watercraft shall be allowed only from areas so designated.
B. Operation of boats. No person shall navigate, operate, direct or handle
any boat, canoe, raft or other watercraft in such a manner as to
unjustifiably or unnecessarily annoy or frighten or endanger the
occupants of any other boat, canoe, raft or other watercraft.
A. Vending and peddling. No person in an open space and recreation area
shall expose or offer for sale or hire any article or thing, nor shall he
station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or
display of such article or thing. Exception is made as to any duly
licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and
regulation of the Council.
B. Advertising. No person in an open space and recreation area shall
announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any article
74.Editor's Note: Former § 256-13, Fireworks and explosives, was repealed 10-20-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-013.
75.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 263, Peddling and Soliciting; and Ch. 279, Printed Matter,
Unsolicited.
§ 256-9 WEST MILFORD CODE § 256-15
250:342
§ 256-16. Disorderly conduct.
No person in an open space and recreation area shall engage in loud,
boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language, or engage
in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to cause a breach of the
public peace. Noise shall be held to an acceptable level and shall comply
with the provisions of Chapter 226, Noise, of the Code of the Township of
West Milford.
§ 256-17. Use of open space and recreation areas; fees.76 [Amended
6-18-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-28]
§ 256-18. Group permits.
or service for sale or hire, or distribute circulars in connection
therewith.
C. Signs. No person in an open space and recreation area shall paste, glue,
tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription.
A. All open space and recreation areas shall be open to the general public.
The Council shall have the power to establish fees for use of a facility.
B. Ballfields and tennis courts. The use of ballfields and tennis courts shall
be coordinated and regulated by the Director. Additional fees shall be
established by the Director for use of ballfields and tennis courts in
open space and recreation areas.
A. General. No organized group shall use any open space and recreation
area without a group use permit issued by the Director. Applications for
permits shall be submitted not later than seven days before the
proposed date of use. The application shall state:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or
association sponsoring the activity, if any;
(3) The day and hours for which the permit is desired;
(4) The particular open space and recreation area for which the permit
is desired;
(5) An estimate of the anticipated attendance;
(6) Any other information which the Director shall find to be
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit
shall be issued hereunder.
B. Standards for issuance. The Director shall issue a group use permit
hereunder when he finds:
76.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 135, Fees and Costs.
§ 256-15 PARKING RESTRICTIONS § 256-18
250:343
§ 256-19. Enforcement.
(1) That the proposed activity or use of the open space and recreation
area will not reasonably interfere with or detract from the general
public enjoyment of the facility.
(2) That the proposed activity or use will not unreasonably interfere
with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety
and recreation.
(3) That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to
incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct;
(4) That the proposed activity or use will not entail unusual,
extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operation by the
Township of West Milford; and
(5) That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at
the day and hour required in the application.
C. Fees and security deposits. The administrative fee set forth in Chapter
135, Fees and Costs, shall be charged for each group use permit. This
shall be in addition to fees established by the Director for the use of
ballfields and tennis courts as provided in § 256-17 of this chapter. A
nonrefundable maintenance fee as set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and
Costs, shall be charged for each group use permit that requires the
opening, closing and/or cleaning of a facility. The Director may, for good
cause, at the request of the applicant, waive the requirement for a
group use permit and/or security deposit.77
D. Liability of permittee. The person or persons to whom a group use
permit is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained
by any person or by the Township of West Milford by reason of the
negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit shall have
been issued.
E. Revocation of permit. The Director shall have the authority to revoke a
group use permit upon a finding of a violation of any provision of this
chapter, or for good cause shown.
A. Officials. The Director and park attendants shall, in connection with
their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
B. Ejectment. The Director and any park attendant shall have the
authority to eject from an open space and recreation area any person
acting in violation of this chapter.
C. Seizure of property. The Director and any park attendant shall have the
authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in an
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 256-18 WEST MILFORD CODE § 256-19
250:344
§ 256-20. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 263
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctioneers — See Ch. 78.
Garage sales — See Ch. 174.
Parks, recreation areas and open
spaces — See Ch. 256.
Unsolicited printed matter — See Ch. 279.
open space and recreation area if the possession or use of such
property, thing or device is prohibited by this chapter.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, of the
Code of the Township of West Milford.
B. In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, the Municipal Court
shall have the power to ban a violator from entering upon or using any
open space and recreation area until the further order of the court,
upon petition and for good cause shown.
§ 256-19 PARKING RESTRICTIONS § 256-20
250:345

ARTICLE I
Peddlers, Hawkers and Vendors
[Adopted as Sec. 6-2 of the 1976 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 263-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER — Any person, whether a resident of the Township of West
Milford or not, travelling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other
type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street
to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise,
meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions,
offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering
articles to purchasers, or who, without travelling from place to place, shall
sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, cart, automotive vehicle,
railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance, and further provided that
one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to
purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this
article shall be deemed a peddler subject to the provisions of this article.
The word "peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and "huckster."
§ 263-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a peddler
within the corporate limits of the Township without first obtaining a license.
§ 263-3. Fees. [Amended 4-16-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-6; 5-2-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-013; 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030]
The annual fee for a peddler's license is set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and
Costs. The fees are for the general protection of the public health, welfare
and safety.
§ 263-4. Plates and license.
A. The Township Clerk shall issue to each licensee a license certificate
bearing upon it a notation of the period for which the license is issued
and the number thereof. The license certificate shall be carried with the
licensee during the time in which he is engaged in peddling and shall be
exhibited to any person requesting to see the same. In addition he shall
issue to each licensee at the time of the delivery of his license two
license plates for each vehicle to be used. The license plates shall bear
the words "Licensed Peddler," the period for which the license is issued
and the number of the license in letters and figures plainly discernible;
license plates shall be attached to the vehicle used by the licensee,
either on both sides or on the front and rear of the vehicle so used.
B. Peddlers are required to exhibit their licenses at the request of any
citizen.
§ 263-1 PARKING RESTRICTIONS § 263-5
250:347
§ 263-5. Loud noises and speaking devices.
No peddler, nor any person in his behalf, shall shout, make any cryout, blow
a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device, including any loud-speaking
radio or sound-amplifying system, upon any of the streets, alleys, parks
or other public places of the Township or upon any private premises in
the Township where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced
therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues,
alleys, parks or other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention
to any goods, wares or merchandise which the licensee proposes to sell.
§ 263-6. Use of streets.
No peddler shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public
streets, nor shall he be permitted a stationary location, nor shall he be
permitted to operate in any congested area where his operations might
impede or inconvenience the public. He shall not be permitted to stand or
remain in any one place for the purpose of selling or offering goods, wares
or merchandise, or any product for which he secures a license as per this
article for sale, for a period longer than 15 minutes. For the purpose of
this section, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall
be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public
impeded or inconvenienced.
§ 263-7. Police enforcement.
A. It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Township to require any
person seen peddling, and who is not known by the officer to be duly
licensed, to produce his peddler's license, and to enforce the provision
of this article against any person found to be violating the same.
B. The Chief of Police shall report to the Township Clerk all convictions for
violation of this article, and the Township Clerk shall maintain a record
for each license issued and record the reports of violations therein.
§ 263-5 WEST MILFORD CODE § 263-7
250:348
ARTICLE II
Canvassers and Solicitors
[Adopted as Sec. 6-3 of the 1976 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 263-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANVASSER or SOLICITOR — Any individual, whether resident of the
Township or not, travelling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck,
or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house,
or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of
goods, wares and merchandise, books, magazines, personal property of any
nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be performed or
furnished in the future, whether or not the individual has, carries or exposes
for sale a sample of the subject of the sale or whether he is collecting
advance payments on the sales or not, provided that the definition shall
include any person, who, for himself, or for any other person, hires, leases,
uses, or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad box car, boat, hotel
room, lodging house, apartment, shop, or any other place in the Township
for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future
delivery.
§ 263-9. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser to engage in business
within the corporate limits of the Township without first obtaining a permit
and license.
§ 263-10. Fees; deposit. [Amended 4-16-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-6;
6-6-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-19; 5-2-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-013]
§ 263-11. Registration.
Where, by reason of any federal or state law, any person is deemed to be
legally exempt from the provisions of this article or from the requirement
of securing a license or permit as herein provided, notwithstanding thereof,
such person shall before engaging in any type of soliciting or canvassing,
as defined in this article, first register on forms provided by the Township
A. The fee for a canvasser's or solicitor's license is set forth in Chapter
135, Fees and Costs, payable to the Township to defray the cost of
investigating, fingerprinting if necessary, printing, processing and
issuing the permit.78
B. In addition, a deposit of $10 shall be made by applicant with the
Township Clerk to assure the return of the badge or certification
number as provided for in § 263-13.
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 263-8 PARKING RESTRICTIONS § 263-11
250:349
with the Chief of Police, furnishing all of the information as provided for in
§ 203-2. If the Chief of Police, after proper investigation, shall be satisfied
that the registrant is not entitled to the exemption above stated, he shall
decline to register him, or after investigation, shall find the registrant's
character or business responsibility to be unsatisfactory, he shall decline
to register him. If the Chief of Police, after investigation, shall find the
registrant's character or business responsibility to be satisfactory, he shall
issue a certificate of registration, which shall contain the signature of the
Chief of Police, and shall show the name and address of the registrant,
the name and address of his employer, if any, the kind of goods to be sold
by him, or the kind of services to be performed or furnished, the date of
issuance and the length of time the registration shall be effective, as well
as the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used
in such soliciting or canvassing. The Chief of Police shall keep a permanent
record of all registrations. These provisions are to be so applied as not to
occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce, but to be applied for
the general protection of the public health, welfare and safety.
§ 263-12. Hours.
No canvassing or soliciting by anyone holding a permit or license or
certification of registration shall be done except between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m. each weekday.
§ 263-13. Exhibition of license.
Solicitors and canvassers are required to exhibit their licenses or
registrations at the request of any citizen. They shall be required to wear
the badge or identification number furnished them on the outer clothing, so
that they may be visible at all times while they are canvassing or soliciting.
When the permittee shall cease operation under the permit in any event,
or on the expiration of the permit, the permittee shall surrender his permit
and badge or identification number to the Township Clerk, who in receipt
of same shall refund the deposit made for the badge or identification in
accordance with § 263-10.
§ 263-14. Loud noises and speaking devices.
No solicitor or canvasser, nor any person in his behalf, shall shout, make
any cryout, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device, including any
loud-speaking radio or sound-amplifying system upon any of the streets,
alleys, parks or other public places of the Township or upon any private
premises in the Township where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or
produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets,
avenues, alleys, parks or other public places, for the purpose of attracting
attention to any goods, wares or merchandise or services which the licensee
or registrant proposes to sell.
§ 263-11 WEST MILFORD CODE § 263-15
250:350
§ 263-15. Use of streets.
No licensee or registrant shall have any exclusive right to any location in
the public streets, nor shall he be permitted a stationary location, nor shall
he be permitted to operate in any congested area where his operation might
impede or inconvenience the public. He shall not be permitted to stand
or remain in any one place for the purpose of soliciting or canvassing of
any goods, wares or merchandise, or for any services, for which he has
secured a license or registered as per this article, for a period longer than
15 minutes. For the purpose of this section, the judgment of a police officer,
exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area
is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced.
§ 263-16. Police enforcement.
§ 263-17. Exemptions.
A. It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Township of West Milford
to require any person seen soliciting or canvassing, and who is not
known by such officer to be duly licensed or registered, to produce his
solicitor's or canvasser's license or registration certificate, and to
enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be
violating the same.
B. The Chief of Police shall report to the Township Clerk all convictions for
violations of this article, and the Township Clerk shall maintain a record
for each license issued and record the reports of violations therein.
A. The definition of "solicitor" or "canvasser" shall not include persons
soliciting or canvassing toward persons within the Township or
originating within the Township in behalf of the following, the Township
Council reserving to permit by resolution solicitation for any of the
following which may originate out of the Township:
(1) United Fund.
(2) Heart, cancer and similar funds.
(3) Red Cross.
(4) Nationally chartered veterans organizations.
(5) Sister Kenny.
(6) March of Dimes.
(7) Churches.
(8) Volunteer fire companies.
(9) First aid squads.
(10) Schools, parent-teachers' associations and other educational
activities.
§ 263-15 PARKING RESTRICTIONS § 263-17
250:351
(11) Hospitals.
(12) Any other charitable organizations or activity not conducted for
profit.
B. In addition, the definition shall not include any person engaged in the
delivery of goods, wares or merchandise or other articles or things in
the regular course of business, from established local business places,
and to persons or premises ordering or entitled to receive same.
§ 263-17 WEST MILFORD CODE § 263-17
250:352
ARTICLE III
Charitable Roadway Solicitations
[Adopted 9-6-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-010]
§ 263-18. Solicitations permitted.
The Township of West Milford shall permit charitable organizations, as
defined in N.J.S.A. 45:17A-20, to solicit contributions in roadways situate in
the Township of West Milford in accordance with the provisions contained
herein.
§ 263-19. Application for permit.
All charitable organizations as defined in N.J.S.A. 45:17A-20 who desire to
solicit contributions in roadways situate in the Township of West Milford
shall file an application for a permit with the West Milford Chief of Police on
a form supplied by said Chief of Police specifying the following information:
§ 263-20. Review and consideration of application; issuance of
permit.
Upon review and approval of a complete application in accordance with
the provisions of this article, the West Milford Chief of Police shall present
same to the Township Administrator for his review and consideration, after
which the Chief of Police shall grant or deny the applicant's request. If
the application is approved, the Chief of Police shall issue a permit to the
A. Name of applicant organization.
B. Address of applicant organization.
C. Telephone number of applicant organization.
D. Contact person of applicant organization.
E. Specific location or locations of proposed charitable solicitation.
F. Dates and times of proposed charitable solicitation.
G. If said request pertains to a location or locations on any county highway,
or intersection of a county highway, said application shall include a
copy of an authorization from the Passaic County Board of Chosen
Freeholders to permit said charitable solicitation.
H. If said request pertains to a location or locations on any state highway
or intersection of a state highway, said application shall include a copy
of an authorization from the Commissioner of Transportation of the
State of New Jersey to permit said charitable solicitation.
I. Identification of the manner in which the motorist solicitation will be
conducted and the procedures to be used to ensure the safety of the
members of the public who will be traveling the roadways situate in the
Township of West Milford.
§ 263-18 PARKING RESTRICTIONS § 263-20
250:353
applicant which shall be subject to the representations contained in the
applicant's application with conditions as necessary.
§ 263-21. Age limitations for participants.
In no event shall any charitable organization requesting authorization from
the Township of West Milford for said charitable solicitation use any
individual under the age of 18 years to perform any function or task
associated with the said charitable solicitation in any roadway.
§ 263-22. Compliance with statutory provisions.
Any charitable organization requesting authorization from the Township of
West Milford for said charitable solicitation shall comply with all of the
terms and conditions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-60, as amended by P.L. 1997, Chapter
82, approved April 30, 1997.
§ 263-23. Statutory authorization.
This article is adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-60, as amended by P.L.
1997, Chapter 82, approved April 30, 1997.
§ 263-24. Severability.
In the event any section, part or provision of this article shall be held
unconstitutional or invalid by any court, such holding shall not affect the
validity of this article or any remaining part of this article other than the
part held unconstitutional or invalid.
§ 263-20 WEST MILFORD CODE § 263-24
250:354
ARTICLE IV
Restrictions
[Adopted 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-008]
§ 263-25. Entering on posted property prohibited.
No individual obtaining a license pursuant to this article shall enter onto
any property on which is located a sign or signs stating "no solicitors" or
carrying a similar message forbidding the entry of any persons onto the
property.
§ 263-26. Collection, preparation and maintenance of a
nonsolicitation list.
§ 263-27. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article may, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or such other
penalties consistent with N.J.S.A. 40:49-5. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
A. Collection, preparation and maintenance of a nonsolicitation list. The
Office of the Township Clerk shall collect, prepare and maintain a list of
addresses of those premises where the owner and/or occupant has
notified the Township Clerk that soliciting and canvassing is not
permitted on the premises. With the adoption of this section, any
resident who wishes to be placed on the non-solicitation list shall
complete a form by obtaining same in the Municipal Building's General
Office during normal business hours, Mondays through Fridays from
8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., except on weekends and legal holidays, or
obtaining the form online on the Township's web page. The form shall
be filed in the Office of the Township Clerk either in person, by United
States mail or electronically by email, as instructed on the form.
B. The Township Clerk shall make the nonsolicitation list available to all
departments within the Township. This list shall be distributed to
applicants seeking a license to solicit or canvass pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter. The licensee shall not solicit or canvass at
any address on the nonsolicitation list. The West Milford Police
Department shall be responsible for enforcement of these provisions.
C. Updating of nonsolicitation list. The list shall be updated regularly and
made available to all municipal departments.
D. Any individual who receives a summons from the West Milford Police
alleging violations of the provisions of § 263-25 described above may be
subject to judicial prosecution and/or fines as prescribed in § 263-27.
§ 263-25 PARKING RESTRICTIONS § 263-27
250:355
Chapter 268
PESTICIDES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Application of fertilizers — See Ch. 138.
§ 268-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Pesticide Control Code of the
Township of West Milford."
§ 268-2. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings:
ACT — The Pesticide Control Act of 1971, as amended, N.J.S.A. 13:1F-1 et
seq.
ACTIVE INGREDIENT — Any ingredient which will prevent, destroy, repel,
control, or mitigate pests, or which will act as a plant regulator, defoliant,
or desiccant.
AGRICULTURAL COMMODITY — Any plant or part thereof, or animal,
or animal product, produced by a person, including farmers, ranchers,
vineyardists, plant propagators, Christmas tree growers, aquaculturists,
floriculturists, orchardists, foresters, or other comparable persons,
primarily for sale, consumption, propagation, or other use by man or animal.
BRAND or BRAND NAME or TRADE NAME — The characteristic
designation by words, symbols, name, number of trademark of a specific,
particular pesticide or formulation thereof under which the pesticide is
distributed, sold, offered for sale, handled, stored, used or transported in
the State of New Jersey.
COMMERCIAL PESTICIDE APPLICATOR — Any person (whether or not he
is a private applicator with respect to some uses) who uses or supervises
the use of any pesticide for any purpose or on any property other than as
provided by the definition of "private pesticide applicator."
COMMERCIAL PESTICIDE OPERATOR — Any person who applies
pesticides by equipment other than aerial under the direct supervision of a
certified and registered responsible pesticide applicator.
COMMUNITY or AREA WIDE — Any pesticide application performed on
aggregate areas greater than three acres of land which is part of a pest
control program administered by a governmental agency or which is
contracted for or performed by one person who has control over the use of
the land to which the pesticide is applied.
§ 263-27 WEST MILFORD CODE § 268-2
268:356
CONSUMER — Any person who hires a commercial pesticide applicator
business to perform an ornamental pest control application utilizing
hydraulic spraying equipment operating at a rate greater than 300 psi
and 10 gpm, airblast sprayers, or aerial application equipment on property
owned or controlled by him. For the purposes of this definition, the term
"consumer" shall include any person who makes such application on
property owned or controlled by him.
EPA — The United Stated Environmental Protection Agency.
ORNAMENTAL — Trees, shrubs, and other planting in and around
habitations generally, but not necessarily located in urban and suburban
areas, including residences, parks, streets, retail outlets, industrial and
institutional buildings.
PERSON — Corporations, companies, associations, societies, firms,
partnerships, and joint-stock companies as well as individuals, and shall
also include all political subdivisions of this state or any agencies or
instrumentalities thereof.
PEST —
PESTICIDE — Any substance or mixture of substances labeled, designed or
intended for use in preventing, destroying, repelling or mitigating any pest,
or any substance or mixture of substances labeled, designed or intended
for use as a defoliant, desiccant, or plant regulator; provided that the term
"pesticide" shall not include any substance or mixture of substances which
the EPA does not consider to be a pesticide.
PESTICIDE APPLICATOR BUSINESS — Any person who either wholly or in
part holds himself out for hire to apply pesticides in the State of New Jersey.
PRIVATE PESTICIDE APPLICATOR — Any person who uses or supervises
the use of any pesticide for purposes of producing any agricultural
commodity on property owned or rented by him or his employer or, if
applied without compensation, other than trading of personal services
between producers of agricultural commodities, on the property of another
person.
PROPER ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL — An official designated by the
municipality, subject to approval by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, whose duties are to enforce the rules and
regulations promulgated under this chapter.
RESPONSIBLE PESTICIDE APPLICATOR — Any individual who is
accountable for the use of a pesticide by himself or any person under his
direct supervision.
A. Any insect, rodent, nematode, fungus, weed; or
Any other form of terrestrial or aquatic plant or animal life or virus,
bacteria, or other microorganism (except viruses, bacteria or other
microorganisms on or in living man or other animals) which is injurious
to health or the environment.
B.
§ 268-2 PESTICIDES § 268-2
268:357
RESTRICTED USE PESTICIDE — Any pesticide or pesticide use so classified
under the provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:30-2 or so classified by the Administrator
of the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
STATE REGULATIONS — Pesticide rules and regulations promulgated
under the Act and codified in N.J.A.C. 7:30.
TARGET SITE — A specific location, including but not limited to any crop,
commodity, object, delineated field or area, or structure or part thereof, that
is intended to be treated by a pesticide so that any pests therein or thereon
are controlled. This term does not include any similar site which was not a
part of the original agreement between the contracting parties even if such
site is included on the label or labeling of the pesticide.
USE — Any act of handling or release of a pesticide, or exposure of man,
property, or the environment to a pesticide through acts which include but
are not limited to:
§ 268-3. Commercial pesticide operators; registration required.
§ 268-4. Commercial pesticide applicators; registration required;
records.
Applying a pesticide, including mixing and loading and any required
supervisory action in or near the area of applications;
A.
B. Handling, transporting, or storing a pesticide or pesticide container;
Disposal actions for a pesticide and/or containers or equipment
associated with the pesticide.
C.
A. No person shall engage in the activities of a commercial pesticide
operator without having satisfied the applicable requirements
established by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
and having obtained a valid pesticide operator registration issued by
that Department.
B. Each commercial pesticide operator shall at all times have in his/her
possession the valid registration card and shall produce it upon request
by proper enforcement personnel.
A. No person shall engage in the activities of a commercial pesticide
applicator without having satisfied the applicable requirements
established by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
and having obtained a valid commercial pesticide applicator
registration issued by that Department.
B. Each commercial pesticide applicator shall at all times have in his/her
possession the valid registration card and shall produce it immediately
upon request by proper enforcement personnel.
C. Each commercial pesticide applicator must keep records of each
application of pesticides in accordance with provisions of state
§ 268-2 WEST MILFORD CODE § 268-4
268:358
§ 268-5. Pesticide applicator businesses; registration required;
records.
§ 268-6. Private pesticide applicators; registration required;
records.
§ 268-7. Storage of pesticides.
No person shall store restricted use pesticides without first meeting the
applicable provisions of state regulations.
§ 268-8. Pesticide equipment; backflow prevention devices.
No person shall add water to any pesticide handling, storage, or application
equipment via a hose, pump, or other equipment unless such hose, pump,
or other equipment is fitted with an effective valve or device to prevent
backflow of pesticides or liquids containing pesticides into water supply
systems, streams, lakes, other sources of water or other areas; except that
such backflow devices or valves are not required when the hose, pump,
or other equipment is not allowed to contact or fall below the level of the
liquid in the handling, storage, or application equipment to which water is
being added and no other possible means of establishing a back-siphon or
backflow exists.
regulations. Such records shall be made available to all proper
enforcement personnel.
A. No person shall engage in the activities of a pesticide applicator
business without having satisfied the applicable requirements
established by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
and having obtained a valid pesticide applicator business registration
issued by that Department. The business registration shall be made
immediately available upon request of proper enforcement personnel.
B. The pesticide applicator business must keep records of each application
of pesticides in accordance with provisions of state regulations. Such
records shall be made available to all proper enforcement personnel.
A. No person shall engage in the activities of a private pesticide applicator
without having satisfied the applicable requirements established by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and having
obtained a valid private pesticide applicator registration issued by that
Department.
B. The valid registration card shall be made available within 24 hours of
the request of proper enforcement personnel.
C. All private pesticide applicators must keep records of each application
of pesticides in accordance with provisions of state regulations. Such
records shall be made available to all proper enforcement personnel.
§ 268-4 PESTICIDES § 268-9
268:359
§ 268-9. Safety equipment.
All persons having employees who use, apply, transport or otherwise handle
any pesticide shall make available to such employees any necessary and
appropriate safety equipment in good working order and shall train such
employees in the proper operation of such safety equipment.
§ 268-10. Notification of community or area wide applications.
A. No person shall apply any pesticide on a community or area wide basis
unless prior notification of the proposed application has been given to
persons residing in the vicinity of the proposed target site.
(1) The notification shall be made through advertisement in at least
two newspapers having the greatest likelihood of informing the
public within the area of application.
(2) The newspaper notification must be given a maximum of 60 days
and a minimum of seven days prior to the proposed application
date.
(3) The notification must contain at least:
(a) The proposed application dates;
(b) The location of the application;
(c) The name, address, and registration number of the applicator
business or the responsible pesticide applicator associated
with the application;
(d) The brand name and active ingredient of the pesticide(s) to be
used;
(e) Application equipment to be used; and
(f) The name, address, and phone number of a person who may be
contacted and is responsible for supplying updated information
on the advertised pesticide applications to those persons
requesting it.
(4) Upon the request by a person residing in the vicinity of the
proposed target site, to a person designated pursuant to
Subsection A(3)(f) above, such designated person shall provide, at
a minimum, the following information at least 12 hours prior to the
application, except that if a reasonable attempt to provide notice is
unsuccessful, an attempt to notify such person, by telephone, shall
be made immediately prior to the application:
(a) The actual time and date of applications;
(b) The actual pesticide to be applied, including the EPA
registration number; and
§ 268-9 WEST MILFORD CODE § 268-10
268:360
§ 268-11. Notification of ornamental applications.
(c) Any precautionary statement(s) on the product's federal
registered label.
(5) The person designated pursuant to Subsection A(3)(f) above shall
maintain a record of all telephone calls, attempted and completed
with persons requesting information referred to in Subsection A(4)
above, and a file of related correspondence. Such record and file
shall be made available to the proper enforcement personnel upon
request. The minimum information required to be kept on the call
record shall include:
(a) Name and phone number of the person contacted; and
(b) The time and date of the call.
(6) The person making the application subject to the notification
requirements shall keep a record of the newspapers in which the
advertisement was placed and the dates published. This
information shall be made available to the proper enforcement
personnel upon request.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any pesticide
application which is made for the purpose of producing an agricultural
commodity, mosquito larviciding applications, or the application of
granular formulations in nonresidential areas.
A. No person shall cause or allow an outdoor ornamental pest control
application utilizing hydraulic spraying equipment operating at a rate
greater than 300 psi and 10 gpm, airblast sprayers, or aerial application
equipment on property owned or controlled by him unless the following
procedures have been implemented:
(1) General public requesting notification. Any person desiring
notification of outdoor ornamental pesticide applications shall
register with the Township Clerk or other designated municipal
agent by April 1 of the calendar year in which the applications
subject to notification will occur, and shall pay an annual fee
therefor as set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs.79
(2) The consumer shall obtain the names and addresses of persons
requesting notification from the Township Clerk or other
designated municipal agent or through other available resources
such as personal contact with residents of property adjacent and
contiguous to the consumer's property and shall provide notice, at
least 48 hours prior to the proposed application, by mail or by
personal delivery, such notice to contain the following information:
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 268-10 PESTICIDES § 268-11
268:361
(a) A general statement of the purpose of the notification and
procedures to follow to obtain additional updated information;
(b) The proposed application date(s);
(c) The location of the application;
(d) The name, address, and registration number of the applicator
business or the responsible pesticide applicator associated
with the application;
(e) The brand name and active ingredients of the pesticide(s) to be
used; and
(f) The name, address, and phone number of the applicator who
may be contacted and is responsible for supplying updated
information on the proposed pesticide applications to those
persons requesting it.
(3) Upon the request of any resident of property adjacent and
contiguous to the consumer's property, to the applicator designated
pursuant to Subsection A(2)(f) above, such designated applicator
shall provide, at a minimum, the following information at least 12
hours prior to the application, except that if a reasonable attempt
to provide notice is unsuccessful an attempt to notify such person,
by telephone, shall be made immediately prior to the application:
(a) The actual time and date of application;
(b) The actual pesticide to be applied;
(c) Any precautionary statement(s) on the product's federal
registered label.
(4) The applicator designated pursuant to Subsection A(2)(f) above
shall maintain a record of all telephone calls, attempted and
completed, with persons requesting information referred to in
Subsection A(3) above, and a file of related correspondence. Such
record and file shall be made available to the proper enforcement
personnel upon request. The minimum information required to be
kept on the call record shall include:
(a) Name and phone number of the person contacted; and
(b) The time and date of the call.
(5) The consumer shall keep a record or file of the notice he provided,
which may include a copy of the receipt for the certified letter(s), if
certified mail is utilized.
(6) The provisions of this section shall not apply to an additional
application made on the same day and in the same locality as an
application governed by this section, if the following requirements
are satisfied:
§ 268-11 WEST MILFORD CODE § 268-11
268:362
§ 268-12. Notification of apiarists.
(a) The consumer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the local
governing authority that he had not hired the applicator more
than 48 hours prior to the start of the application governed by
this section; and
(b) The consumer has personally contacted residents listed on the
municipal registry and whose property is adjacent and
contiguous to property on which the additional application is
proposed and no objections were raised.
(7) A waiver of the minimum amount of prior notice required in
Subsection A(2) may be granted at the discretion of the local
governing authority.
B. Prior to performing an outdoor ornamental pest control application
subject to the notification provisions, the commercial pesticide
applicator shall provide the consumer with a written statement
outlining the consumers' notification responsibilities and the specifics
of the proposed application referred to in Subsection A(2) above.
C. The consumer may delegate, in writing, his notification responsibilities
to the commercial pesticide applicator; providing the commercial
pesticide applicator agrees, in writing, to assume the notification
responsibilities as delineated in this chapter.
D. The commercial pesticide applicator is not responsible for any actions
resulting from the failure of the consumer to fulfill his notification
obligations unless the consumer has delegated and the commercial
pesticide applicator has assumed the notification responsibilities as
stated in Subsection C above.
E. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any pesticide
application which is made for the purpose of producing an agricultural
commodity or to any person required to supply advance notification
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:30-10.9.
F. The provisions of this section shall not apply where the target site is
greater than 100 feet from the consumer's property line.
A. No person shall make an outdoor application of a pesticide product
which has information on its label or labeling noting that the product is
toxic to bees unless such person first notifies, at least 36 hours prior to
the application, each apiarist who:
(1) Desires notification;
(2) Maintains an apiary which is located within 1/2 mile of the target
site; and
(3) Has been registered with either the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection or the New Jersey Beekeepers
§ 268-11 PESTICIDES § 268-12
268:363
Association by April 1 of the calendar year in which the applications
subject to the notification requirements of this section will occur.
B. Notification pursuant to Subsection A above may be given to the
apiarist directly or, in the case of any apiarist registered with the New
Jersey Beekeepers Association, through the local designated agent of
that association; provided that the agent has agreed to make the
required notification and has himself been given notification at least 72
hours prior to the intended application.
C. The notification must include the following information:
(1) The intended date of the application;
(2) The approximate time of the application;
(3) The brand name and active ingredient of the pesticide to be
applied;
(4) The location of the land on which the application is to be made; and
(5) The name and certified pesticide applicator registration number of
the responsible pesticide applicator.
D. If the application date is changed so that the application will not occur
on the intended date specified in the original notification of application
but will be conducted during the next consecutive day, notification must
be given to the individual apiarist as soon as reasonably possible but
not later than 10:00 p.m. the night prior to the new application date.
E. If the owner or operator of an apiary does not choose to move, cover, or
otherwise protect the apiary, the application may be made without
delay; provided that such application complies with the pesticide
labeling and any provisions of the Act or any rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
F. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person using a
pesticide on an aggregate area less than three acres; provided that the
application is not made with hydraulic spraying equipment operating at
a rate greater than 300 psi and 10 gpm, airblast sprayers, or aerial
equipment.
G. Any person required to notify apiarists pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall not be responsible for notifying any apiarist who cannot be
notified because:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and the
New Jersey Beekeepers Association have failed to provide
information deemed necessary by the Department for such
notification; or
(2) The New Jersey Beekeepers Association has failed to or been
unable to notify any apiarist(s) after agreeing to do so.
§ 268-12 WEST MILFORD CODE § 268-12
268:364
§ 268-13. Enforcement.
Whenever the Health Officer shall determine that there exists a violation
of the pesticide control code or the rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder, the Health Officer shall issue a notice of violation and orders
to terminate, directing the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition
and the correction of the violation. Unless an immediate hazard to health
and safety is posed, the Health Official shall permit such time period for
correction as is reasonable within the context of the situation. If an
immediate hazard to health and safety is posed, as determined by the
Health Official, or the violation is not corrected within the time period
allowed, the Health Officer or his agents or employees shall proceed to
abate the condition or violation or may cause it to be abated in a summary
manner by such means as shall be deemed proper.
§ 268-14. Violations and penalties.80
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties
imposed in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, of the Township Code.
The continuation of such violation shall constitute a separate offense for
each successive day, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuance of the violation may be punished as provided above for each
separate offense. A copy of the report of such enforcement actions will
be forwarded to the Bureau of Pesticide Control within the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
Chapter 271
POLICE SERVICES CHARGES
H. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any pesticide
application which is made for agricultural purposes, except to the crops
within the dates and/or stage as stated below:
(1) Apples: April 15 to May 15.
(2) Pears: April 15 to May 15.
(3) Strawberries: April 15 to May 15.
(4) Blueberries: April 15 to May 31.
(5) Cranberries: June 15 to August 15.
(6) Holly: June 1 to June 30.
(7) Vine crops (Cucurbits): June 1 to August 31.
(8) Sweet corn: flowering stage.
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 268-12 PESTICIDES § 271-1
268:365
§ 271-1. Consent of Chief of Police required.
Outside employment by off-duty municipal police officers shall only be
permitted with the consent of the Chief of Police or his designee as the
Chief of Police determines is in the best interest of the Township and under
policies established by the Chief of Police.
§ 271-2. Rate for employment by third parties. [Amended 2-20-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-001]
Third parties seeking to utilize Township police services must coordinate
the services through the Police Department. The Township shall be paid
for the outside employment of police by third parties at a rate equal to
the overtime rate of the officer being employed or straight time rates
of a special officer plus an additional 10% for benefits, supervision, and
other overhead. The Township may require the establishment of an escrow
account initially funded at an amount estimated to cover the cost of the
employment, which shall be posted at least 10 days prior to the date in
which the employment is needed.
Chapter 274
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 274, Poolrooms and Billiard Rooms, adopted as Sec. 6-4
of the 1976 Revised General Ordinances, as amended, was repealed
2-21-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-001.]
Chapter 279
PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 208. Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 263.
§ 279-1. Delivery of unsolicited printed matter.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver or deposit, or for any person,
firm or corporation to cause the delivery or deposit, of any unsolicited
newspapers, shoppers, and other like printed matter to or upon any private
premises within the Township of West Milford except in accordance with
the terms hereof. For the purposes of this Ordinance, "unsolicited" shall
mean the printed matter referred to herein which has not been ordered,
subscribed or requested by the recipient.
§ 271-1 WEST MILFORD CODE § 279-2
279:366
§ 279-2. Placement of printed matter.
Such printed matter shall be placed only within a permanently installed
appurtenance to the premises designed and designated for the receipt of
such printed matter or, if there be none, on the ground or floor at a point
beneath the place where such premises receives its mail or within a threefoot
radius of that point.
§ 279-3. Identification of persons responsible for circulation.
Excepted from the provisions of § 279-2 hereof shall be such printed matter
which plainly bears upon it either in the masthead or on the front page the
name and address of a person responsible for its circulation to whom may
be addressed a written notice by any recipient indicating the recipient's
desire to cease future delivery of the particular item of printed matter.
§ 279-4. Notice to cease delivery.
There shall be no intentional delivery whatsoever of any such unsolicited
printed matter to premises after the owner or tenant of which premises has
notified the publisher or the delivery person or, in the case of printed matter
referred to in § 279-3 hereof, after the owner or tenant of the premises has
notified that person indicated in the printed matter to be the person having
authority to cease further delivery of the same, by certified mail, return
receipt requested at the address so indicated, that such delivery shall cease
or be suspended for a stated period of time.
§ 279-5. Violations and penalties.81
Any person, firm or corporation convicted of a violation of any provision of
this chapter shall be subject to the penalties imposed in Chapter 1, Article
III, General Penalty, of the Township Code. Each delivery in violation of the
terms hereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
Chapter 285
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 94.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 110.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 152.
Littering — See Ch. 208.
Nuisances — See Ch. 230.
Solid waste and recycling — See Ch. 321.
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 279-2 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 285-1
279:367
§ 285-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Code of the
Township of West Milford."
§ 285-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to:
§ 285-3. Compliance required.
The owners of every building, structure, or lot and the premises on which
they are situated within the Township shall comply with the provisions of
this chapter, whether or not any such building or structure shall have been
constructed, altered or repaired before or after the enactment hereof and
irrespective of any permits or licenses which may have been issued for
the use or occupancy of such building or for the installation or repair of
equipment or facilities prior to the effective date hereof.
§ 285-4. Maintenance of property.
A. Provide for the public health, safety and welfare.
B. Avoid, prevent and eliminate the maintenance or creation of hazards to
the public health or safety.
C. Avoid, prevent and eliminate conditions which, if permitted to exist or
continue, will depreciate or tend to depreciate the value of adjacent or
surrounding properties.
D. Prevent the creation, continuation, extension or aggravation of blight.
E. Preserve property values in the Township.
F. Maintain the value and economic health of the commercial property and
businesses that serve and help to support the Township and its citizens.
A. Sanitation. All exterior property areas and premises shall be
maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition, free from any
accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
B. Containers. The operator of every establishment producing garbage,
vegetable wastes or other putrescible materials shall provide, and at all
times cause to be used, leakproof containers, provided with close-fitting
covers, for the storage of such materials until removed from the
premises for disposal.
C. Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained so
as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon or within any
structure located thereon.
D. Traffic safety maintenance. All traffic flow and control signs, whether
painted on pavement or vertical structures, shall be properly
§ 285-1 WEST MILFORD CODE § 285-4
279:368
maintained in a functional condition. Bent and leaning sign poles shall
be replaced and/or straightened. Painted directional and parking-bay
stripes shall be maintained in a readable condition. Bent and broken
traffic control guardrails and fencing shall be replaced.
E. Litter and maintenance of solid waste disposal facilities. All industrial
and commercial sites shall be kept free from noticeable accumulation of
paper and solid waste debris. Common refuse storage areas shall be
kept in a clean and repaired state in full conformance with the site plan
provisions for such facilities. All parking areas, walkways, sidewalks
and pathways on industrial and commercial sites shall be cleared of
snow and ice within 24 hours of the end of any snow or ice storm.
F. Insect and rat control. An owner of a structure or property shall be
responsible for the extermination of insects, rats, vermin or other pests
in all exterior and interior areas of the premises. Whenever infestation
exists in the shared or public parts of the premises, extermination shall
be the responsibility of the owner.
G. Public areas. All sidewalks, steps, driveways, parking spaces and
similar paved areas for public use shall be kept in a proper state of
repair.
H. Noxious weeds. All areas shall be kept free from weeds or plant growth
which is noxious or detrimental to the public health and welfare.
I. Exhaust vents. A person shall not construct, maintain or operate pipes,
ducts, conductors, fans or blowers discharging gases, steam, vapor, hot
air, grease, smoke, odors of other gaseous or particulate wastes so as to
discharge directly upon abutting or adjacent public and private
property or that of another tenant.
J. Prohibited conditions. The exterior of all premises shall be kept free of
the following matter, materials or conditions:
(1) Abandoned, uncovered or structurally unsound walls, shafts,
towers, exterior cellar openings, basement hatchways, foundations
or excavations.
(2) Abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators, heaters, television sets and
other similar major appliances.
(3) Animal excrement.
(4) Hidden or uncovered ground or surface hazards, such as holes,
sudden depressions, sharp or jagged projections or obstructions.
(5) Buried rubble, refuse or rubbish.
(6) Nuisances as hereinabove defined.
(7) Vehicles or parts thereof, including boats and trailers, motorized or
not, licensed or unlicensed, registered or unregistered, which
§ 285-4 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 285-4
279:369
§ 285-5. Maintenance of the exterior of structures.
vehicles or parts thereof are or have been junked, abandoned,
dismantled or are in a state of disrepair.
(8) Dangerously loose and overhanging objects, including, but not
limited to, dead trees or tree limbs, accumulations of snow, ice or
any object, natural or man-made, which could threaten the health
and safety of persons if caused to fall or other similar dangerously
loose and overhanging objects, which, by reason of their location
above ground level, constitute an actual hazard to persons or
vehicles in the vicinity thereof.
(9) Structurally unsound, loose, dangerous, crumbling, missing,
broken, rotten or unsafe exterior portions of buildings or
structures, including but not limited to porches, landings,
balconies, stairways, handrails, steps, walls, overhangs, roofs,
fences, supporting members, timbers, abutments, fire escapes,
signs or loose, crumbling or falling bricks, stones, mortar or
plaster.
(10) Exterior surfaces or parts of buildings or structures containing
sharp, rough or projecting surfaces or objects which might cause
injury to persons coming in contact therewith.
(11) Broken glass or windows or rotted, missing or substantially
destroyed window frames and sashes, door frames, exterior doors
or other major exterior component parts of buildings or structures.
A. General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained structurally
sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the health and safety of
the occupants and so as to protect the occupants from the environment.
B. Structural members. All supporting structural members of all
structures shall be kept structurally sound, free of deterioration and
maintained capable of safely bearing the dead and live loads imposed
upon them.
C. Exterior surfaces (foundations, walls and roof). Every foundation,
exterior wall, roof and all other exterior surfaces shall be maintained in
a workmanlike state of maintenance and repair and shall be kept in
such condition as to exclude rats.
D. Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained so as to carry
the safe design and operating dead and live loads and shall be
maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks so as not to be
detrimental to public safety and welfare.
E. Exterior walls. Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, loose
or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions which might
admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the
occupied spaces of the building. All exterior surface materials,
§ 285-4 WEST MILFORD CODE § 285-5
279:370
§ 285-6. Maintenance of interior structures.
§ 285-7. Enforcement officer. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-6]
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer, who
shall be designated by the Township Administrator, with the assistance of
the Police Department, the Fire Prevention Bureau, the Health Department,
and the Planning and Building Department.
including wood, composition or metal siding, shall be maintained
weatherproof and shall be properly surface-coated when required to
prevent deterioration.
F. Roofs. The roof shall be structurally sound and tight and shall not have
defects which might admit rain, and roof drainage shall be adequate to
prevent rainwater from causing dampness in the walls or interior
portion of the building.
G. Chimneys. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks and similar
appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe, sound and in good
repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from
the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of
weather-coating materials, such as paint, or similar surface treatment
where necessary.
H. Stairs and porches. Every stair, porch and balcony, and all
appurtenances attached thereto, shall be so constructed as to be safe to
use and capable of supporting the loads to which they are subjected and
shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
A. General. The interior of a structure and its equipment shall be
maintained structurally sound and in a sanitary condition so as not to
pose a threat to the health and safety of the occupants and to protect
the occupants from the environment.
B. Structural members.
(1) The supporting structural members of every building shall be
maintained structurally sound, not showing any evidence of
deterioration which would render them incapable of carrying the
imposed loads.
(2) Exit facilities. All interior stairs and railing and other exit facilities
of every structure shall be maintained in sound condition and good
repair by replacing treads and risers that evidence excessive wear
or are broken, warped or loose. Every inside stair shall be so
constructed and maintained as to be safe to use and capable of
supporting the anticipated loads.
§ 285-5 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 285-8
279:371
§ 285-8. Enforcement; service of notice; failure to comply.
Whenever the Zoning Officer determines that there is or has been a
violation of any provision of this chapter, he shall give notice of such
violation to the person, persons or entities responsible thereof under this
chapter. Such notice shall be in writing and shall include a concise
statement of the reasons for its issuance. Such notice shall be deemed to
be properly and sufficiently served if a copy thereof is sent by regular,
registered or certified mail to the last known address of the person or
entity upon which the same is served, as shown by the most recent tax
lists of the municipality, or if a copy thereof is handed to such person or
persons or if a copy thereof is left at the usual place of abode or office
of such persons or entities. Notice shall be given as aforesaid within or
without the municipality. The notice should also state that the violation shall
be abated, removed, cured, prevented or desisted from within 10 days of
the date of service of such notice (exclusive of the date of service), unless
a written request for a hearing before the Building Standards Board is
received within the ten-day period. The Zoning Officer may, at the time
he issues the notice, extend the period for compliance with the violation
stated in the notice for a period in excess of the aforesaid 10 days if, in his
judgment, the abatement, removal, prevention, cessation of or cure of the
condition violated cannot reasonably be effected within the ten-day period,
and in such cases the Zoning Officer shall state such reasonable required
extended period in the notice, which shall then be applicable instead of
the aforesaid 10 days. An individual receiving a notice from the Zoning
Official may request a hearing as to the propriety of the order before the
Building Standards Board. Upon receipt of a written request for a hearing,
the matter shall be heard at the next scheduled meeting of the Building
Standards Board. After such a hearing, the Board may continue such order
in effect, modify or withdraw it. In the event that the violation is not abated,
removed, cured, prevented or desisted from or otherwise fully remedied
within the ten-day period or within such extended period as set forth in the
notice pursuant to the foregoing, a summons shall then issue against the
person, persons, entity or entities so notified.
§ 285-9. Emergency conditions.
Whenever the Zoning Officer finds that an emergency condition in violation
of this chapter exists, which condition requires immediate attention in order
to protect the public health or safety, he may issue an order by service of
notice as set forth in § 285-8, reciting the existence of such an emergency
condition and requiring that such action be taken by the violator as soon as
is reasonably necessary to meet the emergency.
§ 285-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-030]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties imposed in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, of the Township Code. Each violation
§ 285-8 WEST MILFORD CODE § 285-10
279:372
of any of the provisions of this chapter and each day the same is violated
shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 285-11. Abatement by Township; recovery of costs. [Amended
12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030]
Where abatement of any nuisance, as defined herein, correction of a defect
in the premises or work necessary to place the premises in a proper
condition so as to conform to ordinances of the Township or applicable laws
of the State of New Jersey requires expending Township monies, the Zoning
Official shall present a report of work proposed to be done to accomplish
the foregoing to the Township Council of the Township with an estimate
of the cost, along with a summary of the proceedings undertaken by the
Zoning Official or to secure compliance, including notices served upon the
occupants, owners, operators or their agents, as the case may be. The
Township Council may thereupon, by resolution, authorize the abatement
of the nuisance, correction of the defect or work necessary to place the
premises in proper condition and in compliance with this code. The Zoning
Official or the Director of Public Works and Engineering, or his designee,
depending upon the volume of the work performed in accordance with
the resolution at Township expense, not to exceed the amount specified
in the resolution, and shall, upon completion thereof, submit a report of
the monies expended and costs to the Township Council. After review of
the report, the Township Council may approve the expenses and costs
whereupon the same shall become a lien against the premises, collectible
as provided by law. A copy of the resolution approving the expenses and
costs, whereupon the same, shall be certified by the Township Clerk and
filed with the Tax Collector of the Township, who shall be responsible for
the collection, and a copy of the report and resolution for the collection, and
a copy of the report and resolution shall be sent by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the owner.
§ 285-12. Vacant, abandoned and foreclosed properties. [Added
10-18-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-013]
A. Definitions. The following words and terms shall have the meanings
herein indicated for the purposes of this section:
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Zoning Officer, Construction Official,
Township Engineer or any other Township officials so designated by
the Township Council to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Nothing
herein shall preclude any Township employee engaged in the
enforcement of laws and ordinances from enforcing the provisions
hereof. The Construction Official shall be responsible for enforcement
of violations of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES — Those portions of a residential
structure or accessory structure on residential property which are
exposed to public view and the surrounding open space.
§ 285-10 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 285-12
279:373
NUISANCES AND HAZARDS — The following shall be considered
nuisances and hazards for the purposes of this section:
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — The title owner of a vacant and abandoned
property or a creditor responsible for the maintenance of a property
pursuant to N.J.S.A 46:10B-51.
STREET ADDRESS — An address at which a natural person who is the
responsible party or an authorized agent actually resides or actively
uses for business purposes, and shall include a street name or rural
delivery route.
VACANT, ABANDONED AND FORECLOSED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
—
Any residential structure or accessory structure that is in disrepair
by reason of deteriorating conditions or storm damage;
(1)
Out of service swimming pools in disrepair by reason of
deteriorating conditions or storm damage;
(2)
(3) Dead, rotting or diseased trees;
(4) Loose and overhanging tree limbs;
(5) Accumulated junk, litter or debris;
Accumulated hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy substances or
materials; and
(6)
Overgrown or neglected lawns, bushes, trees, shrubbery and
landscaping.
(7)
Any improved residential property which is not physically occupied
by a title owner, title owner's family member, title owner's relative
or a tenant of the title owner, or has been foreclosed upon, and
at which at least three of the following conditions exist at the
property:
(a) Overgrown or neglected vegetation;
The accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, or mail on
the property;
(b)
Disconnected gas, electric or water utility services to the
property;
(c)
The accumulation of hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy
substances or materials on the property;
(d)
The accumulation of junk (including junk vehicles), litter, trash,
or debris on the property;
(e)
The absence of window treatments, such as blinds, curtains, or
shutters;
(f)
(1)
§ 285-12 WEST MILFORD CODE § 285-12
279:374
YARD — An open space extending between the closest point of any
building and a lot line or street line, excluding those portions of the
yard that are critical areas.
(g) The absence of furnishings and personal items;
Statements of neighbors, delivery persons, or governmental
employees indicating that the property is vacant and
abandoned;
(h)
Windows or entrances to the property that are boarded up
or closed off, or multiple window panes that are damaged,
broken, and unrepaired;
(i)
Doors to the property that are smashed through, broken off,
unhinged, or continuously unlocked;
(j)
A risk to the health, safety, or welfare of the public or any
adjoining or adjacent property owners due to acts of
vandalism, loitering, criminal conduct, or physical destruction
or deterioration of the property;
(k)
An uncorrected violation of a municipal building, housing or
similar code during the preceding year, or an order by
municipal authorities declaring the property to be unfit for
occupancy and to remain vacant and unoccupied;
(l)
The mortgagee or authorized party has secured or winterized
the property due to the property being deemed vacant and
unprotected or in danger of freezing;
(m)
A written statement issued by the mortgagee expressing the
clear intent of all mortgagors to abandon the property; or
(n)
(o) Any other reasonable indicia of abandonment.
A property which contains both residential and nonresidential
space may be considered abandoned pursuant to P.L. 2003, c. 210
(N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.) so long as 2/3 or more of the total net
square footage of the building was previously legally occupied as
residential space and none of the residential space has been legally
occupied for at least six months at the time of the determination of
abandonment by the Enforcement Officer and the property meets
the criteria set forth in this section.
(2)
B. Registration of vacant, abandoned, and foreclosed properties.
(1) Registration. The responsible party for a vacant, abandoned, or
foreclosed residential property shall immediately file a certificate
of registration with the Township Clerk after receipt of notice that
the property has been determined to be vacant, abandoned or
foreclosed upon, or immediately after the responsible party
assumes ownership of or responsibility for a property already
§ 285-12 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 285-12
279:375
determined to be vacant, abandoned, or foreclosed upon. A
certificate of registration shall remain valid for one year from the
date of issuance and shall be renewed on an annual basis if the
property remains vacant and abandoned.
(2) Form of certificate of registration. The certificate of registration
shall be filed on forms prescribed by the Township Clerk and shall
contain:
(a) The name, street address, and telephone number of a person
who resides or maintains an office within the municipality and
who is either the responsible party or an authorized agent
designated by the responsible party to receive notices and
complaints of property maintenance and code violations on
behalf of the responsible party;
(b) The name, street address, and telephone number of the person
responsible for maintaining the property, if different; and
(c) A certificate from a licensed insurance provider evidencing the
liability insurance coverage on the vacant and abandoned
property.
(3) Certificate of registration amendments. A responsible party for a
vacant abandoned, or foreclosed residential property shall file an
amended certificate of registration within 30 days after any change
in the information required to be included thereon.
(4) Certificate of registration fees. The following fees for a certificate
of registration shall be paid by the responsible party:
(a) For the initial registration fee: $250.
(b) For the second year: $500.
(c) For the third year: $750.
(d) For the forth year: $1,000, adding an additional $250 for each
subsequent year.
C. Security; notification; liability insurance. Within 45 days after the
property has been determined to be vacant and abandoned and until
the property is reoccupied, the responsible party for a vacant,
abandoned, or foreclosed residential property shall:
(1) Enclose and secure the property against unauthorized entry;
(2) Post a sign affixed to the inside and outside of the property, visible
to the public, indicating the name, address, and telephone number
of the responsible party, and authorized agent designated by the
responsible party for the purpose of maintaining the property if
different from the responsible party or authorized agent; and
§ 285-12 WEST MILFORD CODE § 285-12
279:376
(3) Acquire and otherwise maintain liability insurance by procuring a
vacancy policy, covering any damage to any person or any property
caused by any physical condition of the property.
D. Maintenance standards for vacant, abandoned, and foreclosed
properties. Vacant, abandoned, and foreclosed properties shall be
maintained in accordance with the following standards:
(1) The property shall be kept free of all nuisances and hazards, litter,
and debris.
(2) The property shall be kept free of accumulations of water,
vegetation or other matter which might serve as a source of food or
as a harboring or breeding place for infestation.
(3) Grass in the yard area shall be cut and maintained so as to prevent
the grass from going to seed or exceeding 14 inches in height.
(4) The exterior of every structure or accessory structure or other
improvement on the premises shall be kept in good repair, and all
exposed surfaces subject to deterioration shall be covered by a
protective coating appropriate for the particular material as
needed.
(5) The exterior of the buildings shall be free of loose material that may
create a hazard by falling on persons utilizing the premises.
(6) All exterior walls, roofs, windows, window frames, doors, door
frames, skylights, foundations, and other parts of the structure
shall be maintained to keep water from entering the structure and
to prevent excessive drafts or heat loss during cold or inclement
weather and to provide a barrier against infestation. Damaged or
badly worn materials shall be repaired or replaced and places
showing signs of rot, leakage or deterioration or corrosion shall be
treated or restored to prevent weathering or seepage.
(7) Leaders and drain pipes shall be securely fastened to the building
and maintained in good condition.
E. Notice of vacancy, abandonment, and foreclosure. Upon determination
of the enforcement officer that a residential property is vacant,
abandoned, or foreclosed, the enforcement officer shall notify the
responsible party by personal service or registered mail, and posting of
notice in a noticeable place on the property of the determination and
the requirements of this section.
F. Notice of violation. The enforcement officer, upon determination of any
violation of the provisions of this section, or any other applicable
ordinances, statutes or regulations, shall attempt to notify the
responsible party by personal service or registered mail and posting of
notice in a noticeable place on the property of the determination and
the requirements of this section. The notice shall advise the responsible
§ 285-12 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 285-12
279:377
party of the violation and the obligation to remedy the same within
10 days from the date of the notice. If the violation is not remedied
to the satisfaction of the enforcement officer within said 10 days, the
enforcement officer may issue a summons to the responsible party
and request the governing body to adopt a resolution authorizing the
municipality to abate the violation and place the property in compliance
with the provisions of this section and any other applicable ordinances,
statutes or regulations at the responsible party's sole cost and expense
and impose a lien on the property for all costs and fees associated
herewith.
G. Appeals of abandoned property list inclusion.
(1) An owner or lienholder may challenge the inclusion of his property
on the abandoned property list by appealing that determination to
the Building Standards Board within the 30 days of the owner's
receipt of notice or 40 days from the date upon which the notice
was sent. An owner whose identity was not known to the
Construction Official shall have 40 days from the date upon which
the notice was published or posted, whichever is later, to challenge
the inclusion on the abandoned property list. For good cause
shown, the Building Standards Board shall accept a late filing of an
appeal. Within 30 days of receipt of a request for an appeal of the
findings contained in the notice, the Building Standards Board shall
schedule a hearing for redetermination of the matter. Any property
included on the list shall be presumed to be abandoned property
unless the owner, through the submission of an affidavit or
certification by the property owner averring that the property is not
abandoned and stating reasons for such averment, can
demonstrate that the property was erroneously included on the list.
The affidavit or certification shall be accompanied by supporting
documentation, such as but not limited to photographs, repair
invoices, bills and construction contracts. The sole ground for
appeal shall be that the property in question is not abandoned
property as that term is defined in this section. The Building
Standards Board shall decide any timely filed appeal within 10 days
of the hearing on the appeal and shall promptly, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, and by regular mail, notify the proper
owner of the decision and reasons therefor.
(2) The property owner may challenge on adverse determination of an
appeal with the Building Standards Board by instituting, in
accordance with the New Jersey Court Rules, a summary
proceeding in the Superior Court, Law Division, sitting in Passaic
County, which action shall be tried de novo. Such action shall be
instituted within 20 days of the date of decision mailed by the
Building Standards Board. The sole ground for appeal shall be that
the property in question is not abandoned property as that term is
defined in this section. The failure to institute an action of appeal
on a timely basis shall constitute a jurisdictional bar to challenging
§ 285-12 WEST MILFORD CODE § 285-12
279:378
Chapter 297
SECONDHAND PRECIOUS METALS, DEALERS IN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garage sales — See Ch. 174. Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 263.
the adverse determination, except that, for good cause shown, the
court may extend the deadline for instituting the action.
(3) The Construction Official shall promptly remove any property from
the abandoned property list that has been determined not to be
abandoned on appeal.
(4) The abandoned property list shall become effective and the
Township of West Milford shall have the right to pursue any legal
remedy with respect to properties on the abandoned property list
at such time as any one property has been placed on the list in
accordance with the provisions of this section, upon the expiration
of the period for appeal with respect to the property or upon the
denial of an appeal brought by the property owner.
H. Abatement by municipality; costs and lien. Upon adoption of a
resolution by the governing body, the municipality may abate any
nuisance, hazard or violation and place the property in compliance with
the provisions of this section and any other applicable ordinances,
statutes, or regulations. The enforcement officer shall certify the costs
thereof to the governing body. The governing body shall review the
certificate of costs and if found acceptable, authorize a lien be placed
against the property. The amount of the lien shall be added to the taxes
to be assessed and levied upon the property. The amount of the lien
shall also bear interest at the same rates as taxes and be collected in
the same manner as any other taxes assessed and levied upon the
property.
I. Violations and penalties. Any person or entity that violates any
provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a
fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute an additional, separate and distinct
offense. Any penalty imposed pursuant to this section shall be
recoverable by a summary proceeding under the Penalty Enforcement
Law of 1999, P.L. 1999, c.274 (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.). The Superior
Court, Law Division, or the municipal court shall have jurisdiction to
enforce such penalty.
J. Severability. If any provisions of this section shall be determined to be
invalid or unenforceable, such adjudication shall not affect the validity
of the remaining provisions of this section.
§ 285-12 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 285-12
279:379
§ 297-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEALER — Any person, partnership or corporation who, through any
means, buys or sells secondhand gold, silver, precious metals or jewelry,
and includes anyone advertising the purchase or sale of any of the
aforementioned items.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
§ 297-2. Registration and license required; fee.
Each dealer conducting business within the jurisdiction of the Township
of West Milford shall first register with the Chief of Police, who shall
investigate the applicant, and shall obtain a license from the Township Clerk
by paying a fee of $25.
§ 297-3. Records of purchases and sales required.
Each dealer shall maintain a complete record of each purchase and sale
including the amount paid, indicating the name, residence, occupation,
age and description of the person from whom the items were purchased,
received or sold. These records shall be subject to the inspection of any
authorized police officer of the Township of West Milford.
§ 297-4. Description of transactions to be delivered to Police Chief.
Each dealer doing business in the Township of West Milford shall deliver to
the Chief of Police the description of all items purchased, received or sold,
within 72 hours of the completion of the transaction, on forms prescribed
by the Chief of Police.
§ 297-5. Holding time for purchased items.
No dealer shall sell, melt, change the form of or dispose of any articles
purchased or received within 10 days from the date the notification is made
to the Chief of Police, and all such items shall remain on the premises where
the purchase was made for at least 10 days.
§ 297-6. Identification of persons transacting business with dealers.
Each dealer must require identification of the person with whom it is
transacting business, and no transaction may be made with any minor, as
hereinabove defined.
§ 285-12 WEST MILFORD CODE § 297-7
279:380
§ 297-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person as defined above who violates any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000
or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, within
the discretion of the Municipal Judge. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed in each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 300
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Toilet installation — See Ch. 360.
Water — See Ch. 390.
Water and sewer service — See Ch. 394.
§ 297-7 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 297-7
279:381

ARTICLE I
Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems
[Adopted 1-3-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-3]
§ 300-1. Establishment of code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6, the Individual Subsurface
Sewage Disposal Code (1990), N.J.A.C. 7:9A, is hereby adopted by the
Township. A copy of the code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof
without the inclusion of the text herein.
§ 300-2. Title of code.
The code adopted and established by this article is described and commonly
known as the "Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Code of New Jersey
(1990)."
§ 300-3. Public record.
Three copies of the Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Code of New
Jersey have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary, Clerk or similar
officer of the Department of Health and will remain on file in such office for
the use and examination of the public.
§ 300-4. Septic installation fees and charges. [Amended 11-21-1990
by Ord. No. 1990-43; 12-6-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-18; 9-21-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-14; 8-23-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-010; 12-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-030]
Septic installation fees and charges are set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and
Costs.
§ 300-5. Term of permit.
All permits for the location or alteration of an individual sewage disposal
system shall be valid for a period of one year after date of issuance.
§ 300-5.1. Additional requirements for properties located in lake
communities. [Added 12-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-17]
A. Applicability. All applicants for a permit to construct, alter, repair or
replace an individual subsurface sewage disposal system on a property
located within the boundaries of a lake community in the Township of
West Milford shall, in addition to the requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:9A and
the Ordinances of the Township of West Milford, provide proof to the
Health Department that notice has been provided to the respective
property owners' association of the filing of the application. For
purposes of this section, "properties within the boundaries of a lake
community" shall be defined as those properties (consisting of blocks
and lots) contained on the Township's Lake Community Master List
which is on file with the Township's Building Department.
§ 300-1 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 300-5.1
279:383
§ 300-6. Installer's license; bond. [Amended 11-21-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-43; 4-15-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-15]
B. Proof of the notice required by Subsection A, above, shall be the
submission of a receipt that the notification was sent certified mail,
return receipt requested. Such proof may be established by presenting
a receipt of certified mail shipped by the United States Post Office.
C. Applications for permits to construct, repair, alter or replace an
individual subsurface sewage disposal system for properties located in
lake communities which are not accompanied by the proof of notice
required pursuant to Subsections A and B of this section will be deemed
incomplete and will not be considered until such proof of notice has
been provided.
D. Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the
Director of the Health Department and/or his or her respective
designee.
E. Violations and penalties. Any person or persons, firm, association or
corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties imposed in Chapter 1,
Article III, General Penalty, of the Township Code. For the purposes of
this article, failure to provide the required proof of notice for each
application for a permit for a property subject to the terms of this
article shall be considered a separate offense.
A. Persons shall not engage in the business of constructing, reconstructing
or extending septic tanks or other individual sewage disposal system or
part thereof without first having obtained a license to do so from the
Department of Health or its authorized representative. Applicant must
show proof of his knowledge and experience in the installation of
sewage disposal devices. A license so issued shall expire on December
31 in each year. Such a license may be revoked or suspended for failure
of the licensee to comply with the provisions of the code or any rule or
ordinance of the Department of Health. Licenses not renewed by their
expiration shall not be renewed until the applicant has been
reexamined.
B. A person who has been issued a license to engage in the business of
constructing, reconstructing or extending septic tanks or other
individual sewage disposal systems or part thereof shall execute and
deposit with the Department of Health or its administrative authority a
surety bond of a reliable surety company acceptable to the
administrative authority, and doing business in the State of New Jersey,
provided that the bond shall be in the amount of $10,000. Such bond
shall be conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this code,
and the person or persons so bonded being obliged to pay all fines and
penalties as may be imposed upon him or them pursuant to law for
violation of the provisions of this code and article. A license or permits
§ 300-5.1 WEST MILFORD CODE § 300-6
279:384
issued under this article shall not be valid unless such a bond has been
executed and deposited as herein provided.
C. Persons may install an individual sewage disposal system upon property
owned by such persons without having first obtained an installer's
license, provided that they satisfactorily demonstrate their knowledge
in the installation of sewage disposal devices through a written test to
be administered by the Health Department. [Added 11-4-1992 by
Ord. No. 1992-46]
§ 300-6 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 300-6
279:385

ARTICLE II
Sewer Systems
[Adopted as Sec. 19-6 of the 1976 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 300-7. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions are hereby
established:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The officer of the Township or his
authorized representative assigned to enforce this article.
APPROVED SEWER SYSTEM — A sanitary sewer system which has been
designed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State
Department of Health and Senior Services, pursuant to Title 58 of the
Revised Statutes of New Jersey, and intended to provide sewerage facilities
for realty improvements.
REALTY IMPROVEMENT — Any residence or other building, the useful
occupancy of which will require the installation or erection of sewerage
facilities.
§ 300-8. Permit required; certificate of compliance; standards.
A. From and after September 19, 1961, no person shall locate, construct,
alter, or put into use an approved sewer system, until a permit for the
location, construction, or alteration of such system shall have been
issued by the Department of Health. No certificate of compliance shall
be issued until and unless such system complies with the standards and
regulations herein stated.
B. Construction of sewer systems. [Added 10-5-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-25]
(1) The construction of all sewer systems and sewage treatment plants
shall be approved by the West Milford Municipal Utilities Authority.
All sewer systems shall be constructed in accordance with the
statutes of the State of New Jersey and the rules and regulations of
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and the
West Milford Municipal Utilities Authority; provided, however, that
any person constructing a sewage treatment plant shall also obtain
site plan approval from the Planning Board of the Township of West
Milford, and building permits from the Township of West Milford.
(2) All work in connection with the installation of an approved sewer
system and all house connections shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the sanitary and plumbing codes of the Township.
Work in connection with house connections shall be performed by
duly licensed personnel, who must satisfy the plumbing subcode
official of their experience and knowledge in the installation of
house connections to approved sewer systems.
§ 300-7 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 300-9
279:387
§ 300-9. Administration and enforcement.
The administrative officer shall administer and enforce the provisions of this
article.
§ 300-10. Application for permit and certificate of compliance.
§ 300-11. Issuance of permit and certificate.
A. Applications for the permit required by this article and for certificate of
compliance of the system shall be in writing and shall be made to the
administrative officer on a formal application blank provided by him.
They shall include such engineering data as shall be prescribed by the
standards for construction, fixed by the State Department of Health and
Senior Services and by this article. Such application shall set forth the
following information:
(1) The applicant's full name and post office address.
(2) The full description of the property or area in the Township to be
served by the sewer system.
(3) Name and address of the professional engineer designing the
system.
(4) Certification of the professional engineer that the sewer system are
in compliance with the standards of the State Department of Health
and Senior Services and the standards of this article.
(5) Name and address of the licensed superintendent or operator to be
in general charge of the sewer system.
(6) Such other information as the Department of Health may
determine and require in order to show compliance with the
standards herein stated.
B. Copies of all applications and the accompanying engineering data for
certifications shall be filed with or mailed to the State Department of
Health and Senior Services on the date on which application is made to
the Department of Health
A. The Department of Health shall issue or deny certification within 15
days after receiving an application for certification except that, in case
the Board finds the data submitted by an applicant incomplete, the time
for acting thereon shall be extended by 15 days beyond the date of
submission of adequate supplementary or amendatory data. Denial of
certification shall be supported by a statement of the reasons for such
action.
B. Copies of all certifications by the Department of Health shall be mailed
by the administration officer to the State Department of Health and
Senior Services on the date of issue.
§ 300-9 WEST MILFORD CODE § 300-12
279:388
§ 300-12. Revocation.
Any permit or certification made may be revoked by the Department;
provided that such action is taken before approval is given by the State
Department of Health and Senior Services; and provided that such action
is supported by a statement of the reasons therefor. If, after revocation of
any permit or certification, the application is amended or supplemented, the
Department after reconsideration may reissue the permit and recertify the
system.
§ 300-13. Certification voided on change in physical condition.
If any change in the physical conditions of any lands of a realty
improvement, which will materially affect the operation of the sewerage
facilities or system covered by any certification issued under this article,
shall be made after certification, the certification shall become null and void
and a new certification shall be obtained before construction shall proceed.
A copy of the application for a new certificate shall be mailed to the State
Department of Health and Senior Services on the date upon which it is
submitted to the Department of Health.
§ 300-14. Hearing; time; action.
In case any certification is denied by the Department of Health, a hearing
shall be held thereon before the Department, within 15 days after request
thereof is made by the applicant, and upon such hearing the Department
of Health shall affirm, alter or rescind its previous determination and take
action accordingly within 15 days after the date of such hearing.
§ 300-15. Inspections and tests.
The Department of Health shall have power to make, or cause to be made,
such inspections and tests as may be necessary to carry out the purposes
of this article, and its authorized representatives shall at all times have the
right to enter upon the lands served by the sewer system or of the realty
improvements for such purposes.
§ 300-16. Order to stop work; violations and penalties.
The Department of Health shall have the right to order all further work
in and about any sewerage facilities which is being erected or installed in
violation of this article, to be stopped forthwith, except such work as shall
be necessary to remedy such violation and, thereafter, to continue such
work without any violation of any of the provisions of this article, and after
the issuance of any such order and the service of a copy thereof upon any
person connected with or working in and about the erection or installation
of any such sewerage facilities, or any part thereof, no further work shall
be done thereon except as aforesaid and any person or corporation who,
after having been served with a copy of such an order, shall do any work
or cause or permit any work to be done in or about the same, except such
§ 300-12 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 300-16
279:389
as is hereinbefore provided, shall be liable to a penalty as provided for in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, of the Township Code.
§ 300-17. Fees.82
The fees and charges pertinent to this Article II are included in Chapter 135,
Fees and Costs.
§ 300-18. Standards, rules and regulations.
All of the rules and regulations of the State Department of Health and
Senior Services of the State of New Jersey, made effective on April 25,
1958, promulgated for employment in the administration of N.J.S.A. 58:12-1
et seq.,83 58:11-2, 58:11-3, 58:11-1084 and 58:10-17,85 and any and all
supplements and amendments thereto, except as to any provisions
hereinafter recited modifying the same, are hereby included and made part
of this article; no approved sewer system shall be certified until and unless
it conforms to such rules and regulations, and as herein modified.
A. All work in connection with the installation of an approved sewer
system, and all house connections, shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the sanitary and plumbing codes of the Township. Work in
connection with house connection shall be performed by duly licensed
personnel, who must satisfy the Department of Health of their
experience and knowledge in the installation of house connections to
approved sewer systems.
B. All sewage treatment plants are to be provided with primary and
secondary treatment facilities.
C. No intermittent biological sand filter shall be employed to provide
secondary treatment in any sewage treatment plant.
D. Sewage treatment plants shall be located as far from existing
structures as practical, but not closer than the distances from the
following:
(1) From an existing collector street: 400 feet.
(2) From an existing minor street: 200 feet.
(3) From any existing dwelling: 500 feet.
(4) From any other type of existing building: 300 feet.
(5) From property line: 250 feet.
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
83.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 58:12-1 et seq. was repealed by P.L. 1977, c. 74.
84.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 58:11-1 et seq. was repealed by P.L. 1977, c. 224.
85.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 58:10-17 was repealed by P.L. 1977, c. 74.
§ 300-16 WEST MILFORD CODE § 300-18
279:390
§ 300-19. Purpose.
This article is for the purpose of regulation and shall in no way affect any
of the fees as now provided for or to be hereafter provided for in any other
ordinance of the Township, but shall be in addition thereto.
E. Where intermittent sand filters are used, the distances shall be as
follows:
(1) From an existing collector street: 600 feet.
(2) From an existing minor street: 200 feet.
(3) From any existing dwelling: 1,000 feet.
(4) From any other type of existing building: 300 feet.
(5) From property line: 300 feet.
F. Variances from any of the above distances may be granted upon the
recommendation of the Advisory Board of Health by the Township
Council, after public hearing on due notice to all property owners
within the distance of the location of the proposed treatment plant for
which a variance is applied for.
G. Where by ordinance consent has been given to the formation of a
sewerage company, and such ordinance provides for the location of
sewerage treatment plants, such company, notwithstanding the
provisions herein, shall locate its sewerage treatment plants in
accordance with the distances stated in such ordinances of consent.
H. After the installation of the sewer system, the applicant shall submit in
duplicate a map, with an overlay of the original plan, upon which
certification is based, showing the location of the treatment plant, and
showing all utilities, construction units and connections in exact
location and elevation. The map shall bear the certification of the
professional engineer designing the system.
§ 300-18 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 300-19
279:391

ARTICLE III
Connection to Sanitary Sewer Lines
[Adopted by Sec. 19-7 of the 1976 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 300-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the
context, the following words shall have the following meanings:
BUILDING — Any building or structure heretofore or hereafter constructed
and designed or used for dwelling purposes, either temporary or
permanent, or for other use or occupancy by persons.
CONNECTION DATE — When used with respect to a building constructed
prior to the date of initial operation, as a part of any sanitary sewage
treatment and disposal system in the Township, owned or operated by the
Township or the West Milford Township Municipal Utilities Authority, of a
sewer in a street, upon which such building is located, means 180th day
next ensuing after the date of initial operation, and when used with respect
to a building constructed after the date of initial operation, as a part of
any sanitary sewage treatment and disposal system owned or operated by
the Township or such Authority, of a sewer in the street, upon which the
building is located, means the 60th day after the date of completion of
construction, or the date of initial occupancy, of such building, whichever of
the dates shall be earlier in point of time.
SEWER — Any sewer or main designed or use for collection or disposal of
sanitary sewage and located within the Township.
§ 300-21. Connection with sewer.
The owner of each property along the line of any sewer now or hereafter
constructed in the Township shall connect each building on such property
with a sewer prior to the connection date with respect to such building.
§ 300-22. Soil pipes.
Every connection required by this article shall be made with soil pipe of
extra heavy iron, calked and leaded, extending from inside the building
foundation to a sewer, or to a point which is not less than five feet outside
of such foundation and connection therefrom to a sewer with soil pipe of
asbestos cement or extra heavy cast iron pipe, or other material approved
by any code adopted by the Department of Health. All soil pipes shall be
not less than four inches in diameter, and every connection required by this
article shall be made in a manner to discharge into such sewer all sanitary
sewage originating in the building, and in all other respects as required by
any code of the Department of Health.
§ 300-23. Receipt of notification.
Upon receipt by Health Department of notification from the West Milford
Township Municipal Utilities Authority or from the Township that any sewer
§ 300-20 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 300-23
279:393
is available to serve buildings on any street in the Township, the
Department of Health shall order each owner of property along the line of
such sewer to connect each building on such property with such sewer in
accordance with the terms of this article.
§ 300-24. Notice to property owner.
The Department of Health shall designate one of its proper officers to give
notice to the owner of property with respect to which an order is issued
pursuant to § 300-23. Such notice shall be addressed to the owner of the
property as the name of the owner appears in the last tax duplicate of the
Township, shall describe the property by lot and block designation as the
same appears on the tax map of the Township and by the street address
if a street address exists, and shall state that by order of the Department
of Health the owner is required to connect each building on the property
with the sewer in accordance with the terms of this article on or before
the connection date with respect to such building, or if such connection
date shall have passed, within 30 days after the service of such notice as
hereinafter provided, and the notice shall also describe the penalty which
may be imposed hereunder for failure to comply with the notice and order
in accordance with the terms of this article. The notice may be served on the
owner personally or by leaving it as his usual place of abode with a member
of his family above the age of 18 years. The notice may also be served within
or without the limits of the Township by mailing the same by registered or
certified mail to the last known post office address of the owner as the same
appears on the last tax duplicate of the Township.
§ 300-25. Violations and penalties.86
Any person who shall not comply with any order issued in accordance with
the provisions hereof within 30 days after notice by the proper office of
the Department of Health as hereinabove provided shall, upon complaint
by such officer of the Department or the Secretary of the West Milford
Township Municipal Utilities Authority, or any other person, and upon
conviction, be subject to the penalties imposed in Chapter 1, Article III,
General Penalty, of the Township Code. Penalties under this article may be
enforced in the Municipal Court of the Township in the manner provided by
law.
§ 300-26. Exceptions.
If an owner of property along the line of any sewer now or hereafter
constructed in the Township shall, on due application, clearly demonstrate
that the requirement of connection to the sewer will exact an undue
hardship, and that the literal enforcement of this article as against him
would be impracticable, the Department of Health may permit an exception
to be allowed such owner from complying with the requirements of this
article; provided that such owner has on his property an individual sewer
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-23 WEST MILFORD CODE § 300-26
279:394
system functioning according to the local sanitary code and that such
system does not result in a menace to the public health. Any exception
so made, however, shall cease and become immediately ineffective should
such individual sewer system cease to function in accordance with the local
code, in which case the requirement of connecting to the sewer system shall
become mandatory.
§ 300-27. Effectiveness.
To the extent that the installation and construction of sewers in the various
areas of the Township shall be for the best interest of the public, the West
Milford Township Municipal Utilities Authority shall, before the undertaking
of any program or prior to the taking of any action for such sewering in any
designated area, confer with the Department of Health. The lack of strict
enforcement of this section, however, shall not in any way affect the validity
of this article.
§ 300-28. Permit fee. [Added 10-5-1983 by Ord. No. 1983-2587]
The fee for the issuance of a permit for each house connection to an
approved sewer system is set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs.
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-26 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 300-28
279:395

ARTICLE IV
Sewage Treatment Systems
[Adopted 7-2-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-18]
§ 300-29. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIVE SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM — Any individual sewage
treatment system which contains or incorporates, as part of the treatment
process, a manner of introducing air and/or oxygen into the sewage or
treating the sewage held in such systems so as to provide for and facilitate
the biochemical stabilization of the sewage prior to its discharge to any
substantial absorption area.
CLOSED SEWAGE SYSTEM — Any septic system design that includes in
its construction a holding tank or a metal vault having only a vent pipe
and an opening for the purpose of emptying same. This may be a holding
tank, a septic tank and holding tank in series; a septic tank, disposal field
and holding tank in series, or other designs approved by the Department of
Health.
OWNER — Any person, individual, copartnership, corporation, or other type
of business association or entity who shall either own, reside upon, lease
or operate any premises upon which is located any active waste treatment
system.
§ 300-30. Application.
Upon application to the Department of Health for the approval of a septic
system, the Department of Health shall determine whether the system
proposed is an active waste treatment system or a closed sewage system.
The applicant shall provide detailed drawings, specifications and any other
materials requested by the Department of Health relevant to the system to
be constructed.
§ 300-31. Active sewage treatment systems.
A. Approvals and permits. In the event a septic system is classified as an
active waste treatment system, no approval of or permit shall issue for
the construction, alteration, modification, installation or utilization of
any such system unless the owner of said premises shall present
evidence of a service and inspection contract or policy in a form
acceptable to the Department.
B. Inspection, service and maintenance contracts. Where the Department
of Health requires a service, inspection or maintenance contract in
accord with the regulations set forth herein, said contracts or policies
shall run from January through December 31 of each year with the
exception of the year of construction when the contract shall run from
the date of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy through December
§ 300-29 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 300-31
279:397
31 of that year. Copies of new or renewal contracts or policies shall be
filed with the Department of Health by the owner prior to the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy and prior to December 15 of each year.
Policies may extend for a time period longer than one year; however,
in such event the policies shall expire on December 31 of the last year
provided therein.
C. Periodic inspections. All policies or contracts provided to the
Department of Health in accord with the requirements set forth herein
shall require that the active sewage treatment systems be inspected not
less than every three months and that copies of the results of said
inspections be filed with the Department by the inspecting company or
the owner within 10 days from the date of said inspection. The
Department reserves the right to inquire into the qualifications of any
issuer of said service and inspection contracts or policies and the
Department may, where it feels the issuing individual is not qualified,
reject said policies and contracts.
D. Prior existing systems. Upon the passage of this article, the Department
of Health shall provide notice by certified mail to the owners of any
presently existing active sewage treatment systems. Said notice shall
contain a copy of this article and shall advise the owners notified that
their system has been classified as an active sewage treatment system
and that they will be compelled to comply with all of the requirements
of this article. Within 90 days from the receipt of said notification, the
owners of all said active sewage treatment systems shall provide to the
Department of Health copies of contracts or policies for the servicing
and inspection of said systems.
E. Appeals. Any owner or applicant who feels his system should not be
classified as an active sewage treatment system or who for any other
reason feels that he cannot comply with the requirements set forth
herein may apply to the Department of Health for an exception or a
modification to the requirements set forth herein. Said application shall
contain a detailed explanation of the reasons or causes for such
application and shall be supported by any and all plans, specifications
or other documents required by the Department of Health. Upon
receipt of any such application, the Department of Health shall proceed
as follows:
(1) The Department shall review and examine and inquire into the
facts set forth in the application.
(2) The Department shall inquire into the adequacy and sufficiency of
any proposed service and inspection of the unit in question.
(3) The Department shall, within 45 days of the filing of said
application, order and direct the owner or applicant to service and
inspect the subject system in a manner and in accordance with its
considered judgment. Such determination shall be deemed final.
§ 300-31 WEST MILFORD CODE § 300-32
279:398
§ 300-32. Closed sewage systems.
A. Approvals and permits. In the event a septic system is classified as a
closed sewage system, a permit may be issued for the installation of
such a system by the Department of Health only where soil tests
indicate that septic systems will not function properly, where no other
method of handling sewage is presently available, when the
Department of Health is satisfied that such relief can be granted
without danger to the health and welfare of the residents of the
Township of West Milford and when the following conditions are met.
B. Design standards.
(1) The proposed system shall be designed by a licensed engineer
pursuant to standards promulgated by the State Department of
Environmental Protection and the Township of West Milford
Advisory Board of Health and shall include, among other things, a
large enough sealed tank to provide a safety margin so that the
tank will not become completely full prior to emptying. The
capacity of the tanks shall be at least 14 days.
(2) The system shall also include, among other things, a two-stage float
control alarm system, a gauge to indicate the amount of effluent in
the tank and a device which is accessible to the Health Department,
or its agents, for shutting off the water supply pump.
(3) The design, layout and specification of the tank and of the entire
system must be approved by the Health Office before construction
begins and again when completed.
C. Estoppel certificate. An estoppel certificate shall be executed by the
property owner and duly recorded with the Register of Deeds, County
of Passaic, which certificate shall stipulate the existence of a sealed
septic system. The property owner shall pay for the cost of preparing of
the said certificate.
D. Inspection, service and maintenance contracts.
(1) Pursuant to the issuance of a permit the property owner shall enter
into a written contract with a licensed scavenger service for the
periodic pumping of the said system, and said contract shall run
from January 1 through December 31 of each year with the
exception of the year of construction when the contract shall run
from the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy through
December 31 of that year. Copies of new or renewal contracts or
policies shall be filed with the Department of Health by the owner
prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and prior to
December 15 of each year. Policies may extend for a time period
longer than one year; however, in such event the policies shall
expire on December 31 of the last year provided thereon. The
scavenger service shall also submit to the Department of Health
proof of its capacity to lawfully dispose of the materials pumped
§ 300-32 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 300-32
279:399
§ 300-33. Violations and penalties.88
Any person who shall violate any provisions of or order promulgated under
this article or code established herein shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to the penalties imposed in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty,
of the Township Code. Each day that a particular violation continues shall
constitute a distinct and separate offense.
from said system, including a signed copy of its contract with the
final disposition site owner.
(2) The owner of the system shall keep a record of the dates of the
pumping of the system and the volume of water removed
therefrom. These records shall be available to the Department of
Health or its agents or personnel upon request.
E. Emptying of tanks.
(1) The tank or tanks of a closed sewage system shall be emptied
immediately when full, and no tank shall be permitted to run over
or leak. Tanks may only be emptied by persons holding a license to
engage in such business.
(2) In the event of an overflow, leak or malfunction, owner shall
immediately correct or pump the system as needed. Upon the
failure of the owner to immediately correct the situation, the
Department of Health may require that the premises be vacated
without redress by the owner.
(3) Upon the failure of the owner to properly pump and maintain the
said system, the Department of Health may cause such pumping or
maintenance through the direction of the Health Officer. The
Department of Health shall certify the cost thereof to the Tax
Assessor, who shall charge the cost against the said lands, which
amount shall become a lien on the said lands, and be assessed,
collected and enforced in the same manner as taxes.
F. Connection to sewer system. The owner shall connect to a sewer system
in the event of its availability within 60 days of receipt from the
Department of Health of a demand to so connect, and the closed septic
system shall be abandoned.
G. Shallow wells. All shallow wells within 100 feet of holding tanks shall be
replaced with drilled wells. The said drilled wells shall be approved by
the appropriate authorities and in operation before commencement of
the use of a sealed septic.
H. Remedies. In addition to the remedies provided herein, the Township
may avail itself of any lawful remedy available to it.
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-32 WEST MILFORD CODE § 300-33
279:400
ARTICLE V
Sewerage Authority Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 5-1-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-23]
§ 300-34. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The Mayor and Council of the Township of West Milford, in the County of
Passaic, State of New Jersey, as the governing body thereof, does hereby
determine that there exists a need and a requirement to provide an efficient
means for the enforcement of rules and regulations regulating the making
of connection to and regulating the discharge into the primary sewer system
operated by the Pequannock, Lincoln Park, and Fairfield Sewerage
Authority, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:14A-23 and Section 701
of the Service Agreement between the Pequannock River Basin Regional
Sewerage Authority and the Pequannock, Lincoln Park, and Fairfield
Sewerage Authority for any properties within the Township that are
connected to the Authority system. The Mayor and Council of the Township
of West Milford hereby adopts said rules and regulations which are
enumerated at length in a document entitled, "Rules and Regulations
Governing the Discharge of Sewage, Industrial Wastes, or Other Wastes into
the Pequannock, Lincoln Park, and Fairfield Sewerage Authority System
and All Sewers Tributary Thereto," adopted on April 5, 1978, and amended
January 11, 1984, and as may be amended from time to time by the
Pequannock, Lincoln Park, and Fairfield Sewerage Authority by resolutions.
§ 300-35. Violations and penalties; enforcement.89
Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation violating any rules,
regulations, or emergency proclamations of the Pequannock, Lincoln Park,
and Fairfield Sewerage Authority, in the Township of West Milford, shall be
subject to the penalties imposed in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty,
of the Township Code, for each violation, and the Municipal Clerk of the
Township of West Milford shall have jurisdiction in actions for the violation
of such rules and regulations, which shall be enforced by like proceedings
and processes as those provided by law for the enforcement of ordinances of
the municipality. In the event of continuing violation, each day the violation
continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. The officers
authorized by law to serve and execute processes in the Municipal Court
shall be the officers to serve and execute processes issued out of the
Municipal Court for violations of the rules and regulations of the Authority.
The Executive Director of the Authority is hereby designated as the
enforcement officer of this article.
§ 300-36. Disposition of fines and penalties.
All monies collected, either as fines or penalties, but not court costs or
municipal expenses, for any violations of the rules and regulations of the
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-34 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 300-36
279:401
Authority under any provisions of this article shall be forthwith paid over to
the Authority by the custodian of municipal funds, as permitted by law.
§ 300-36 WEST MILFORD CODE § 300-36
279:402
ARTICLE VI
Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal System Management
[Adopted 12-3-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-050]
§ 300-37. Purpose.
In addition to the purposes set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-1.1., it is the purpose
of this article to:
§ 300-38. Definitions.
All definitions given in Subchapter 2 (N.J.A.C. 7:9A-2.1 et seq.) of the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) Standards for the
Construction of Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems, N.J.A.C.
7:9A-1.1 et seq., and any amendments thereto ("NJDEP Regulations") are
hereby incorporated into this article, with the following additions:
ACTIVE USE — For initial licenses, this term shall mean the use or direction
of wastewater to a system after the adoption date of this article. For renewal
licenses, this term shall mean the use or direction of wastewater to a system
at any time during the period of the license.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH — The Department of Health of the Township of
West Milford.
EDUCATION PROGRAM — An educational program prepared and
administered by the Board of Health regarding the fundamentals of
individual and nonindividual subsurface sewage disposal systems and the
proper procedures for the operation and maintenance of such systems. The
educational program shall be deemed to be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:9A-3.14.
A. Establish a management program for individual and nonindividual
subsurface sewage disposal systems in the Township of West Milford in
order to ensure the proper operation and maintenance of such systems.
This article requires existing, new and proposed individual and
nonindividual subsurface sewage disposal systems to be pumped out at
least once every three years in order to minimize future malfunctions of
such systems.
B. Regulate individual and nonindividual subsurface sewage disposal
systems in the program area in such a way as to protect public health
and welfare and the environment, and to provide for a means of
educating owners/operators, as defined herein, in the characteristics of
such systems and the proper procedures for altering, operating and
maintaining them.
C. Develop a management program to maintain records and manage
systems in the program area.
D. Promote and assure the proper management and maintenance of
individual and nonindividual sewage disposal systems through time.
§ 300-37 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 300-38
279:403
ENFORCING OFFICIAL — The Health Officer of the Township of West
Milford or his designee.
IMMEDIATE EFFECTIVE DATE SHALL BE JANUARY 1, 2009 — On or about
January 1, 2009, the Director of the Department of Health shall designate
by way of publication in two newspapers circulated in the Township the date
that property owners must obtain a valid license as set forth in § 300-40.
The Health Officer may set such compliance date by region, section or any
other reasonable manner.
INDIVIDUAL SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — An individual
subsurface sewage disposal system, as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:9A-2.1, serving
a single-family detached residential housing unit.
LICENSED SEPTIC SLUDGE REMOVAL OPERATOR — Any person, firm or
corporation who or which has been duly examined by the enforcing official
and found qualified to pump out an individual or nonindividual subsurface
sewage disposal system, and who or which has been issued a license.
NONINDIVIDUAL SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — An onsite
subsurface sewage disposal system serving a property other than a
single-family home. Such systems include but are not limited to those
systems defined in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-1.8(a)2. Typical examples include, but
are not limited to, commercial buildings, restaurants, food establishments;
commercial/residential mixed uses, and systems servicing multiple units.
OPERATOR'S LICENSE — A license issued to an applicant pursuant to this
article for the operation of an individual or nonindividual subsurface sewage
disposal system.
OWNER or OPERATOR — The person who owns the realty upon which an
individual or nonindividual subsurface sewage disposal system is located
and/or the person who uses or operates said system. The owner of the realty
and the operator of the system, if different, are jointly and severally liable
for the obligations imposed by this article.
PLOT PLAN — A sketch drawn by the owner/operator, or agent on his or
her behalf, showing the type (if known) and location of the individual or
nonindividual subsurface sewage disposal system servicing the property, as
well as the location and type of any on-site water supply. All plots shall be
drawn to scale and list the dimensions used.
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any fixed or mobile restaurant; coffee
shop; cafeteria; short-order cafe; luncheonette; grill; tearoom; sandwich
shop; soda fountain; tavern; bar; cocktail lounge; nightclub; roadside stand;
industrial feeding establishment; private, public, or nonprofit organization,
institution, or group preparing, storing or serving food; catering kitchen;
commissary; box lunch establishment; retail bakery; meat market;
delicatessen; grocery store; public food market, or any similar place in
which food or drink is prepared for retail sale or service on the premises
or elsewhere, and any other retail eating or drinking establishment or
operation where food is served, handled or provided for the public with or
without charge.
§ 300-38 WEST MILFORD CODE § 300-38
279:404
SYSTEM — An individual or nonindividual subsurface sewage disposal
system, including all of the component parts thereof.
§ 300-39. Scope, applicability and exemptions.
§ 300-40. License to operate.
A. Scope. The owner and/or occupant of any realty improvement serviced
by an individual or nonindividual on-site subsurface sewage disposal
system located in the Township of West Milford shall be subject to all of
the requirements of this article.
B. Applicability. No person within the Township of West Milford shall
operate an individual or nonindividual subsurface sewage disposal
system unless such construction, installation, alteration, maintenance
or operation is in accordance with all applicable sanitary regulations
and this article.
C. Exemptions. Any system not in active use shall be exempted from this
article. The Department of Health may require an owner or operator of
a system seeking exemption under this section to submit proof in the
form acceptable to the Department so as to qualify for this exemption.
A. Requirement for license. On and after within two years of the effective
date of this article, no owner or occupant of a property in the Township
of West Milford, upon which an individual or nonindividual subsurface
sewage disposal system is located, shall use or operate the system
unless a currently valid license to operate the system has been issued
by the Department of Health in accordance with the schedule herein to
the owner of the property on which the system is located. [Amended
8-26-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-019]
(1) The Department of Health or its designee may issue a license to
operate and educational information relative to the proper
operation and maintenance practices (pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:9A-3.14) to the owner and occupant of a property upon one or
more of the following events:
(a) Issuance of a certificate of compliance for a new system;
(b) Issuance of a certificate of compliance for the alteration of a
system; or
(c) Upon the sale or transfer of a premises.
(d) For all existing individual and nonindividual sewerage disposal
systems in accordance with the immediate effective date for all
systems.
(2) All licenses issued pursuant to this section shall be on a form
provided by the Township Department of Health. Once issued, a
license shall be transferable upon change of ownership or
§ 300-38 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 300-40
279:405
occupancy of the premises for which the license has been issued. A
fee as provided in § 300-46 of this article thereof shall accompany
each application for a license or renewal.
B. Expiration/renewal. The license to operate shall expire three years after
issuance. The Department of Health shall notify the licensee or its
designee at least three months before the license expires, who shall be
directed to apply for a renewal of the license. The renewal notice shall
include educational materials relative to the proper operation and
maintenance practice for such systems in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:9A-3.14.
(1) Requirements for renewal. The Department of Health or its
designee shall not renew the license unless the licensee has
submitted the following to the Department of Health or its
designee:
(a) Evidence that the septic tank or pump tank (if applicable) (or in
the case of an alternate system, the comparable component of
such system) has been pumped by a licensed septic sludge
removal operator as required by § 300-42 of this article.
(2) Renewal term. Any license renewed under Subsection B(1)(a)
(actual pumping) shall be renewed for a period of three years.
(3) As a condition precedent to a license renewal, the owner/operator
shall pay the fee required by § 300-46 herein.
C. Suspension of license. The Department of Health or its designee may
suspend or revoke the license to operate in the following
circumstances:
(1) It has been determined that the system is malfunctioning based
upon criteria provided for in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-3.4(a) and the licensee
fails to take steps to correct said malfunction as directed by the
Department of Health or its designee;
(2) The owner or occupant of the premises served by the system
violates any provision of this article with respect to operation and
maintenance of the system; or
(3) The owner or occupant of the premises served by the system denies
the right of entry to the Department of Health or its designee, or to
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP),
as required in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-3.19, or in any way interferes with the
administration or enforcement of this article.
D. Modified term of license.
(1) The Department of Health may, on its own motion, upon notice and
opportunity to the property owner or operator for a hearing, or
upon application of a property owner or system operator, alter the
time period of a license to operate.
§ 300-40 WEST MILFORD CODE § 300-40
279:406
§ 300-41. Standards on use of subsurface sewage disposal systems.
(2) The Department of Health may consider the following factors in
determining that a more frequent licensing renewal or pumping/
inspection schedule may be necessary:
(a) Limited size of the septic tank or disposal field.
(b) The fact that the existing system may be a cesspool.
(c) The age of the system.
(d) Past history of malfunction or other noncompliance.
(e) Location of the existing system in a flood hazard, wetland area,
wetlands transition zone or other environmentally sensitive
area.
(f) Proximity of the system to a well or water body.
A. General. [Amended 8-26-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-019]
(1) The subsurface sewage disposal system shall be used only for the
disposal of wastes of the type and origin provided for in the
approved engineering design. No permanent or temporary
connection shall be made to any source of wastes, wastewater or
clean water other than those plumbing fixtures which are normally
present within the type of facility indicated in the approved
engineering design.
(2) Drainage from basement floors, footings or roofs shall not enter the
sewage disposal system and shall be diverted away from the area of
the disposal field.
(3) As set forth in N.J.S.A. 58:10A-17, no person shall use or introduce
or cause any other person to use or introduce into any sewage
water disposal system any sewage system cleaner containing any
restricted chemical material.
(4) Disposal of materials containing toxic substances into a subsurface
sewage disposal system is prohibited. Materials containing toxic
substances include, but are not limited to, waste oil, oil-based or
acrylic paints, varnishes, photographic solutions, pesticides,
insecticides, paint thinners, organic solvents or degreasers and
drain openers.
(5) Inert or nonbiodegradable substances should not be disposed of in
the subsurface sewage disposal system. Such substances include,
but are not limited to, disposable diapers containing plastic, cat box
litter, coffee grounds, cigarette filters, sanitary napkins, facial
tissues and wet-strength paper towels.
§ 300-40 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 300-41
279:407
(6) Plumbing leaks shall be repaired promptly to prevent hydraulic
overloading of the system.
(7) Vehicle traffic and vehicular parking shall be kept away from the
aspects of the system, unless the system has been specifically
designed to support vehicular traffic.
B. Disposal field maintenance.
(1) The area of the disposal field shall be kept free of encroachments
from decks, pools, sprinkler systems, driveways, patios, accessory
buildings, additions to the main building and trees or shrubbery
whose roots may cause clogging of any part of the system.
(2) Grading shall be maintained in a condition that will promote runoff
of rainwater and prevent ponding.
(3) All drainage from roofs, footing drains, ditches or swales shall be
diverted away from the disposal field.
(4) Vegetation shall be maintained to prevent soil erosion.
C. Abandoned systems.
(1) When it is necessary to abandon a system or components of a
system, all septic tanks, dosing tanks, seepage pits, dry wells and
cesspools which are to be abandoned shall be emptied of wastes
and removed or filled completely with compacted sand, gravel,
stones or soil material in a manner which is acceptable to the
Department of Health or its designee.
(2) Except when done as part of or in conjunction with an alteration, a
permit must be obtained from the Department of Health prior to
abandoning a septic system or component of a septic system.
D. Additional inspection and maintenance requirements for systems with
grease traps.
(1) Grease traps shall be inspected and cleaned out at a frequency
adequate to prevent the volume of grease from exceeding the
grease retention capacity. Grease shall be removed whenever 75%
of the grease retention capacity has been reached.
(2) Pumping of grease traps shall be performed by a solid waste hauler
registered with the NJDEP in accordance with the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 7:26-3.1.
(3) Equipment used in the pumping of grease traps shall meet the
following requirements:
(a) Mobile tanks shall be securely mounted on trucks or trailers,
shall be watertight and provided with a leakproof cover and
shall be vented to permit the escape of gases but not the liquid
or solid contents of the tank.
§ 300-41 WEST MILFORD CODE § 300-41
279:408
§ 300-42. Removal of septic tank sludge.
(b) Pumps and hoses shall be maintained and operated in a
condition that will prevent the leakage of sewage.
(c) Equipment shall be available to permit accurate measurement
of the volume of grease in relation to the grease retention
capacity of the grease trap.
(d) Pumping of grease traps shall be conducted in such a manner
that the entire contents of the grease trap, including both
liquids and solids, are removed.
(e) Pumping shall be carried out in a manner that will prevent
spillage of sewage onto the ground. If any spillage occurs, the
solid portion shall be immediately removed and disposed of in a
sanitary manner, and the area of the spill shall be disinfected
using a suitable chlorine-bearing compound.
(f) Grease and other waste materials removed from grease traps
shall be disposed of in accordance with the requirements of the
Statewide Sludge Management Plan adopted pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 58:1A-1 et seq., as well as
any other applicable state or local rules, regulations,
ordinances or directives.
E. Maintenance of dosing tanks.
(1) Dosing tanks and associated pumps, siphons, switches, alarms,
electrical connections and wiring shall be maintained in proper
working order.
(2) Any solids that accumulate in the dosing tank shall be removed and
disposed of per NJDEP procedures.
A. Any person, partnership, firm or corporation who or which empties,
relieves or pumps out all or a portion of an individual or nonindividual
sewage disposal system within the Township of West Milford shall first
apply to the Department of Health to become a licensed septic sludge
removal operator. Any such license shall be for a term of one year and
shall be subject to the payment of a fee as provided in § 300-46.
B. Prior to emptying, relieving or pumping out all or a portion of any
individual or nonindividual subsurface sewage disposal system within
the Township of West Milford, the licensed septic sludge removal
operator shall obtain a septic pumping permit from the Township
Department of Health.
C. The licensed septic sludge removal operator shall complete all
information on the septic pumping permit and deliver one copy to the
property owner and one copy to the Department of Health within 72
hours of the time that the individual or nonindividual sewage disposal
§ 300-41 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 300-42
279:409
§ 300-43. Appeals to Department of Health.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of a designee of the Department
of Health made pursuant to this chapter shall have the right to appeal
that decision to the Department of Health. Any aggrieved person seeking
a hearing under this section shall make application to the Department in
writing within 30 days of the decision to be appealed. The Department of
Health shall schedule the matter for a hearing within 45 days thereafter.
system is pumped. Failure to deliver said report within the required
time frame shall be considered to be a violation of this article.
D. In addition to the license required under Subsection A above, the
pumping of septic tanks shall be performed by a solid waste hauler
registered with the NJDEP in accordance with the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 7:26-3c.
E. The Department of Health may suspend or refuse to renew the license
of any septic sludge removal operator who fails to comply with this
article.
F. Equipment used in the pumping of septic tanks shall meet the following
requirements:
(1) Mobile tanks shall be securely mounted on trucks or trailers, shall
be watertight and provided with leakproof covers and shall be
vented to permit the escape of gases but not the liquid or solid
contents of the tank.
(2) Pumps and hoses shall be maintained and operated in a condition
that will prevent the leakage of sewage.
(3) Equipment shall be available to permit the accurate measurement
of the sludge and scum levels in relation to the bottom of the outlet
baffle.
G. Pumping of septic tanks shall be conducted in such a manner that the
entire contents of the septic tank, including both liquids and solids, are
removed.
H. Pumping shall be carried out in such a manner that will prevent spillage
of sewage onto the ground. If any spillage occurs, the solid portion shall
be immediately removed and disposed of in a sanitary manner and the
area of the spill shall be disinfected using a suitable chlorine-bearing
compound.
I. The entire contents of the septic sludge shall be disposed of at a sewage
treatment plant designated in accordance with the county and/or state
solid waste management plans pursuant to the Statewide Sludge
Management Plan adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq. and
N.J.S.A. 58:1A-1 et seq.
§ 300-42 WEST MILFORD CODE § 300-43
279:410
The hearing shall be conducted at a meeting held pursuant to the Open
Public Meetings Act.
§ 300-44. Enforcement.
A. Nuisances to be corrected.
(1) Any on-site sewage disposal system or component thereof that is
found to be malfunctioning (as defined in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-2.1 and 3.4)
shall constitute a nuisance and shall be repaired, modified or
replaced pursuant to an order of the Department of Health or its
designee to correct the condition caused by the malfunction.
Alterations shall be performed in accordance with Standards for
the Construction of Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal
Systems as adopted and implemented by the Department of Health
by virtue of this code and any amendments thereto.
(2) Any individual or nonindividual subsurface sewage disposal system
which has not been maintained in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:9A-12.3, Septic System Maintenance,90 is hereby declared a
nuisance.
(3) Any individual or nonindividual subsurface sewage disposal system
which is constructed, installed, altered, operated or maintained in
violation of this section, the DEP regulations, any rule or regulation
promulgated pursuant to this article or any permit, certificate or
license issued pursuant to this article is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
(4) In addition the powers provided for in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-1.1 et seq., the
Department of Health retains its authority to abate any nuisance in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:3-45 et seq.
B. Malfunctioning subsurface sewage disposal system; inspections of
system; revocation of license.
(1) The Department of Health shall have the right to inspect any
system which shows evidence of any malfunction. Such evidence
may include, but not be limited to, foul odors, leakage to ground
surface, or soggy ground over system. Water and/or soil samples
may be taken to confirm the existence of a malfunctioning system.
(2) The Department of Health may require that any malfunctioning
system be corrected by servicing or by replacement or alteration of
the system.
(3) Until any necessary replacement or alteration of a system has been
accomplished, the Department of Health may require pumping and
90.Editor's Note: Former N.J.A.C. 7:9A-12.3 was repealed by R. 1993, d. 294, effective
6-21-1993.
§ 300-43 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 300-44
279:411
§ 300-45. Right of entry.
In furtherance of the rights granted to the Department of Health in N.J.S.A.
26:3-45 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 7:9A-3.19, the Department of Health Officer
or his designee, upon presentation of identification, shall have the right
to enter upon property where an individual or nonindividual subsurface
sewage disposal system is located for the purpose of observation,
inspection, monitoring and/or sampling of the on-site sewage disposal
system. This authority is exercised by virtue of N.J.S.A. 26:3-31 as a
necessary and reasonable method of furthering the duties of the
Department of Health as enumerated therein.
§ 300-46. Fees.
Fees and charges as set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs, are herewith
established.
§ 300-47. Violations and penalties.
the removal of the entire contents of the septic tank for the system
(both liquids and solids) at intervals specified by the Department.
(4) No provision of this article shall be interpreted as precluding the
Department of Health from revoking a license issued by the
Department for the operation of a system in the event that the
Department shall determine that such action is necessary and
appropriate for the enforcement of this article. Any such revocation
shall be upon notice to the owner/operator, with an opportunity to
comment or appeal.
A. A person or entity who or which violates any provisions of this article,
or any term or condition of any certificate or license issued hereunder,
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 per
day or a period of community service not to exceed 90 days, or both.
B. Each separate day and each violation of any provision of this article, any
term or condition of any certificate or license or any notice or order
issued by the Department of Health shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation under this article.
C. Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting the remedies of the
Board of Health for violations of this article. The Department of Health
may proceed under any other remedy available at law or in equity for
any violation of this article or any term or condition of any certificate or
license issued by the Department of Health or for any failure to comply
with any notice or order issued by the Department of Health or its
enforcement official under this article.
§ 300-44 WEST MILFORD CODE § 300-47
279:412
Chapter 305
(RESERVED)
Chapter 321
SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous discharges — See Ch. 181.
Littering — See Ch. 208.
Nuisances — See Ch. 230.
Pesticides — See Ch. 268.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 285.
Waste disposal in storm sewers — See Ch.
325, Art. I.
§ 300-47 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 300-47
279:413

ARTICLE I
Garbage and Rubbish Collection
[Adopted as Sec. 6-11 of the 1976 Revised General Ordinances;
amended in its entirety 12-7-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-41]
§ 321-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the collection of garbage, rubbish,
refuse and other waste materials and thereby to promote the public health,
comfort and welfare of the inhabitants of the Township.
§ 321-2. Definitions. [Amended 6-18-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-10]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BULK ITEMS — Refers to but is not limited to items such as furniture,
mattresses and rugs.
GARBAGE — Includes all animal or vegetable waste solids resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of foods, and all waste
materials that attend the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of
foods, including all containers and other material utilized therewith.
RECYCLED MATERIAL — Applies to newspaper, paper, cardboard, bottles
and cans, household appliances, scrap metal, automotive batteries and
tires.
REFUSE — All solid waste, other than garbage and body waste.
§ 321-3. Storage of garbage and refuse.
A. Garbage shall be drained and stored in durable, rust-resisting,
nonabsorbent, watertight and washable containers which have closefitting
covers and adequate handles to facilitate collection and shall be
of not more than 32 gallons in capacity and shall be limited to 50
pounds in weight. [Amended 1-20-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-1;
2-10-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-2]
B. Refuse shall be stored in durable containers with close-fitting covers,
except that bulky refuse may be packed and bundled together and
firmly tied. Such bundles shall not exceed four feet in length nor 50
pounds in weight. [Amended 2-10-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-2]
C. All containers for garbage and refuse shall be kept in a proper state of
repair and in sanitary condition.
D. No garbage or refuse shall be placed at the curb more than 24 hours
prior to the regular collection day, and all containers shall be removed
within 12 hours after collection, except in case of summer or seasonal
residents not in daily occupancy who may place garbage or refuse at
the curb for collection at the conclusion of any temporary stay even if
more than 24 hours prior to regular collection, provided that such
§ 321-1 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 321-3
279:415
§ 321-4. Collection; approval required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to gather, collect, remove or in any
way interfere with the collection of garbage, refuse or other solid waste
materials from any dwelling house, tenement, store or other building, place
or premises within the Township, or to use the streets of the Township
for the purpose of transporting the same, except if such person holds a
certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the Board of Public
Utility Commissioners and until the proposed collection system has been
registered with and approved by the State Department of Environmental
Protection as provided by law; provided that nothing herein shall render it
unlawful for anyone to transport any household item, appliances or other
item if being transported for purposes other than disposal as garbage or
rubbish.
§ 321-5. Council authorized to grant exclusive contract; contract
requirements. [Amended 1-20-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-1]
The Township Council is hereby authorized to grant an exclusive contract
for the collection of such garbage and refuse upon competitive bidding, the
term of such exclusive contract may be granted to the bidder whose bid
provides for the lowest rates for the removal and disposal of such garbage
and refuse; provided that such bidder shall show that he in all respects
garbage or refuse is held in proper containers to insure against spilling,
exposure to the elements or any other unsafe or unsanitary condition.
E. All waste building materials from new construction or remodeling shall
not be placed at curb. All building material must be tied and bundled,
and must not be heavier than 50 pounds; it cannot be any longer than
four feet in length and three feet in height. Only one bundle of
construction debris can be placed to the curb on the regular garbage
pickup. [Amended 6-18-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-10]
F. No container shall be placed in the paved area of any street or any part
thereof awaiting collection, but shall be placed at the curbline.
G. Bulk items, such as furniture, mattresses and rugs, will be collected on
regular scheduled garbage collection day, with a limit of one bulk item,
three cans and one bundle of construction material every garbage
collection. [Added 6-18-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-10; amended
4-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-002]
H. No individual or entity that engages in the sale or resale of recycling
material shall attempt to recover or remove any of the recycling items
left at curbside intended for bulk pickup, including items intended for
metal pickup and recycling, without the consent of the Township
Recycling Coordinator, as stated in § 321-21 of this chapter. Failure to
obtain said consent shall result in a violation of this chapter and shall
subject the violator to the penalties provided for in § 321-11. [Added
4-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-002]
§ 321-3 WEST MILFORD CODE § 321-5
279:416
complies with the provisions of this article, the rules and regulations of the
Department of Health, and the terms and conditions of specifications hereby
adopted or hereafter to be adopted by the Council. The successful bidder
shall furnish surety bonds satisfactory to the Council, the condition of which
shall be that the successful bidder shall perform the services set forth in his
bid and contract for a sum not in excess of the amount quoted in such bid,
and that he shall comply with the terms and provisions of this article, the
rules and regulations of the Department of Health, and the regulations and
specifications adopted or to be adopted by the Council in connection with
the collection and removal of such garbage and refuse.
§ 321-6. Qualifications for bidders for contract.
Every bidder for a scavenger contract shall furnish the Council with the
following information:
§ 321-7. Regulations for contractors.
A. The number, age, condition, type and carrying capacity of his trucks.
B. His financial ability to perform a proper scavenger service.
C. Must meet all specifications set forth by the Subchapter Six of the
Uniform Bid Specifications for Municipal Solid Waste Collection
Contract. [Amended 6-18-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-10]
D. The disposal site is available to the contractor for the period of the
contract. [Amended 6-18-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-10]
E. That such site for the disposal of garbage, refuse, and other collected
material is located outside the limits of the Township.
F. That the governing body of the municipality in which such site is
located or such other body that may have jurisdiction over such site has
authorized the dumping of such material, which authorization shall be
certified by the Clerk of said municipality.
G. That a permit has been granted to the bidder for dumping purposes on
such site by the Advisory Board of Health of such municipality or by
other body having authority to grant such permit.
H. An itemized list of all machinery, trucks, and equipment owned by the
bidder and available for use for the performance of his contract with the
Township of West Milford. Such equipment shall be made available for
inspection by the Township Administrator or his designee. [Amended
9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
A. The contractor shall have at all times sufficient personnel, material and
equipment, including an adequate number of trucks of ample power
and carrying capacity required to perform the contract. The trucks shall
at all times be in good mechanical operating condition and of good
appearance.
§ 321-5 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 321-7
279:417
B. The contractor shall provide adequate motor vehicle, public liability
and workers' compensation insurance, and certificates of the insurance
company evidencing such coverage shall be filed with the Township
Clerk at the time of the issuance of the contract. The adequacy of the
amounts and form of such insurance shall be determined by the
Council.
C. The contractor shall collect, remove and transport all garbage, refuse,
and other material collected in such manner that no material, solid or
liquid, shall escape and drop upon the ground. If any material is spilled,
it shall be immediately cleaned up.
D. Collections shall not start earlier than 5:00 a.m. Monday through Friday
and on special Saturday collection days, and shall stop not later than
5:00 p.m. on the days fixed for such collection. The contractor shall
furnish to the Township Administrator, or his designee, copies of the
collection routes. [Amended 1-20-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-1;
6-18-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-10; 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
E. All avoidable noises shall be prevented, and containers shall be
properly and carefully replaced upside down in the location originally
found. [Amended 6-18-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-10]
EXAMPLE: If a container is picked up on the right side of the driveway,
then the container must be replaced on the right side of the driveway.
F. Drivers and collectors shall at all times be courteous, sober and
responsible and shall maintain a neat and clean appearance and shall
remain fully clothed at all times. Collectors shall not walk across lawns
to adjoining properties. [Amended 1-20-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-1]
G. The contractor shall notify customers of changes or omissions in
collection not less than three days nor more than five days in advance of
such change.
H. A minimum of five years' previous experience in municipal garbage
collection, whether by direct contract with municipalities or private
contract with residents, shall be required.
I. Contractor shall maintain a dedicated telephone hot-line for customer
service complaints, answered by designated contractors'
representative responsible for handling of complaints and to transact
business daily, from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., and see that all complaints
receive prompt and proper attention. Said telephone hot-line shall be a
local exchange or toll-free number. [Amended 6-18-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-10]
J. The contractor shall be under the supervision of the Township
Administrator or his designee. [Amended 6-18-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-10; 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
§ 321-7 WEST MILFORD CODE § 321-7
279:418
§ 321-8. Contractor to furnish service to all residents. [Amended
1-20-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-1; 6-18-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-10;
9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
It shall be the duty of the contractor to furnish and make available collection
service to all residents of the Township, and to those establishments and
West Milford municipal facilities designated by the Township Administrator
or his designee.
§ 321-9. Business establishments.
The owner, agent, lessee or occupant of any commercial or industrial
premises shall arrange for the removal of waste materials each day, unless
sufficient and suitable facilities are provided and used for the storage of
such waste materials on such premises until removal of the same.
§ 321-10. Dumping prohibited.
No person shall place, deposit or dump or allow, permit, aid or abet the
placing or depositing or dumping of any garbage, refuse or waste material
of any kind upon any public or private property or street in the Township,
but shall dispose of the same as herein provided.
§ 321-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the penalties imposed in Chapter 1, Article III,
General Penalty, of the Township Code.
§ 321-12. Effective date.
Inasmuch as it is necessary for the health, safety, comfort and convenience
of the people of the Township that this article shall have immediate effect,
K. The contract shall not be assigned or sublet in whole or in part without
the prior written consent of the Township Council. Request for
permission to subcontract may be made at time of bid proposal and bid
may be conditioned upon the Township Council's consent to such
subcontracting. All requests for the Township Council's consent shall be
accompanied by a questionnaire, completed by each person with whom
a contract is proposed. [Amended 6-18-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-10]
L. The contractor shall also make his vehicles available for early morning,
periodic and random inspections, by the Township Administrator or his
designee, to determine if the vehicles are clean and serviceable.
[Added 6-18-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-10; amended 9-1-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-6]
M. For violation of the provisions and regulations of this section, the
Township Council may cancel the contract. [Amended 6-18-1997 by
Ord. No. 1997-10]
§ 321-7 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 321-12
279:419
an emergency is hereby declared to exist and this article shall be of full
force and effect from August 20, 1975.
§ 321-13. Brush, grass, weeds, overgrowth and garbage; removal.
A. The term "overgrowth" shall include all weeds, brush, dead and dying
trees, stumps, roots and obnoxious growth.
B. Whenever garbage, refuse or overgrowth has accumulated on any lot
lying within the Township and it shall be deemed necessary and
expedient for the preservation of the public health, safety and general
welfare, the owner or tenant of the lands shall remove such overgrowth
within 10 days after notice thereof.
C. Upon failure of such owner or tenant to remove the garbage, refuse or
overgrowth, the Township shall be empowered to cause such removal
through the direction of the Township Administrator, or such
department or officer as he may, from time to time, designate.
[Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
D. Upon removal of the garbage, refuse or overgrowth by the Township, or
a private contractor authorized by the Township, the Department of
Health shall certify the cost of such removal to the Tax Collector, who
shall charge the costs against the lands, which amount shall become a
lien upon the lands. The amount of the lien shall become part of the tax
to be assessed against the lands and shall bear interest and be collected
and enforced in the same manner as taxes.
E. The notice referred to above shall include an estimate of the cost of
removal and the date after which the Township may cause the removal.
Such notice shall be served on each person whose name appears as an
owner on the tax lists, at his last known address as it appears on the last
municipal tax duplicate, and service shall be by ordinary mail and
certified mail, return receipt requested.
§ 321-12 WEST MILFORD CODE § 321-13
279:420
ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 9-2-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-34]
§ 321-14. Establishment of recycling program.
There is hereby established a program for the mandatory separation of
newspapers, glass, aluminum/bimetal products, and other solid wastes
within the Township of West Milford.
§ 321-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM BEVERAGE CONTAINERS — Containers made exclusively of
aluminum which are used to hold beverages.
AUTOMOBILE BODIES — Crushed or shredded automobile and truck
bodies.
BATTERIES — Automobile and truck batteries. Does not include household
batteries.
BIMETAL/TIN — Consisting of or relating to two metals. Also includes tin
cans.
BRUSH — All small trees, shrubs, limbs and branches.
BUSINESS or COMMERCIAL — Any nonresidential building, structure or
establishment, including, but not limited to, those used for retail, wholesale,
offices, professional services, shipping and receiving areas, cafeterias,
automobile service, restaurants and dining areas and taverns.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with
stormwater.[Added 9-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
CORRUGATED (CARDBOARD) — Used to identify a type of paper in which
a portion has been made to have a wavy surface (alternating ridge and
grooves) and is placed between two flat surfaces for the sake of strength
and which is commonly used to form cartons.
DESIGNATED MATERIALS — Those recyclable materials listed in the
Passaic County District Recycling Plan which are mandated to be collected
for recycling. These materials may be expanded as viable markets are
found.
FERROUS — Derived from, containing, or alloyed with iron or steel.
FOOD WASTE — All food waste that is recycled or rendered such as meat
bones, frying oil, or institutional kitchen waste.
§ 321-14 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 321-15
279:421
GLASS FOOD AND BEVERAGE CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of
silica, soda ash and limestone being transparent and/or translucent and
breakable. Also includes window glass.
GRASS (CLIPPINGS) — All grass clippings that are composted in
combination with other vegetable waste.
HIGH-GRADE PAPER — Papers generally used in an office environment that
are of high quality and include, but not limited to, computer, letterhead,
ledger and photocopy paper.
INSTITUTION — An established organization or foundation dedicated to
public service or culture, including, but not limited to, religious,
educational, health care and governmental establishments.
LEAVES — Refers to fallen leaves.
MIXED PAPER — Includes all unsoiled paper materials such as magazines,
junk mail, books (not hard-covered), manila folders, but not necessarily
limited to these materials.
MULTIFAMILY — Any building or structure of one or more stories and
any land appurtenant thereto, any portion thereof, in which two or more
units of dwelling space are occupied, or are intended to be occupied by
two or more persons who live with and/or independently of each other.
This definition shall also mean any group of five or more buildings on a
single parcel of land or on contiguous parcels under common ownership, in
each of which two units of dwelling space are occupied or intended to be
occupied by two persons or households living independently of each other,
and any land appurtenant thereto and any portion thereof. This definition
shall also include apartments, townhouses, condominiums and retirement
communities. "Condominiums," as used herein, shall include the form of
ownership of real property under a master deed providing for ownership
by one or more owners of units of improvement together with an individual
interest in common elements appurtenant to each such unit.
NEWSPAPER — Includes paper of the type commonly referred to as
"newsprint" and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly,
having printed thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements
and other matters of public interest.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.[Added 9-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Any molded substance (PET and HDPE)
consisting of organic compounds synthesized from hydrocarbons, proteins,
cellulose or resins commonly used for beverage and food containers.
RECYCLING — Any process by which materials which would otherwise
become solid waste are collected, separated or processed and returned to
the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products.
§ 321-15 WEST MILFORD CODE § 321-15
279:422
RESIDENT — Any person who owns, leases and/or occupies dwellings
within the municipality, including those in multifamily dwellings and/or
single-family developments.
SOLID WASTE — Refers to all garbage and rubbish normally placed at the
curb for collection on a regular schedule.
SOURCE REDUCTION — Preventing the actual generation of waste,
eliminating the need to manage that material later as recyclable or
nonrecyclable waste and therefore reducing the economic and
environmental impact of both recycling and waste disposal.
SOURCE SEPARATION — Recyclable materials which are kept separate
and apart from residential, commercial, and institutional solid waste by the
generator for the purposes of collection, disposition and recycling.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way, which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines.[Added
9-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
TIRES — A continuous solid or pneumatic rubber cushion encircling a
wheel usually consisting, when pneumatic, of an external rubber and fabric
covering that contains and protects from injury an air-filled inner tube for
use on a motor vehicle not for commercial use. A "tire" as defined herein
shall have the rim removed.
USED MOTOR OIL — All oil from internal-combustion engines,
transmissions, differentials, etc., that is collected by a NJDEP registered
hazardous waste transporter.
WHITE GOODS — Any used refrigerator, stove, washing machine, dryer,
etc., pieces of ferrous/nonferrous scrap metal that can be placed at the curb
for collection.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings.[Added 9-21-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-16]
§ 321-16. Mandatory source separation.
A. On or after the date of final approval of this article, it shall be
mandatory for all residential, commercial and institutional inhabitants
of the Township of West Milford to source-separate designated
materials from all other solid waste for recycling (for as long as markets
are available, accessible and cost effective).
B. Residential developments (single and multifamily) shall be responsible
for establishing and maintaining recycling programs for the collection
of designated recyclable materials listed in § 321-15, Definitions, and
§ 321-17, Program responsibilities and descriptions, herein. These
materials are to be stored for collection by the municipality, a private
recycling vendor or deposited at the municipal recycling depot, if
§ 321-15 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 321-16
279:423
applicable. If not served by the municipality, a documentation of
tonnage of materials recycled must be submitted in accordance with
§ 321-19, Documentation.
C. Commercial establishments and institutions.
(1) Commercial establishments and institutions shall be responsible to
separate newspaper, leaves, corrugated and high-grade paper for
source separation and recycling along with glass food and
beverage containers, aluminum beverage containers, tin and
bimetal cans, plastic containers and film (PET, HDPE and PVC),
mixed paper (magazine, junk mail and unsoiled scrap paper), white
goods, ferrous and nonferrous scrap metals (by January 1, 1992, or
as markets become available, as to metals only), construction and
demolition debris recyclable components, which are concrete,
brick, block, asphalt, asphalt-based roofing scrap, tree stumps/
trunks and grass (January 1, 1992, or as markets become
available), tires, used motor oil, batteries, brush (by January 1,
1992), food waste by restaurants and taverns (by January 1, 1993,
or as markets become available), and additional mandated
recyclable materials may be added as viable markets are found to
be collected for recycling in the commercial and institutional
sectors of the community. Each commercial establishment shall be
responsible for establishing and maintaining their own collection,
transportation and marketing of designated recyclable materials,
unless the municipality has agreed (individually) to provide this
service or allow the use of the municipal depot for dropoff.
Documentation of tonnage of material recycled must be submitted
in accordance with the provisions of this article. From time to time,
as it is established that markets have been secured for certain
materials, commercial establishments and institutions shall be
responsible to separate such materials. The cost for commercial
entities to dispose of grass, leaves and brush (no larger than four
inches in caliper) is set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs.
[Amended 8-23-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-01091]
(2) Self-audit waste surveys will be required to be performed in the
commercial/industrial sectors in a phased-in manner (businesses
with more than 500 employees by 1992, with more than 250
employees by 1993, with more than 100 employees by 1994 and
with more than 50 employees by 1995) with waste reduction plans
to be submitted to the County Recycling Coordinator and copied to
the Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
D. All sectors will be notified at least six months of the provisions of the
Recycling Ordinance and the various responsibilities each sector has
for recycling. This may include, but may not be limited to, direct mail,
notifications, posted community calendars, notices in public places and/
or newspaper advertising.
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 321-16 WEST MILFORD CODE § 321-17
279:424
§ 321-17. Program responsibilities and descriptions.
A. Residents of single-family units shall separate corrugated cardboard,
high-grade and/or mixed paper, newspaper, glass and plastic
containers, bimetal and tin cans, and aluminum beverage containers as
follows:
(1) Corrugated cardboard shall be flattened, all staples and packing
removed (if any), and tied in bundles.
(2) Brown bags and newspaper: any combination of these recyclables
can be placed neatly in brown paper bags not to exceed 20 pounds,
or compacted and tied securely in bundles not to exceed 50 pounds
in weight. No paper products shall be placed in plastic bags.
(3) High-grade and mixed paper will be collected separate from
newspaper and brown bags (no paper products) in a thirty-twogallon
trash can.
(4) Glass, plastic, tin and aluminum: any combination of these
recyclables shall be contained in a reusable metal or plastic
receptacle, occupant or owner supplied.
(5) All organic foodstuffs and beverages shall be cleaned out of any
material listed above prior to being placed in said recyclable
receptacle.
(6) In addition, tires are available for municipal curbside pickup, in
accordance with the following procedures:
(a) The fee to be paid for municipal curbside pickup of tires is set
forth in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs.92
(b) The Recycling Coordinator shall establish a procedure to
assure that whenever a fee is required for tire collection
pursuant to this article, the tires for which the fee is paid are
collected by the Township of West Milford.
(7) All such recyclables shall be placed at the curbside no earlier than
6:00 p.m. on the day before and no later than 5:00 a.m. on the day
in question for curbside collection.
B. Other dwelling units such as apartments and multifamily units shall
ensure that a special place is designated for the storage of these
recyclable materials as mentioned in Subsection A above. The owner
and/or manager of the unit(s), subject to the provisions of this section,
shall notify the Municipal Recycling Coordinator for his inspection so
approval can be given as to location of recycling containers.
C. Commercial establishments and institutions: see § 321-16C and D
herein.
92.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 321-17 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 321-17
279:425
§ 321-18. Scheduling for collection.
The collection, removal and disposal of those recyclable materials as
mentioned in § § 321-16 and 321-17 herein shall be scheduled and regulated
by the establishment and promulgation of reasonable regulations, from time
to time, by the Business Administrator, in conjunction with the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator, who shall establish the time, manner and method or
routes of service for recycling pickup. The Township will notify all sectors at
least two weeks in advance prior to any change in the collection schedule.
Such notification may include, but not be limited to, direct mail, posting of
notices in public places, and newspaper advertising.
§ 321-19. Documentation.
D. Recycling Depot. The recycling depot will allow for the dropoff of
recyclables from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Labor Day through Memorial
Day; and 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Memorial Day through Labor Day.
Along with those materials collected curbside, the Recycling Depot will
accept:
(1) Used motor oil. Used motor oil should be placed in a sealed
container and brought to the attendant at the Marhill Recycling
Depot. The recycling fee is set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and
Costs.93
(2) Tires. See Subsection A(6)(b).
(3) Cloth and fabric. Goodwill has provided a collection box for the
recycling of clothing and fabric. Items should be bagged and placed
inside the collection box.
(4) Batteries: automobile and truck batteries.
(5) Leaves, brush and grass. When proper permits are secured, leaves,
brush and grass will be brought to the Marhill Compost Center for
composting and chipping. Leaves will be removed from bags and
the bags disposed of properly.
A. All commercial, institutional, multifamily developments or single-family
units who are not serviced by the municipal recycling collection system
must submit recycling documentation (as directed by) the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator.
B. The Municipal Recycling Coordinator will compile all recycling
documentation and report to the Passaic County Recycling Coordinator
on a yearly basis by the 15th of April or the due date of the State
Tonnage Grant. Those not complying will be subject to the enforcement
penalties defined in § 321-23, Violations and penalties. The Municipal
Recycling Coordinator will compile and submit documentation
indicating compliance with yearly municipal recycling certification
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 321-17 WEST MILFORD CODE § 321-19
279:426
§ 321-20. Receptacle requirements.
All receptacles required herein shall be supplied by the occupant or owner
of the premises, and all recyclable material receptacles shall be placed,
prior to collection, between curb and sidewalk where they shall be readily
accessible to the collector. Receptacles should be placed curbside no earlier
than 6:00 p.m. the day prior to collection. The occupant or owner shall keep
all receptacles clean and in condition for safe handling. After collection, any
empty receptacles shall be removed from curbside promptly, but not later
than 7:00 p.m. of the day of collection.
§ 321-21. Scavenging prohibited.
Recycling materials placed at the curb are the property of the Township
of West Milford or its authorized agent or an authorized agent of the
establishment where private collection is being conducted. It is a violation
of this article for any person unauthorized by the Township of West Milford
to collect, pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any recyclable. Any
and each such collection in violation hereof shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided in § 321-23, Violations
and penalties.
§ 321-22. Enforcement; inspections.
The Police Department, the Municipal Recycling Coordinator, the Health
Department, the Department of Public Works and Engineering, the County
Health Department or any citizen of the Township of West Milford may
enforce the provisions of this article. The enforcement agent for the
Township or its designated agent shall be responsible for the inspection
requirements to the County Recycling Coordinator by April 15th of
each year for information of the previous calendar year's activities for
certification purposes.
C. Requirements for the yearly municipal recycling certification indicating
ongoing program compliance as directed by the county are as follows:
(1) Local recycling ordinance and Master Plan requirements in full
compliance with County District Recycling Plan and state
regulations, with submission of any and all additions or deletions.
(2) Previous year's recycling recovery goal met.
(3) Samples of two publicity outreach mechanisms and description of
distribution to each sector.
(4) All quarterly reports filed with the County Recycling Coordinator.
(5) Completed State Tonnage Grant Application submitted on time to
both the NJDEP and county.
(6) Report of enforcement efforts in all sectors.
§ 321-19 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 321-22
279:427
of solid waste and/or recyclables in all sectors in order to determine any
noncompliance with this article. Such inspections shall include but not be
limited to those made on a random basis, at a frequency of at least one per
month per collection route.
§ 321-23. Violations and penalties.
§ 321-24. Sale and donation of material.
Any person who is an owner, lessee or occupant may donate or sell
recyclable materials to any person, partnership or corporation (whether
operating for profit or not for profit) as long as the recycling individual or
company submits documentation to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator as
described in § 321-19, Documentation.
§ 321-25. Unlawful acts.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who violates or neglects to comply with
any provisions of this article or any rules or regulations promulgated
thereto after two warnings shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable by a fine not less than $100, not to exceed $1,000, and
community service for a period not exceeding 30 days. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed for each and every act or
occurrence which violates the terms of this article. [Amended
12-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-2594]
B. Any person, firm or corporation who, without authority from the
Township, removes items placed at curbside pursuant to and in
accordance with the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not less than $500 nor greater that
$5,000, or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both,
or community service for a period not exceeding 90 days. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed for each and every act or
occurrence which violates the terms of this article.
A. It shall be unlawful to combine designated, unsoiled recyclables with
other solid waste. Failure to separate designated materials for recycling
is a violation of this article and is punishable under the provisions of
this article.
B. It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that
contains visible signs of designated recyclable materials. It is also
unlawful for solid waste collectors to remove for disposal those bags or
receptacles of solid waste/recyclables which visibly display a warning
notice sticker or some other notification indicating that the load of solid
waste does contain recyclable materials and therefore should not be
removed for disposal.
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 321-22 WEST MILFORD CODE § 321-25
279:428
C. It shall be the responsibility of the nonrecycler whose solid waste was
not removed because it contained recyclable materials to properly
segregate the uncollected waste, for proper recycling. Allowing such
unseparated refuse to accumulate will be considered a violation of this
article.
D. It shall be unlawful for the generator not serviced by the Township of
West Milford to fail to accurately record and report recyclables that
have been collected, stored, sold or otherwise disposed of.
E. It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property, or any
employee or contractor of such owner or occupant engaged to provide
lawn care or landscaping services, to sweep, rake, blow or otherwise
place yard waste, unless the yard waste is containerized, in the street.
If yard waste that is not containerized is placed in the street, the party
responsible for placement of yard waste must remove the yard waste
from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this article.
[Added 9-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
§ 321-25 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 321-25
279:429

ARTICLE III
Garbage Collection District
[Adopted 5-20-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-31]
§ 321-26. Establishment of district.
There is hereby established within the Township of West Milford, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:66-1, a Garbage Collection District, the boundaries of which
shall be coterminous with the municipal boundaries of the Township of West
Milford.
§ 321-27. Provision for garbage and refuse removal; costs.
The Township Council shall by contract or otherwise provide for collection
and removal of garbage and refuse, as such is defined in § 321-2 of this
chapter, from all residential properties and those business and industrial
establishments and municipal and educational facilities within said
collection district as authorized by the Council; and shall, through levy and
collection of taxes, provide for the payment and cost of such collection in
accordance with New Jersey statutes.
§ 321-26 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 321-27
279:431

ARTICLE IV
Compost Site
[Adopted 8-21-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-29]
§ 321-28. Decal and passes required. [Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-030; 5-28-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-024; 12-16-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-027]
§ 321-29. Annual fees. [Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030]
Compost site decals and passes shall be made available to residents upon
payment of the annual fee set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs.
§ 321-30. Compliance with regulations required.
All users of the Compost Facility must comply with all Compost Site and
local and state laws and regulations.
A. Use of the Township of West Milford Compost Facility shall be limited to
Township residents. Resident commercial and noncommercial vehicles
must obtain and display a decal prominently on the window of the
vehicle bringing materials to the Township Compost Facility.
B. Resident commercial vehicles engaged to provide lawn care,
landscaping or tree removal services must obtain a booklet of five
compost site passes and present a pass to the attendant prior to
entering the facility. Each pass is good for one load of material. An
additional compost site pass will be required if the vehicle is loaded and
is towing a loaded trailer.
C. Resident commercial vehicles exceeding 12,000 pounds GVW and not
engaged in lawn care, landscaping or tree removal services will be
required to obtain and present a compost site pass to the attendant
prior to entering the facility. Each pass is good for one load of material.
D. Any resident vehicle, not exceeding 12,000 pounds GVW, or trailer,
commercial or noncommercial, not engaged in lawn care, landscaping
or tree removal services, will not be required to obtain and present a
compost site pass for the vehicle and/or trailer to the attendant prior to
entering the facility, provided that the material is from their residence.
E. Resident vehicles with farm vehicle license plates shall be considered
commercial vehicles.
§ 321-28 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 321-30
279:433

ARTICLE V
Refuse Containers and Dumpsters
[Adopted 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-004]
§ 321-31. Purpose.
An article requiring dumpsters and other refuse containers that are
outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all times and prohibits
the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of liquids, semiliquids
or solids from the containers to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Township of West Milford and/or the waters of
the state so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 321-32. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of West Milford or
other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
property owner's association, or political subdivision of this state subject to
municipal jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls,
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 321-33. Prohibited conduct.
§ 321-31 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 321-33
279:435
§ 321-34. Exceptions to prohibition.
Exceptions to prohibition:
§ 321-35. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by all police officers of the Township, regular
and special, the Health Officer or his/her duly authorized designee and the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator of the Township of West Milford, who are
hereby given full power and authority and are charged with the duty to
enforce all provisions of this article.
§ 321-36. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s), firm, association or corporation found to be in violation of
the provisions of this article shall be subject to any one or more of the
following penalties: a fine not to exceed $1,250, imprisonment for any term
not exceeding 90 days, or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semiliquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of West
Milford.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding,
appliances placed curbside for pickup).
§ 321-33 WEST MILFORD CODE § 321-36
279:436
Chapter 325
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Application of fertilizers — See Ch. 138.
Hazardous discharges — See Ch. 181.
Pesticides — See Ch. 268.
Sewers — See Ch. 300.
Solid waste — See Ch. 321.
Sump pumps — See Ch. 337.
Water — See Ch. 390.
§ 321-36 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 321-36
279:437

ARTICLE I
Waste Disposal in Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
[Adopted 9-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-18]
§ 325-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the spilling, dumping or disposal
of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer
system operated by the Township of West Milford so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 325-2. Definitions and word usage.
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. For the
purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the
text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning:
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 325-3. Disposal of materials into storm sewer system.
No person shall spill, dump, or dispose of materials other than stormwater
to the municipal separate storm sewer system; or spill, dump or dispose of
materials other than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge
of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system.
§ 325-4. Exceptions.
A. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
§ 325-1 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 325-4
279:439
§ 325-5. Enforcement.95
All police officers of the Township, regular and special, the Director of
Public Works and Engineering or his/her duly authorized designee and the
Health Officer or his/her duly authorized designee are hereby given full
power and authority and are charged with the duty to enforce all provisions
of this article.
§ 325-6. Violations and penalties.96
Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the
penalties imposed in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, of the Township
Code.
C. Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use for
their intended purposes; and
(2) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing materials
immediately following salt and de-icing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded. Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the
above situation, is limited to exterior, undercarriage, and exposed
parts and does not apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 325-4 WEST MILFORD CODE § 325-6
279:440
ARTICLE II
Illicit Connections to Storm Sewer Systems
[Adopted 9-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-19]
§ 325-7. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of West Milford so
as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties
for the failure to comply.
§ 325-8. Definitions and word usage.
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The
definitions below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions
in the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules
at N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1.2. For the purpose of this article, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein
unless their use in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different
meaning:
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township unless
that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other than the Tier
A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit Number
NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not limited to,
leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited to,
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township or other public body, and
is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
§ 325-7 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 325-8
279:441
product. Noncontact cooling water may however contain algaecides, or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 325-9. Discharges through illicit connections.
No person or persons, firm, association or corporation shall discharge
or cause to be discharged through an illicit connection to the municipal
separate storm sewer system operated by the Township any domestic
sewage, noncontact cooling water, process wastewater, or other industrial
waste (other than stormwater).
§ 325-10. Enforcement.97
All police officers of the Township, regular and special, the Director of
Public Works and Engineering or his/her duly authorized designee, the
Health Officer or his/her duly authorized designee are hereby given full
power and authority and are charged with the duty to enforce all provisions
of this article.
§ 325-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-030]
Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the
penalties imposed in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, of the Township
Code.
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 325-8 WEST MILFORD CODE § 325-11
279:442
ARTICLE III
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
[Adopted 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-003]
§ 325-12. Purpose.
An article requiring the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which are
in direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing
or alterations of facilities on private property, to prevent the discharge of
solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food wrappers and other
litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the
Township of West Milford so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 325-13. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of West Milford or
other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
property owner's association, or political subdivision of this state subject to
municipal jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 325-14. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 325-12 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 325-14
279:443
§ 325-15. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 325-14 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this subsection, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see
§ 325-15C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 325-15 below prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Grates.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT
Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and
Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is no greater
than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
(2) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than 7.0
square inches, or be no greater than 2.0 inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
§ 325-14 WEST MILFORD CODE § 325-15
279:444
§ 325-16. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by all police officers of the Township, regular
and special, the Zoning Officer, a representative of the Department of Public
Works and Engineering and the Health Officer or his/her duly authorized
designee of the Township of West Milford, who are hereby given full power
and authority and are charged with the duty to enforce all provisions of this
article.
§ 325-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s), firm, association or corporation found to be in violation of the
provisions of this article shall be subject to any one or more of the following
penalties: a fine not to exceed $1,250 for each storm drain inlet that is
not retrofitted to meet the design standard, imprisonment for any term not
exceeding 90 days, or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(This option does not apply for outfall netting facilities.); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register-listed historic property.
§ 325-15 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 325-17
279:445
Chapter 332
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic — See Ch. 10. Subdivision of land and site plan review — See
Ch. 470.
§ 325-17 WEST MILFORD CODE § 325-17
279:446
ARTICLE I
Street Excavations
[Adopted as Sec. 15-1 of the 1976 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 332-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
APPLICANT — Any person making written application for the permit
hereinafter mentioned.
EXCAVATION WORK — The excavation and other work permitted under an
excavation permit and required to be performed under this article.
PERMITTEE — Any person who has been granted and has in full force and
effect an excavation permit issued hereunder.
STREET — Any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, or other public way
or public grounds in the Township.
§ 332-2. Excavation permit. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel,
undermine or in any manner break up any street, or to make or cause to be
made any excavation in or under the surface of any street for any purpose
or to place, deposit, or leave upon any street any earth or other excavated
material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the street,
unless such person shall first have obtained an excavation permit therefor
from the Township Administrator as herein provided.
§ 332-3. Permit application requirements.
A. No excavation permit shall be issued unless a written application or the
issuance of an excavation permit on forms supplied by the Township is
submitted to the Township Administrator, signed by the person making
the application or by a duly authorized agent, and shall contain the
following information: [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
(1) Name and address of the person for whom such work is to be
performed.
(2) A detailed plan, in triplicate, describing the work to be performed;
on approval, one approved copy is to be returned with the permit to
be issued, which approved copy and permit are to be in the
possession of the person supervising work.
(3) Surface type of road to be opened.
(4) Number of square yards to be opened.
(5) Date of commencement and estimated date of completion of work.
§ 332-1 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 332-3
279:447
§ 332-4. Cash deposit; permit and inspection fees. [Amended
3-17-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-7]
(6) Name and address of independent contractor to do work, if other
than applicant.
B. All applications for permits shall be accompanied with a public liability
insurance policy or a certificate of insurance with limits of $100,000 to
$300,000, for personal injuries, and $50,000 for property damage,
policy to be issued by an insurance company authorized to do business
in New Jersey, indemnifying and protecting the Township from all
liability by reason of property damage or personal injuries or death
which may result or may be claimed to result as a result of any accident
occurring at the point of the opening. If work is to be performed by an
independent contractor, other than by the applicant, then such
certificate of insurance shall be required of the independent contractor.
C. A public utility, in lieu of furnishing a public liability insurance policy or
certificate of insurance, may file proof that it is a self-insurer under the
insurance and motor vehicle laws of the State of New Jersey,
accompanied by a certificate of financial responsibility. Should such
public utility contract out work provided for in the application and
permit, the contractor engaged shall file the certificate of insurance as
above provided for.
D. No permit or excavation permit shall be issued during a period of five
years after the completion of a major construction improvement of a
road or street, except where due proof of an emergency is shown.
E. No applications will be accepted for road openings between November
15 and April 1 except in the event of emergency or except when deemed
necessary by the Township Engineer or Director of Public Works and
Engineering.98
A. The application for an excavation permit to perform excavation work
under this article shall be accompanied with a deposit, made to the
Township for deposit with the Township Treasurer, as follows:
[Amended 4-16-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-6]
(1) Fifteen dollars per square yard of surface for a roadway or street
which has a bituminous treated surface road.
(2) Twenty dollars per square yard of surface for a roadway or street
which has a bituminous penetrated macadam; or a bituminous
concrete surface, type S.M.
(3) Fifteen dollars per square yard of surface for roadway or street
which has a dirt or gravel road surface.
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 332-3 WEST MILFORD CODE § 332-4
279:448
§ 332-5. Deposits turned over to Administrator. [Amended 9-1-2004
by Ord. No. 2004-6100]
Such deposit and fees shall be turned over to the Township Administrator,
and upon certification by the Director of Public Works and Engineering
that the street has been properly repaired, the deposits shall be returned
to the applicant, except that where streets are constructed of bituminous
penetration macadam or bituminous concrete, type S.M., constructed with
state aid funds, the certification shall be by the Township Engineer.
§ 332-6. Supervision.101
The Director of Public Works and Engineering shall have full supervision
over any opening to be made in any street under any permit granted
hereunder, and the work on any such opening shall be commenced within
10 days of the date of the issuance of the permit, and such work shall
proceed with due diligence to its completion. If for any reason the work
on the opening is not commenced within the period of 10 days, the permit
shall be void, and any deposit held by the Township thereunder shall be
returned to the applicant upon surrender of the permit, unless an extension
of time is granted by the Township Engineer in writing, endorsed on the
permit, within which to commence the work, whereupon the applicant shall
commence such work within the time set forth under the extension or
forfeit any right to make any opening under the extension, and permit,
and thereupon any deposit held by the Township shall be returned to the
applicant upon the surrender of the permit upon which such extension is
endorsed. The work under any extension shall proceed with due diligence
to its completion.
(4) In no case under Subsection A(1), (2) or (3) should the deposit be
less than $100, which amount is hereby fixed as the minimum
deposit to accompany the application.
B. In addition to the foregoing deposit, the applicant shall pay a permit fee
and an inspection fee as set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs.99
C. Any deposit made hereunder shall serve as security for the repair and
performance of the work necessary to put the street in as good a
condition as it was prior to the excavation if the permittee fails to make
the necessary repairs or to complete the proper refilling of the opening
and the excavation work under the excavation permit. The Township
may use any or all of any such deposit to pay the cost of any work the
Township performs to restore or maintain the street as herein provided
in the event the permittee fails to perform such work, in which event
the amount refunded to the permittee shall be reduced by the amount
thus expended by the Township.
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
101. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 332-4 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 332-7
279:449
§ 332-7. Revocation of permit.
The Township may at any time revoke or annul any permit, or extension
endorsed thereon, for cause, or for making any opening not in accordance
with the permit granted, or for failure or neglect to pursue the work in
accordance with such permit or by reason of any condition which would, or
the Township fears might prove to be dangerous or injurious to any person
or property, or the Township deems harmful to or not for the best interests
of the Township, and every person receiving a permit or any extension
thereof shall accept the same subject to the foregoing provisions, without
any liability or responsibility attaching to the Township for any loss or
damage that might result by reason of such revocation.
§ 332-8. Replacement of pavement or surface over opening.102
All pavement or surface over any opening for which any permit is granted
as aforesaid shall be replaced by the permittee by a temporary pavement of
a bituminous concrete, type A, immediately after filling, except that if the
road is gravel, the temporary replacement shall be by gravel; permanent
pavement is to be restored by permittee, not less than 30 nor more than 60
days after opening is made, unless this time is extended by the Director of
Public Works and Engineering or Township Engineer, depending on road or
weather conditions. Should the permittee fail to do so, the deposit provided
for herein, or such portion thereof as may be necessary, shall be used to
pay the cost of consolidating the material used, to refill the opening, and to
replace the pavement or surface; and the balance, if any, shall be returned
to the applicant 12 months after the issuance of the permit, if the surface
is then in good condition, or as soon thereafter as the necessary repairs
thereto are made, upon presentation to the Township of the original permit,
and the signing by the applicant of a receipt for the amount so returned.
§ 332-9. Responsibility of permittee.103
Every opening and all excavations and backfilling shall be the responsibility
of the person to whom any permit is issued. Such person shall give at least
a twenty-four-hour notice to the Township Engineer or Director of Public
Works and Engineering before any street opening work is commenced. Such
person shall give reasonable notice to the Township Engineer or to the
Director of Public Works and Engineering or other person designated by
the Township before any backfilling is commenced. All excavations shall
be made in open trenches, except where otherwise permitted or directed
by the Director of Public Works and Engineering or Township Engineer.
The sides of the excavation shall be supported when necessary by suitable
plank and shoring which shall be drawn as the work progresses unless
the Director of Public Works and Engineering or the Township Engineer
orders the same left in place. All the work of excavating and backfilling
shall be prosecuted with all possible vigor. All trenches shall be backfilled
102. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 332-7 WEST MILFORD CODE § 332-9
279:450
by depositing therein back run gravel in layers of not more than six inches
in depth, each thoroughly rammed, and if required by the Director of Public
Works and Engineering or Township Engineer flushed with water, or both.
Surplus earth shall not be piled over filled openings so as to interfere with
traffic. All old paving material shall be carefully conserved and placed over
the trench in as good condition and as near the street grade as practicable,
and all surplus material and rubbish of any kind shall be promptly removed
by the person to whom such permit is issued. Where excavation is made in
a tunnel beneath a concrete pavement having a concrete base, the tunnel
shall be backfilled with concrete composed of one part of portland cement
and nine parts of hard steam boiler cinders or other approved material
stamped in place so that the cavity is completely filled, provided that before
any work of tunneling is commenced the method of such tunneling shall
be first approved by the Director of Public Works and Engineering or the
Township Engineer.
§ 332-10. Opening in paved road.104
Whenever an opening is made in a paved road, the pavement of surface
shall be cut with an approved pavement cutter no wider than one foot
outside of either side of the pipe to be laid. Should ground conditions
warrant a wider opening, such widening and the method for same shall
be with the consent of and under the supervision of the Director of Public
Works and Engineering of the Township or the Township Engineer.
§ 332-11. Lighting of excavation; traffic conditions.
A. The excavation and all piles of excavated material or any material used
in the work to be performed in the opening for which a permit is issued
shall be carefully guarded and lighted or caused to be carefully guarded
and lighted by the person to whom such permit has been issued, who
shall be liable for all loss and damage caused by the prosecution of the
work or failure to properly guard or maintain the opening.
B. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that during
the performance of the excavation work traffic conditions as nearly
normal as practicable shall be maintained at all times so as to cause as
little inconvenience as possible to the occupants of the abutting
property and to the general public, provided that the Township
Engineer, with the approval of the Chief of Police, may permit the
closing of streets to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by him if in
his opinion it is necessary. The permittee shall route and control traffic
including its own vehicles as directed by the Police Department. The
following steps shall be taken before any road may be closed or
restricted to traffic:
(1) The permittee must receive the approval of the Township Engineer
and the Chief of Police therefor.
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 332-9 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 332-11
279:451
§ 332-12. Construction of sewers or drains.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as requiring the
issuance of a permit for the performance of any opening or excavating by
the Township or under a contract with the Township for the construction of
sewers, drains or street improvements.
§ 332-13. Surety bond.
(2) The permittee must notify the volunteer fire company and
volunteer first aid squad in the area of any street so closed.
(3) Upon completion of construction work the permittee shall notify
the Township Engineer, Chief of Police, and volunteer fire company
and first aid squad, before traffic is moved back to its normal flow
so that any necessary adjustments may be made.
(4) Where flagmen are deemed necessary by the Township Engineer or
Chief of Police, they shall be furnished by the permittee at its own
expense.
C. Excavations on opposite sides of a road, in the same locality, and at the
same time, shall not be permitted. Where such excavations are
required, the permittee shall first complete the work on one side of the
road, and shall not commence work on the opposite side until work on
the initial side has been completed, backfilled, and land or road
restored to its initial condition. Where more than one permit has been
issued for the excavation along a road in the same locality, the Township
Engineer shall regulate as to the side of the road first to be excavated.
Where the excavation is to be from one side of the road to another, the
permittee may make sure excavation, provided proper access for traffic
is first made, subject to the approval of the Chief of Police and the
Township Engineer.
A. Any public utility as defined in N.J.S.A. 48:2-13, which desires to obtain
permits under this article, may file with the Township Administrator a
surety bond in the amount of $10,000, running to the Township, such
bond shall be that of a surety company authorized to transact business
in New Jersey, except that if the public utility is a self-insurer under the
motor vehicle or insurance laws of the State of New Jersey, it may file its
own bond, together with proof it is a self-insurer, and a certificate of
financial responsibility; any bond filed must be satisfactory to the
Township Attorney in form and substance. Such bond shall be
conditioned upon compliance by such public utility with the applicable
provisions of this article with respect to each street opening which shall
be made by such public utility in the Township and shall further provide
that the obligation of such bond shall be a continuing obligation to the
full amount thereof with respect to each street opening. Whenever any
public utility which shall have filed such a bond shall request the
Township Administrator in writing to issue to it a street opening permit,
it shall be the duty of the Township Administrator to issue such permit,
§ 332-11 WEST MILFORD CODE § 332-13
279:452
§ 332-14. Right of appeal. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-6105]
Any person aggrieved by any action of the Director of Public Works and
Engineering or Township Engineer or any other Township official in the
enforcement of any provisions of this article shall have a right of appeal to
the Township Administrator. The appeal must be taken within 14 days after
the action complained of has occurred. Appeals shall be made in writing
to the Township Administrator, and shall set forth reasons for the appeal.
The Township Administrator thereupon shall set a date for a hearing to take
place within 30 days after receipt of the request for a hearing.
provided the permit fee and the inspection fee as set forth in this article
are paid at the time of the filing of the application for such a permit.
[Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
B. The amount of this bond may be increased by the Township Council
depending upon the number of street openings and the estimated cost
of restoring the streets.
105. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 332-13 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 332-14
279:453

ARTICLE II
Street Acceptances
[Adopted as Sec. 15-2 of the 1976 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 332-15. Requirements for dedication and acceptance.
No street shall be dedicated to public use and accepted by the Township
Council unless there shall be strict compliance with all of the requirements
of this article, including the specifications regarding the width and
construction of streets.
§ 332-16. Widths.
§ 332-17. Line and grade; curbs.
§ 332-18. Stone base course.
A. The right-of-way shall not be less than 50 feet, the graded width not less
than 30 feet, and the paved width not less than 20 feet. Paved gutters
shall be five feet in width on each side of the twenty-foot side pavement
and be in addition to the twenty-foot wide pavement.
B. When a comprehensive improvement to an existing roadway is
proposed, variations to these standards may be recommended by the
Township Engineer, and accepted by the Township Council.
A. Line and grade. The street shall be constructed to conform to the
designed line and grade. Grades shall not exceed 10%, nor be less than
1%.
B. Curbs. When the grade of any paved street exceeds 7%, there shall be
constructed concrete or bituminous curbs on both sides of the street, in
order to discharge stormwaters into storm sewers or other outlets as
may be required. Curbs shall be constructed at all intersections. All
curbs shall be constructed with the face being 15 feet from each side of
the center line except at street intersections, where the minimum
radius shall be 25 feet. The top curb shall generally be set to a grade
two inches higher than that of the center line and shall have an exposed
face of six inches. The concrete curb shall be six inches wide at the top,
nine inches wide at the bottom and 18 inches in depth, and shall be in
accordance with the New Jersey State Highway Specifications for Class
"C" concrete. The bituminous curb shall be installed by an approved
automatic curber; it shall be installed on top of pavement. All curbs
shall be backfilled and subject to an inspection and approval by the
Township Engineer. Belgium block curbs may be permitted as an
alternate, installed according to Township Engineer's specifications.
A. A subgrade shall be prepared and approved by the Township Engineer
before the stone base course is placed.
§ 332-15 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 332-18
279:455
§ 332-19. Bituminous concrete courses.
B. The stone base course shall be constructed of quarry processed stone,
consisting of crushed or naturally angular particles of rock, which will
pass a two-inch sieve and be retained on a No. 10 sieve. The broken
stone shall be free of pieces coated with clay, caked stone dust and
other objectionable materials. The grading of the quarry-processed
stone shall conform to the following schedule requirements:
Sieve Size Percent Passing
2 inches 100
3/4 inch 55 to 90
No. 4 25 to 60
No. 40 15 to 30
No. 400 5 to 12
C. The stone shall be spread and shaped with road graders, so that when
compacted by four passes of a three-wheel roller weighing at least 10
tons, it will have a thickness of at least four inches and will have a
crown of at least three inches. Gutters shall be shaped to have a threeinch
trough.
A. The Standard Specifications of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation for Road and Bridge Construction, 1961, apply here as
to Materials and Methods of Construction, their being recited at length
in Articles 3.10.2, and 3.10.3.
B. Bottom course shall be CABC or Mix 2 placed to a compacted thickness
of 1 1/2 inches. This course shall not be required for gutters.
C. Top course shall be FABC or Mix 5 placed to a compacted thickness of
1 1/2 inches. This course shall be used for gutters.
D. Bituminous concrete courses shall not be placed when the atmospheric
temperature is below 40°, nor when the weather is foggy, rainy, or
otherwise unfavorable in the opinion of the Engineer.
E. When the bituminous concrete is to be placed on newly constructed
macadam base, the surface shall be cleaned and given a prime coat of
asphaltic oil, tar, or emulsified asphalt satisfactory to the Engineer at
the rate of 0.10 to 0.25 gallon per square yard.
F. Contact surfaces of curbing gutters, manholes, and other structures
shall be painted with a thin coating of asphaltic oil RC-2 or RC-3 just
prior to the placing of the bituminous concrete mixture against them.
§ 332-18 WEST MILFORD CODE § 332-20
279:456
§ 332-20. Bridges and culverts. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-6]
All bridges and culverts on such streets shall be constructed and be in
such a condition as approved by the Engineer of the County of Passaic. A
certificate of such approval shall be filed with the Township Administrator.
§ 332-21. Drains and drainage systems.
Streets shall have such drains or drainage system as shall be required by
the Township Council, with the recommendations of the Township Engineer.
No streets shall be accepted for public use unless and until easements on
land adjacent to them shall have been procured for all drains.
§ 332-22. Utility agreements.
The Township Council shall reserve the right to require its agreement
with public, quasi-public or private utility companies relative to the future
construction and maintenance of utilities, on, over, along or under streets.
§ 332-23. Supervision by Township Engineer; fees.
§ 332-24. Delivery of deed; other requirements.
After the streets are completed and approved as set forth herein, and
sufficient permanent stone monuments have been set to lines and grades
as approved by the Township Engineer, a deed shall be properly executed
by all the owners of the land within them. The deed shall be delivered
to the Township Council, conveying the streets or the lands thereof, to
the Township, in fee simple, free of all encumbrances, including taxes
and assessments. The deed shall be accompanied by one original map
delineated on tracing cloth with black waterproof ink, six blueprints on
cloth, indicating all details required by and approved by the Township
Engineer, and the recording fees for the deed and filing of the original
tracing map and one cloth print with the Register of Deeds of the County
of Passaic. The Township Council may accept the same, provided the
conditions set forth herein shall have been complied with.
A. All of the work set forth in §§ 332-16 to 332-21, both inclusive, shall be
supervised by the Township Engineer. All fees for such supervision shall
be paid by the person requesting the acceptance of the streets.
B. Fees shall be computed on an actual salary cost, to which shall be added
a percentage to cover cost of fringe benefits actually received or to be
received.
C. The Township Engineer shall compute the cost and certify its
correctness on the submitted bill.
§ 332-20 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 332-25
279:457
§ 332-25. Realignments of accepted streets excluded.
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable in the case of streets
heretofore dedicated or in use by the public as public thoroughfares,
wherein the Township Council determines by ordinance to straighten or
realign the same and to procure new rights-of-way for future improvement
thereof.
§ 332-25 WEST MILFORD CODE § 332-25
279:458
ARTICLE III
Street Improvement Specifications
[Adopted as Sec. 15-3 of the 1976 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 332-26. Minimum standards and specifications.
The following shall constitute the minimum standards and specifications for
the improvement of streets or roads in the Township of West Milford, in the
County of Passaic, before building permits are issued, as provided for in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-35 and 40:55D-76:106
A. Acceptable right-of-way width.
(1) The minimum width of any acceptable right-of-way shall be 33 feet.
However, if an applicant desires to build a building on a street with
a defined right-of-way, according to the tax maps, of less than 33
feet, he may be permitted to do so, provided he provides for and
dedicates a reserve strip to the Township. The width of the reserve
strip shall be 1/2 of the amount required to bring the right-of-way to
33 feet. The applicant shall also be required to establish concrete
monuments at the property corners that intersect with the
proposed road right-of-way, whenever irregular rights-of-way are
so developed. Locations of monuments are to be shown on the site
plan to be submitted for review in accordance with the zoning or
building codes of the Township. Where a building permit is
required for a building on a private street, and the applicant owns
to the center line of such street, he shall be required to provide for
and dedicate to the Township a reserve strip along his frontage
from the center line of such street to the desired right-of-way line.
In every instance, when a building permit is requested for a
building to front on a private road, it shall be the responsibility of
the applicant to prove to the engineering and building departments
the road ownership. It shall not become the Township responsibility
to perform maintenance on reserve strips of property; rather it will
be the objective of the Township to exercise the right of ownership
whenever it deems it in the best interest of the public to do so.
(2) When a comprehensive improvement to an existing roadway is
proposed, variations to these standards may be recommended by
the Township Engineer, and accepted by the Township Council.
B. Minimum condition of road base.
(1) Storm drainage must be provided for in accordance with the
requirements of the Township Engineer, including the provision of
any necessary easements; this item of construction is essential and
may not be eliminated without the written authorization of the
Township Engineer with reasons for such authorization indicated.
106. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 332-26 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 332-26
279:459
(2) The subgrade of the street shall be shaped and brought to a firm,
unyielding surface by rolling the entire area with a three-wheel
power roller weighing not less than 10 tons. Roads shall have a
parabolic cross section with a cross slope of 1/4 to 3/8 inch per foot.
Prior to shaping and rolling, all topsoil shall be stripped from the
proposed subgrade. After rolling, all soft and spongy places shall be
excavated and refilled solidly with subbase consisting of suitable
earth, quarry processed stone or sand as directed by the Township
Engineer. All evident loose rock or boulders shall be removed or
broken off 12 inches below the subgrade surface. All stumps shall
be removed in their entirety. Subgrade shall not be prepared during
freezing weather, or when frozen, or when it is unstable due to
excessive moisture. Roads with an average annual daily traffic of
less than 100 vehicles of which less than five are single-unit trucks
must have a minimum application of a surface treatment or a slurry
seal. The surface treatment shall include a prime coat application
at a rate of 1/4 gallon per square yard, immediately followed with a
cover material of three-eighths-inch or one-quarter-inch stone at a
rate of 25 pounds per square yard, properly rolled. After 24 hours,
a seal coat application shall be made using a tack coat at a rate of 1/
10 gallon per square yard, immediately followed with a cover
material of three-eighths- or one-quarter-inch stone at a rate of 10
pounds per square yard, properly rolled. All materials used shall be
compatible with one another. An alternate method shall be a slurry
seal. However, traffic must be kept off the roadway for at least 24
hours after the slurry seal has been applied. Slurry seals consist of
a wet mix of thin grout of slurry consistency. They are composed of
emulsified asphalt and fine aggregate. The slurry mix is generally
spread over the pavement with a long, bottomless, box-like drag
device. Slurry machines are designed especially for slurry seal
mixing and application work. For roads with an average annual
daily traffic of more than 100 vehicles or of more than five singleunit
trucks, a minimum of three inches compacted thickness of hot
mix bituminous concrete, Mix No. 4, shall be laid on the completed
subgrade and properly rolled. All work with bituminous materials
shall take place only when the atmosphere temperature is above
50° F. and when the weather conditions are otherwise favorable in
the opinion of the Township Engineer. No bituminous and/or
bitumen concrete shall be applied unless the Township Engineer
has been given a minimum of 24 hours' notification.
C. Width of pavement. Road surface shall be improved in accordance with
above standards to a minimum width of 20 feet.
D. Maximum allowable road grade. The maximum allowable road grade
shall be 15%. However, for any grades greater than 10%, curbing must
be provided.
§ 332-26 WEST MILFORD CODE § 332-26
279:460
§ 332-27. Right of appeal. [Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-030]
Where the enforcement of the provisions of the statute above cited or
the implementation of this article would entail practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship, or where the circumstances of the case do not
require the structure to be related to a street, the applicant for a building
permit shall have the right of appeal as provided for in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10,
40:55D-36 and 40:55D-76.
§ 332-28. Conflict with subdivision regulations.
Where there shall be any conflict between the provisions of this article and
Chapter 470, Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Review, then, and in such
case, the provisions of said Chapter 470 shall govern.
§ 332-29. Conflict with street acceptance regulations.
Where there shall be any conflict between the provisions of this article and
Article II, Street Acceptances, of this chapter, in the acceptance of private
roads as public thoroughfares, or in a road improvement program, financed
on the assessment basis, the provisions of Article II, Street Acceptances,
and the provisions in the road improvement program shall govern.
§ 332-30. Township improvement assessment and acceptance rights
preserved. [Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030]
Since the thrust of this article and the implementation of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-35
and 40:55D-76 is to assure adequate access to every structure for
emergency vehicles necessary to protect health and safety by requiring
lots to front on specified kinds of streets, as above described, suitably
improved or their improvements guaranteed, before permits may issue, it is
understood that the right of the Township Council or the Township to the
acceptance or to the permanent improvement of any road or roads, whether
public or private, by assessment to the property owners on the basis of
benefits derived shall not be precluded by this article.
E. Curb. Curb may be bituminous concrete curb or white/grey concrete
vertical curb. Curb must be provided when either of the following
conditions exist:
(1) The grade of roadway is more than 10%.
(2) The finished roadway elevation is higher than the adjoining
property.
(3) When, in the opinion of the Township Engineer, it is necessary to
provide lateral support for the pavement, thereby alleviating the
possibility of edge cracking occurring along the roadway.
§ 332-26 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 332-30
279:461

ARTICLE IV
Snow and Ice Removal from Private Roads
[Adopted as Sec. 15-5 of the 1976 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 332-31. Findings.
It is hereby recognized that the Township Council has the power and
authority under N.J.S.A. 40:67-23.1 to provide for the removal of snow, ice
and other obstructions from any roads or streets upon which the public
travel is sufficient, in the opinion of the Township Council, to warrant such
expenditures, even though such roads or streets shall not have been taken
over by the Township or dedicated and accepted as public highways. It is
further recognized that:
§ 332-32. Township Engineer to prepare list of roads.
The Township Engineer be and is hereby authorized to prepare a list of such
roads or streets, and to submit his report to the Township Council.
§ 332-33. Plowing of roads or streets.
In the event of a snowfall of four inches or more in depth, wherein an
emergency may then exist, and to eliminate hazardous conditions as the
result thereof, the Township Engineer be and is empowered to authorize the
plowing of such roads or streets as shall be listed on the list to be prepared
by the Township Engineer and approved by the Township Council.
§ 332-34. Sanding of roads or streets.
When hazardous conditions shall exist on such roads or streets, as on the
list, the Township Engineer shall authorize the sanding of such roads or
streets.
A. There are numerous such roads or streets whereon the public travel is
sufficient to warrant the removal of snow, ice and other obstructions.
B. Such roads should be classified and listed for the benefit of the
Township Engineer, to the end that snow and ice be removed therefrom,
primarily to eliminate hazards to life, health and fire prevention.
C. Such service should be rendered to citizens living on or along such
roads, to assure them relief from hazardous conditions.
§ 332-31 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 332-34
279:463

ARTICLE V
Snow and Ice Removal from Sidewalks
[Adopted 3-6-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-5; amended in its entirety
10-20-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-011]
§ 332-35. Duty of owner, occupant or tenant.
The owner of commercial premises abutting or bordering upon any street in
the Township shall remove all snow and ice from the abutting sidewalks of
such streets, or in the case of ice, which may also be so frozen as to make
removal impractical, shall cause the same to be fairly covered with sand or
deicing material, within 12 hours after the conclusion of the storm.
§ 332-36. Depositing of snow or ice on streets or sidewalks
prohibited; handicapped parking.
§ 332-37. Enforcement of article.
§ 332-38. Removal by Township; payment.
A. No person shall throw, place or deposit any snow or ice into or upon any
street in the Township, it being the intent and purpose of this provision
to prohibit all persons from throwing, casting, placing or depositing
snow and ice which accumulated within the private property belonging
to such person upon the sidewalks or streets of the Township.
B. Handicapped parking spaces. No person, firm, corporation or
partnership or the owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of any premises
having parking spaces reserved for handicapped drivers or any
contractor employed for the removal of snow and ice shall block access
to parking spaces reserved for handicapped drivers by the plowing,
piling or placement of snow and ice in such reserved spaces.
A. Any resident of the Township, all members of the Department of Police,
all special officers, all members of the Department of Public Works and
the Zoning Officer are authorized to file complaints for violations of this
article and shall be certified by a Township "enforcement official" as
further set forth in this article.
B. Investigation and enforcement of this article will normally occur after
the storm event. Complaints must be issued within 30 days of the
violation.
A. In case any such owner of any commercial premises abutting or
bordering on any street in the Township of West Milford shall fail to
remove such ice and snow from such sidewalks as provided in § 332-35
of this article, the enforcement official or such other officer of the
Township as the Township Council may have designated may cause said
ice and snow to be removed from said sidewalk by Township employees
or contractors, and the cost and expense incurred or paid for such
removal shall be certified by the enforcement official and submitted to
§ 332-35 PRINTED MATTER, UNSOLICITED § 332-38
279:465
§ 332-39. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable for a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, General
Penalty, of the Township Code.
§ 332-40. Exceptions.
The regulations set forth under § 332-35 of this article shall not be
applicable when the National Weather Service, Governor or the Mayor has
declared a snow emergency throughout the Township.
the Township Council of the Township of West Milford, and, upon
approval of said amount by the Township Council, the same shall be
certified to the Tax Collector and shall thereupon become and be a lien
upon said premises as of the date of such certification by the Township
Council and shall be added to, recorded and collected with and in
the same manner as real estate taxes assessed and levied upon said
premises.
B. The cost and expense of removal of such ice and snow provided for in
this section shall be separate and distinct from any fines and court costs
which may be imposed and collected under § 332-39 of this article.
§ 332-38 WEST MILFORD CODE § 332-40
279:466
Chapter 337
SUMP PUMPS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 300. Stormwater management — See Ch. 325.
§ 337-1. Unlawful discharges.
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as owner, tenant, lessee, or
occupant, to cause to be discharged upon any public road, right-of-way or
public property or into sanitary sewers, waters from a sump pump or other
such similar mechanical device. The discharge of such waters from a sump
pump or other such similar mechanical device is hereby declared to be
public nuisance and in violation hereof.
Chapter 344
SWIMMING POOLS
§ 332-40 SUMP PUMPS § 337-1
337:467

ARTICLE I
Swimming Pool Code
[Adopted as Sec. 19-2 of the 1976 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 344-1. Code adopted.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6, the Swimming Pool Code of New
Jersey (1970) is hereby adopted by the Township. A copy of the code is
annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of the text
thereof herein.
§ 344-2. Title of code.
The code established and adopted by this article is described and commonly
known as the "Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey (1970)."
§ 344-3. Permit fee; water sampling charges; exemption. [Amended
3-17-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-7; 4-16-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-6]
Permit fees shall be as follows:
A. The annual permit fee to be paid by the applicant for each public
swimming pool is included in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs. [Amended
9-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-14107]
B. In addition, the applicant shall pay for all water sampling charges
required.
C. The permit fee is for the purpose of regulation and shall be for a term
commencing on July 1 of each year and expiring on June 30 of the year
following.
D. Public swimming pool facilities that are owned and operated by a public
governmental entity will be exempt from paying the annual permit fee.
[Added 6-17-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-17]
107. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 344-1 SWIMMING POOLS § 344-3
344:469

ARTICLE II
Public Bathing Places
[Adopted as Sec. 19-10 of the 1976 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 344-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The officer of the Township or his
authorized representative assigned to enforce this article.
PUBLIC BATHING PLACE — All places wherein and whereat a charge or fee
is paid by the patron or patrons for entrance, and for use of facilities, which
shall include bathing or swimming at lakes or other bodies of fresh water.
§ 344-5. Permit required.
From and after March 21, 1961, it shall be unlawful for any person to
engage in the business of operating a public bathing place, as herein
defined, within the limits of the Township without first having obtained
a permit to do so and without first complying with the standards and
regulations herein stated.
§ 344-6. Administration and enforcement.
The administrative officer shall administer and enforce the provisions of this
article.
§ 344-7. Application for permit.
Applications for the permit required by this article shall be made to the
administrative officer upon forms provided by him. They shall be signed
by the applicant, if an individual; and by a duly authorized agent, if a
partnership or corporation. Such application shall set forth the following
information:
A. The applicant's full name, residence and post office address, and
whether such applicant is an individual, firm or corporation; if a
partnership, the names of the partners, together with their addresses,
shall be included; if a corporation, the name, date of incorporation and
the state under the laws of which such corporation was organized; if a
foreign corporation, whether authorized to do business in the State of
New Jersey, the names of the principal officer, directors and local
representatives, their residences and business addresses.
B. The location of the public bathing place, and the name under which the
business or place is known.
C. Such other information as the Department of Health may determine and
require in order to show compliance with the standards herein stated.
§ 344-4 SWIMMING POOLS § 344-8
344:471
§ 344-8. Issuance of permit.
§ 344-9. Permit fee; water sampling charges. [Amended 3-17-1982
by Ord. No. 1982-7; 7-2-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-15; 9-19-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-28]
Permit fees shall be as follows:
§ 344-10. Inspections.
The administrative officer may inspect all public bathing places. The
administrative officer, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter
at any reasonable time, upon any private or public property within the
Township, where a public bathing place is operated, for the purpose of
determining compliance with the provisions of this article. The owner or
operator of such public bathing place shall make provisions for the
administrative officer to have access, either in company with an employee
or otherwise, to make the inspections.
§ 344-11. Standards.
In addition to such other requirements as may be reasonably imposed by
the New Jersey State Department of Health and Senior Services through
rules and regulations promulgated, the administrative officer shall not issue
A. Before any applicant shall be entitled to a permit:
(1) The Building Inspector and Zoning Officer of the Township shall
certify whether or not the location of the public bathing place
complies with Chapter 500, Zoning, of the Township Code.
(2) The administrative officer shall make or have made an inspection of
the public bathing place, in order to determine compliance with the
provisions of this article and the standards herein stated.
B. If, after the aforesaid certifications have been made, the administrative
officer shall be reasonably satisfied that the statements set forth in the
application are correct and that the applicant is in compliance with the
provisions not only of this article, but also with all applicable
ordinances of the Township.
A. The annual permit fee to be paid by the applicant for each public
bathing place is included in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs.108
B. In addition, the applicant shall pay for all water sampling charges
required.
C. The permit fee is for the purpose of regulation and shall be for a term
commencing on January 1 of each year and expiring on December 31 of
the year.
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 344-8 WEST MILFORD CODE § 344-11
344:472
a permit for any public bathing place, unless the following standards are
observed, and unless the public bathing place is in conformity with the
following requirements:
A. Bacteriological.
(1) Collection of samples.
(a) Location. Samples of lake bathing waters shall be taken at the
inlet(s) and bathing areas. Samples shall also be obtained at
outlets when sufficient discharge is occurring. Additional
samples shall also be obtained at any critical points subject to
known or possible pollution from developments, individual
dwelling, streams or other sources.
(b) Frequency. Sufficient samples should be taken at weekly
intervals. However, the time between sampling shall not
exceed two weeks.
(c) Sampling period. A program of sampling shall be instituted at
least one week before Decoration Day and shall continue in a
manner as prescribed herein until the end of the bathing
season.
(d) Time of sampling. Whenever possible, samples shall be
obtained during, or soon after, peak bathing load periods.
(e) Field data. Physical conditions noted at the time of sampling
shall be recorded on a suitable form, including sample number,
name of collector, source, location, time of sampling, water and
air temperature, wind direction and velocity, bathing load, and
the possible effect of recent rainfall on bacteriological quality.
(f) Method of sampling. Samples shall be obtained at depths
representative of the body of water in use for bathing. Method
of sampling shall be in accordance with procedures as found in
"Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage,"
current edition.
(g) Sampling personnel. Samples shall be taken by the local health
officer or by persons authorized by or under the supervision of
the laboratories responsible for the analyses.
(2) Bacteriological examinations.
(a) Laboratories. Bacteriological analyses of bathing lake water
shall be made by laboratories acceptable to the New Jersey
State Department of Health and Senior Services. In addition,
all laboratories doing such analyses shall be thoroughly
familiar with all requirements contained herein.
(b) Method of analysis. Bacteriological analysis of bathing lake
waters determining the presence and density of organisms of
§ 344-11 SWIMMING POOLS § 344-11
344:473
the coliform group shall either conform to the method
prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Sewage," current edition, or other methods acceptable to
the Department.
(c) Number of portions and dilutions. Although the number of
portions and dilutions used will depend on the expected
character of the water, it is recommended that two portions at
the following dilutions be used: 10, 1.0, 0.1, and 0.01 ml.
(d) Method of reporting. The number of positive findings shall be
reported in terms of most probable number per 100 ml. (MPN
per 100 ml.)
(e) Total bacteria determination. As an aid to interpretation of the
results, agar plate counts shall be made in accordance with
"Standard Methods," one ml. shall be planted on at least two
plates and the resultant counts averaged arithmetically.
(3) Bacterial limits. When the arithmetic average coliform MPN of a
set of samples taken at any particular time exceeds 2,400 per 100
ml., another set of samples shall be taken as soon as possible from
the same locations. If the arithmetic average of this set of samples
still remains above 2,400 per 100 ml., a sanitary survey shall be
instituted by the local health officer or laboratory responsible for
the analysis, provided the local health officer will accept the
inspection findings of such laboratories.
(4) Chemical analysis. pH values of every sample obtained shall be
determined as an aid to interpretation of bacteriological results.
(5) Physical analysis. Determination of turbidity, color and odor should
also be made as an aid to the interpretation of quality of bathing
lake waters. Such determinations shall be in accordance with
"Standard Methods."
B. Sanitation.
(1) Bathhouses and dressing rooms.
(a) Dressing rooms. Where dressing rooms or bathhouses are
made available to the bathing public and when used
simultaneously by both sexes, such structures shall consist of
two sections, entirely separated by partitions. Line of sight
shall be broken at entrances and exits of dressing rooms.
(b) Floors. Floors of all dressing and locker rooms shall be
constructed of smooth, finished material impervious to
moisture. Floors shall have sufficient pitch or be constructed
so as to permit proper drainage after washing down. Walk
areas used by patrons shall be nonslip construction.
§ 344-11 WEST MILFORD CODE § 344-11
344:474
(c) Walls and partitions. Walls and partitions of all dressing rooms
and bathhouses shall be of smooth, impervious material. If
walls of wood or other similar material are used, all cracks and
joints shall be filled and the surface kept finished with paint,
creosote or other sanitary waterproof coating. Partitions
between dressing rooms should terminate a sufficient distance
above the floor to permit flushing of the entire floor area.
(d) Furniture and lockers. All furniture used in dressing rooms
shall be of simple character and easily cleaned. Lockers, where
provided, shall be properly ventilated and be of verminproof
construction with tight joints.
(e) Cleaning and disinfection. All dressing rooms, bathhouses and
appurtenances shall be kept clean and orderly at all times. A
suitable disinfectant shall be used at daily intervals on floors,
walls, seats and other interior portions of dressing rooms and
bathhouses. Foot baths are not required.
(2) Toilets, lavatories and showers.
(a) Number. An adequate number of conveniently located and
properly designated toilets shall be provided for each sex.
Readily accessible washing facilities should be provided.
(b) Type. Flush-type toilets should be used, provided wastewaters
can be disposed of properly. If soil, groundwater conditions,
location or space limitation do not permit the use of flush-type
toilets, properly constructed and located privies or chemical
toilets may be used, subject, however, to local ordinances.
(c) Material. Floors, walls and fixtures shall be constructed of
durable easily cleaned material.
(d) Maintenance. All toilets, lavatories and showers shall be
cleaned and disinfected daily and kept in good repair. Toilets
shall be kept supplied with a sufficient amount of toilet tissue.
Lavatories shall be supplied with soap and suitable receptacles
for disposal of paper towels. Common towels shall not be
permitted.
(3) Water supply.
(a) Type. Whenever possible, a water supply should be obtained
from an approved municipal system. Where private wells are
used, such wells shall be located and constructed so as to
prevent surface or subsurface contamination.
(b) Quality. Any water used or available for use for drinking or
culinary purposes or for the cleaning of utensils used in
preparing or serving food or drink for public consumption shall
be of a quality safe for such use and shall meet the standards of
§ 344-11 SWIMMING POOLS § 344-11
344:475
quality fixed by the New Jersey State Department of Health
and Senior Services.
(4) Sewage disposal.
(a) Toilet waste. Any toilet or receptacle for human excrement
shall be constructed and maintained so that flies cannot gain
access to the excremental matter contained therein, and
excremental matter shall at all times be prevented from
flowing over or upon the surface of the ground and shall be
prevented from gaining access to any of the waters of this
state.
(b) Other wastewaters. No dish water, shower water, drainage for
plumbing fixtures or other foul or putrescible waste liquids
shall be permitted to accumulate on the surface of the ground
or be disposed of in a manner that will pollute any water supply
or create a nuisance.
(5) Food handling.
(a) Protection. Food offered for sale or intended for public
consumption shall be protected from flies, dust and dirt.
(b) Cleanliness. Where food or drink is offered for sale or public
consumption, adequate washing facilities for thoroughly
cleaning utensils used in preparing or serving the same shall
be provided, and such utensils and counters, table tops
shelves, boxes, refrigerators, and other receptacles on or upon
which food or drink is stored, prepared, handled, displayed or
served shall be kept clean.
(6) Garbage disposal. Garbage cans shall be emptied daily and kept
clean.
(7) Rodent control. All areas so far as may be practicable shall be kept
free from rats, mice, roaches and other vermin.
(8) Weed control. Noxious weeds such as ragweed, poison ivy, poison
sumac, etc., should be properly controlled in those areas open to
the public.
C. Safety.
(1) Lifeguards.
(a) Number. There shall be at least one competent lifeguard (as
hereafter defined) on duty at all times when the area is open
for bathing and stationed at least every 500 feet of visible
bathing area shoreline.
(b) Competence. A "competent lifeguard" shall be defined as a
person holding a valid Senior Red Cross certificate or
§ 344-11 WEST MILFORD CODE § 344-11
344:476
equivalent. Additional lifeguards, if required, shall be
considered competent if so judged by the senior lifeguard
in charge. All persons acting as lifeguards shall be capable
swimmers proficient in lifesaving and artificial respiration
procedures.
(c) Identification. All lifeguards on duty shall be identified by
distinguishing apparel, emblems or signs.
(2) Emergency equipment.
(a) First aid.
[1] Properly stored and maintained first aid equipment shall
contain, as a minimum, the following items:
[a] Aromatic ammonia.
[b] Tincture of iodine or equivalent.
[c] Individually compressed sterile gauze.
[d] Absorbent cotton.
[e] Adhesive tape.
[f] Bandages of various widths.
[g] Rubbing alcohol.
[h] Woolen blankets (two or more).
[i] Stretcher or equivalent.
[2] There shall also be at least one person available at all
times when the bathing area is open for the public who is
capable of administering first aid.
(b) Fire extinguishers. Fire extinguishers, meeting the
requirements of the Fire Underwriters Association, shall be
placed at suitable locations and serviced at regular intervals.
(c) Life rings. There shall be available a sufficient number of life
rings at least 14 inches in diameter with 50 to 75 feet of threequarter-
inch manila line firmly attached to each ring. Life rings
shall be placed at every 150 feet of bathing beach shoreline
over three feet in depth. Such rings shall be property stored
and readily accessible.
(d) Life boats. Where bathing is permitted a distance greater than
100 feet from the bathing shoreline, floats or towers, there
shall be provided at least one stable, flat bottom, square stern
boat, 12 feet or more in length and equipped with oars and oar
locks, one pole and one ring. Such boats shall be located so as
to be immediately available and shall be used for their
§ 344-11 SWIMMING POOLS § 344-11
344:477
§ 344-12. Regulations pertaining to permits.
intended purposes only. If because of the shape or nature of a
bathing area, adequate coverage can be effected by tower(s) or
raft(s) or similar devices for lifeguards, they may be considered
satisfactory in lieu of boat(s).
(e) Markers. Safety regulations pertaining to swimming and
boating shall be conspicuously posted at each waterfront. At
every bathing beach where safe limits are required, such limits
shall be marked by buoys, poles or other markers located not
over 100 feet apart and of a type visible to bathers from a
distance of at least 100 feet, and there shall be provided
suitable signs on the beach describing such markers and
stating that they indicate the limits of safe bathing.
(3) Diving towers, spring boards and floats.
(a) Diving towers. Diving towers, when provided, shall be rigidly
constructed and properly anchored at the bottom with
sufficient bracing to insure stability under the heaviest
possible load.
(b) Floats. Fixed platforms and floats in the water shall be
constructed with a one-foot air space so as to be visible. There
shall be as little underwater construction as is consistent with
strength, and all braces and struts shall be designed to prevent
entanglement or trapping of bathers beneath the platform.
(c) Head room. At least 13 feet free and unobstructed head room
shall be provided above diving boards and towers.
(d) Height and water depth. No diving board or platform available
for use by the general public shall be more than 10 feet above
water level. The minimum water depth below any diving board
or platform shall be 10 feet.
(e) Covering. Spring boards, diving platforms and floats shall be
covered with cocoa matting, carpeting, or other nonslip
material wherever necessary. The use of canvas for such
purpose is not recommended.
(4) Night bathing. Where night bathing is allowed, adequate lighting
shall be provided so that lifeguards can observe all parts of the
bathing area and appurtenances without being blinded by glare.
A. The permit provided for in this article shall not be transferable.
B. The person to whom a permit is granted pursuant to this article shall
cooperate at all times with the administrative officer, and other officers
of the Township when requested to do so, in order to make available to
them information or knowledge which will enable them or any of them
§ 344-11 WEST MILFORD CODE § 344-12
344:478
§ 344-13. Revocation of permit.
Any permit issued for a public bathing place may be revoked for cause, after
a summary hearing, before the Department of Health. A printed or written
notice, setting forth the charges, and the time and place of hearing shall
be served upon the person to whom the permit was issued by leaving such
notice at the place where the operator conducts his business, at least five
days prior to the date of the hearing. The administrative officer, pending the
hearing, may suspend such license before such hearing if in his judgment
the protection of the public health and welfare demands. In such event, it
shall be unlawful for the operator or person to whom the permit has been
granted to engage in the business for which he has received the permit.
§ 344-14. Purpose.
This article is for the purpose of regulation and shall in no way affect any
of the fees as now provided for or to be hereafter provided for in any other
ordinance of the Township, but shall be in addition thereto.
to safeguard the health, welfare, morale and safety of the residents of
the Township, as the same may be affected in anyway by the operation
of a public bathing place. If the permittee shall refuse to render such
information, the permit issued to such person may be revoked.
However, before a permit may be revoked for a cause, a hearing shall
be held by the Department of Health officer to determine if the
permittee has been guilty of such charge.
§ 344-12 SWIMMING POOLS § 344-14
344:479
Chapter 348
TATTOO PARLORS AND TATTOO ARTISTS
§ 348-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION — Written approval from the Health Officer
or his authorized representative that said tattooing establishment has been
inspected and meets all of the terms of this chapter.
HEALTH OFFICER — The appointed, licensed Health Officer or his
authorized representative.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, company, corporation or association that
owns or operates an establishment where tattooing is performed and any
individual who performs or practices the art of tattooing on the person of
another.
TATTOO ARTIST — One who engages in tattooing.
TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT — The location wherein tattooing is performed.
TATTOO, TATTOOED or TATTOOING — Refers to any method of placing
designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any marks under the skin with
ink or any other substance resulting in the coloration of the skin by the aid
of needles or any other instruments designed to puncture the skin.
§ 348-2. Licensing requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
operating an establishment where tattooing is performed without first
obtaining a license from the Health Department to engage in such
business in accordance with the provisions hereof.
B. An application for an initial license shall be accompanied by a fee in the
amount set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs. Any change of
ownership shall require a new application and license with payment of
fees therefor. All applicants shall submit plans for establishment to the
Health Department prior to initiation or construction.109
C. The renewal license fee for engaging in the business of operating a
tattoo establishment within West Milford shall be set forth in Chapter
135, Fees and Costs. All licenses shall expire on the last day of March
annually. If renovations of the tattoo establishment occur, plans must be
submitted to the Health Department and the applicant will be required
to comply with § 348-4A. The late fee for failure to renew the license if
not paid by final due date of April 30 annually is set forth in Chapter
135, Fees and Costs.110
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 344-14 WEST MILFORD CODE § 348-2
348:480
§ 348-3. Minors; records to be kept.
§ 348-4. Sanitary requirements.
D. All existing establishments will be considered renewal applications,
provided that they apply for renewal of said license within one month
after the effective date of this chapter. Establishments failing to apply
within the specified time period will be considered new applicants and
will be subject to the provisions of Subsection B of this section.
E. The provisions of this chapter and all licensing fees shall be due
immediately upon enactment of this chapter.
A. Age. It shall be a violation of this chapter for anyone or any tattoo
business to tattoo an individual under 18 years of age without
authorization signed by the parent or legal guardian and witnessed by
the operator. The operator shall be responsible for maintaining the
original consent form and copies of all consent information for a period
of two years beyond the recipient's 21 birthday. The operator shall
obtain a copy of a photo ID of the individual being tattooed.
B. Each person wishing to receive a tattoo must first apply to the operator,
on a form approved by the Health Department. If the applicant is
suspected to be under the influence of alcohol, drugs or any other
behavioral modifying substance, the operator must refuse the
applicant.
C. All records regarding tattoos are to be maintained for a minimum of two
years. Information required for each applicant referred to in Subsection
B is to include the name, age, date of birth, address and telephone
number of the applicant as well as the design and location of the tattoo.
A. Each tattoo facility shall have a bathroom accessible to the public and
staff. Each bathroom shall be equipped with a commode and a sink with
the sink being connected to hot and cold running water. Soap and
sanitary towels, or other approved hand-drying devices, shall be
available at the sink at all times. Common towels are prohibited. In
addition to the above, each tattooing cubicle or work station must be
provided with a sink connected to hot and cold running water. This area
shall also be provided with soap and appropriate hand-drying facilities.
B. The chair or seat reserved for the person receiving the tattoo shall be of
a material that is smooth and easily cleanable and constructed of
material that is nonabsorbent. Any surfaces on the chair that become
exposed to blood or body fluids must be cleaned and sanitized prior to
use by the next customer.
C. The work table or counter used by the tattoo artist shall be smooth and
easily cleanable and constructed of material that is nonabsorbent.
110. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 348-2 TATTOO PARLORS AND TATTOO ARTISTS § 348-4
348:481
§ 348-5. Regulation of tattoo parlors.
There shall be a covered junction between the table/counter and the
wall if the table/counter is to be placed against the wall. This table/
counter must be cleaned and sanitized, utilizing a method approved by
the Health Department, between customers.
D. The walls in the tattooing area shall be smooth and easily cleanable and
constructed of a nonabsorbent material.
E. The floor in the tattooing area shall be of a durable material that is
nonabsorbent and is smooth and easily cleanable. Floors shall be kept
clean.
F. Lighting within the tattoo area shall be adequate so as to provide a
minimum of 100 footcandles in all areas.
G. The work area reserved for the application of the tattoo shall be
separated from other areas of the establishment by walls or durable
partitions extending at least six foot in height and so designed to
discourage any persons other than the customer and the tattoo artist
from being in the work area.
H. Any surfaces in the establishment that become exposed to blood or
body fluids must be cleaned and sanitized, utilizing a method approved
by the Health Department.
I. Products used in cleaning, sanitizing and sterilizing procedures must be
clearly marked and stored in an acceptable manner. Smaller working
containers filled on-site from larger containers must be clearly marked
with the name of the product.
J. Proper waste receptacles shall be provided and waste disposed of at
appropriate intervals.
K. All medical waste shall be disposed of according to state standards. All
records shall be kept on site and shall be available for inspection. All
medical waste records shall be maintained for at least two years after
manifest.
A. Tattoo artist.
(1) Hepatitis B pre-exposure vaccination or proof of immunity is
required for all tattoo artists. Any accidental needle stick injury
shall be reported to the Health Department. If a person cannot
obtain the vaccination for medical reasons, he shall submit to the
Health Department a letter from his physician certifying that the
individual does not have Hepatitis B and the vaccination is
contraindicated. This certification shall be annually renewed.
(2) Before working on each patron, each tattoo artist shall scrub and
wash his/her hands thoroughly with hot water and antiseptic soap
§ 348-4 WEST MILFORD CODE § 348-5
348:482
using his/her individual hand brush. Fingernails shall be kept clean
and short.
(3) Disposable vinyl or latex gloves shall be worn by the tattoo artists
during tattoo preparation and application to prevent contact with
blood or body fluids. It is recommended that universal precautions
as described by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) be followed. All materials shall be disposed of in accordance
with Subsection E of this section after contact with each patron.
Hands shall be washed immediately after removal of gloves. Any
skin surface that has contact with blood shall be washed
immediately.
(4) Immediately after tattooing a patron, the tattooist shall advise the
patron on the care of the tattoo and shall instruct the patron to
consult a physician at the first sign of infection of the tattoo.
Printed instructions regarding these points shall be given to each
patron.
(5) All infections resulting from the practice of tattooing which become
known to the operator shall be promptly reported to the Health
Officer by the person owning or operating the tattoo establishment
or by the tattoo artist.
B. Skin preparation.
(1) Tattooing shall be done only on normal healthy skin surfaces that
are free of moles or infection.
(2) Only safety razors with disposable blades shall be used for the skin
preparation. Blades shall be disposed of according to Subsection E
of this section after each use and new blade(s) used for each
patron.
(3) Following shaving, the area shall be thoroughly cleansed and
scrubbed with tincture of green soap or its equivalent and warm
water. Before placing the design on the patron's skin, the area shall
be treated with 70% alcohol and allowed to air dry.
(4) Only petroleum jelly (U.S.P. or National Formulary) or antiseptic
ointment shall be applied to the tattoo area prior to tattooing. The
ointment shall be applied in a sanitary manner, disposing of the
utensil after spreading. Collapsible tubes of ointment or jelly may
also be used.
C. Tattooing.
(1) Design stencils shall be thoroughly cleansed and rinsed in an
approved germicidal solution for at least 20 minutes or disposed of
following each use.
(2) Only nontoxic dyes or pigments may be used. Premixed sterile
materials are preferred. Premixed dyes shall be used without
§ 348-5 TATTOO PARLORS AND TATTOO ARTISTS § 348-5
348:483
adulteration of the manufacturer's original formula. It shall be the
responsibility of the operator to provide certification to the Health
Department of the nontoxicity of the dyes or inks at the time of
license application and renewal.
(3) Single service or individual containers of dye or ink shall be used
for each patron and the container disposed of immediately after
completing work on each patron. Any dye in which the needles are
disposed shall not be used on another person.
(4) The completed tattoo shall be washed with sterile gauze and a
solution of tincture of green soap or its equivalent, then disinfected
with 70% alcohol. The area shall be allowed to air dry and
antiseptic ointment applied and spread with sterile gauze and
sterile dressing attached.
D. Needles and instruments.
(1) Only single-service sterilized needles and needle bars shall be used
for each patron.
(2) If solder is used in manufacturing needles, needle bars or needles
tubes, it must be free of lead.
(3) Any needle that penetrates the skin of the tattoo artist shall be
immediately disposed of in accordance with Subsection E of this
section.
(4) Needle tubes shall be soaked with soapy water, then scrubbed with
a clean brush, then rinsed clean. Needle tubes shall be sterilized in
accordance with Subsection D(5), stored in sterile bags and
maintained in a dry, closed area.
(5) Each item to be sterilized shall be individually wrapped using
indicator bags or stripes. Sterilization shall be by steam
sterilization. The sterilizer shall be well-maintained with a tightfitting
gasket and a clean interior. The manufacturer's operating
instructions and sterilization specifications shall be at hand. The
sterilizer shall conform to the manufacturer's specifications with
regard to temperature, pressure and time of sterilization cycle.
Proper functioning of sterilization cycles shall be verified by the
weekly use of biologic indicators (i.e., spore tests). A log book of
these weekly test results shall be available, and a test may be
required to be done during any inspection.
(6) If the primary source of sterilization malfunctions, the Health
Department must be notified within 24 hours. If an emergent
situation, the Health Department may approve alternate
sterilization techniques.
§ 348-5 WEST MILFORD CODE § 348-5
348:484
§ 348-6. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 353
TAXICABS, AUTOCABS AND LIMOUSINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and costs — See Ch. 135.
(7) Needles and bars shall not be bent or broken prior to disposal.
Tattoo artists shall take precautions to prevent injuries from
contaminated needles or tubes.
E. Disposal of wastes. All used needles, needle bars or other tools used in
the tattooing process, as well as gloves, gauze and other materials
contaminated with blood or body fluids shall be sterilized in accordance
with Subsection D(5) of this section, and then discarded in a disposable
rigid container. In lieu of this requirement, contracting with an
authorized service for the disposal of infectious waste shall be
acceptable.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or who shall
refuse to comply with a lawful order or directive of the Health Officer
shall be liable for the penalties as provided by N.J.S.A. 26:1A-10 and all
other applicable law and/or injunctive action as provided by law, or
both. [Amended 12-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-25; 8-23-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-012111]
B. Reasonable counsel fees incurred by the Health Department in the
enforcement of this chapter shall be paid by the defendant. The amount
of such reimbursable fees and costs shall be determined by the court
hearing the matter.
C. This chapter shall preempt any municipal ordinance inconsistent
herewith.
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 348-5 TATTOO PARLORS AND TATTOO ARTISTS § 348-6
348:485

ARTICLE I
Taxicabs
§ 353-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
DRIVER — Any person who drives a taxicab within this Township.
OPERATION — Of a taxicab, shall consist of transporting in such taxicab at
least one but not more than nine persons, exclusive of the driver, for hire on
any of the streets in this Township; accepting a passenger to be transported
for hire within this Township or from a point within the Township to a
point outside of the Township limits. The operation of a taxicab as above
described by one other than the owner shall be deemed operation by the
owner thereof as well as by the person actually driving the same. The
transportation of any person other than the owner or driver in a taxicab as
hereinafter defined shall be prima facie evidence of operation.
OWNER — Any person in whose name title to any taxicab is registered with
the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles or who appears in such record to
be the conditional vendee or licensee thereof.
SENIOR CITIZEN — Any person 62 years of age or older.
STREET — Includes any street, avenue, park, parkway, local, county, state
or federal highway or other public roadway located within the Township,
whether or not the same is an improved road.
TAXICAB — Any automobile or motor car capable of carrying up to nine
passengers, exclusive of the driver, and which may commonly be referred
to as a "taxi," "cab," "van" or "hack," duly licensed by the Township and
engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, which is held out,
announced or advertised to operate or run or which is operated and run
over any of the streets within the Township of West Milford and which
accepts passengers for transportation from points and places within the
Township to points and places within or without the same Township;
provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall include autobuses
or buses or designated routes, public deliveries or jitneys or such public
conveyances as are by law exclusively subject to state and/or federal
regulation.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of West Milford, Passaic County, New Jersey.
§ 353-2. License required; expiration.
No person shall operate a taxicab or engage in the taxicab business within
the Township without first obtaining a license from the Township Council.
The license shall expire December 31 of the year in which it was issued,
unless sooner suspended or revoked by the Township Council.
§ 353-3. Types of licenses.
§ 353-1 TATTOO PARLORS AND TATTOO ARTISTS § 353-3
348:487
§ 353-4. Licensing of taxicab owners.
A. Driver's license. The holder of a taxicab driver's license shall be entitled
to operate within the Township any taxicab whose owner has been
licensed under this chapter.
B. Owner's license. The holder of a taxicab owner's license shall be
entitled to operate a taxicab owned by him within the Township,
provided that the person driving the cab holds a valid taxicab driver's
license.
A. Application information. Applications for licenses shall be made by the
owner, lessee or bailee of the vehicle in writing to the Township
Administrator and shall be sworn to and filed with the Township Clerk.
The application shall state:
(1) The name and address of the owner, lessee or bailee of the vehicle.
(2) The name and address of the applicant.
(3) The physical location of the vehicle(s).
(4) Type of vehicle and date of last inspection.
(5) Length of time the vehicle has been in use.
(6) The number of persons the vehicle is capable of carrying.
(7) The motor power, make and value of the vehicle.
(8) Proof of insurance in conformance with the requirements of
§ 353-4B.
B. Insurance.
(1) Each application for a taxicab owner's license shall be
accompanied by a policy of insurance naming the Township of West
Milford as an additional insured, with the premium prepaid
thereon, written by an insurance company duly licensed to transact
business under the insurance laws of the State of New Jersey,
which shall be submitted to the Township Clerk and to the
Township Attorney for approval as to form and sufficiency. A
certificate of insurance must be submitted to the Township Clerk
prior to a license being approved.
(2) Such policy shall be conditioned for payment of a sum required to
satisfy all claims for damage by reason of bodily injury to or the
death of all persons or property damage as follows: up to a sixpassenger
vehicle: not less than $500,000 combined single limit.
(3) Such policy shall provide coverage for every driver of each vehicle
listed in the policy, and the acceptance of said policy by the
Township of West Milford and the issuance of the license by the
Township shall constitute an agreement by and between the
§ 353-3 WEST MILFORD CODE § 353-4
348:488
§ 353-5. Taxicab driver's license.
applicant and the Township that applicant holds and saves
harmless the Township from any and all claims from damages
arising out of personal injury and/or property damage made by
third parties as the result of the issuance of said license and the
operation of a taxicab. In the event that such policy is canceled
for any reason, a notice of such action must be delivered to the
West Milford Township Clerk 20 days prior to the effective date of
cancellation by the insurance company providing coverage to the
taxi operator.
C. License fee. A separate license application shall be filed and a separate
license fee shall be paid for each vehicle. The annual license fee per
vehicle is set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs.
D. Issuance of license; contents; display.
(1) Taxicab owner's licenses shall be granted by the Township Council,
and a license certificate shall be issued by the Clerk. The certificate
shall contain:
(a) The name of the applicant.
(b) The official state license plate number of the taxicab.
(c) The applicant's place of business or taxi stand.
(d) A statement that in case of any complaint the Chief of Police
shall be notified.
(2) The certificate shall be affixed to a conspicuous part of the interior
of the taxicab and shall be open to the view of all passengers.
E. Limitation on number of licenses issued. The number of taxicab owner's
licenses outstanding shall be limited to one per 1,200 residents of the
Township, as shown by the last preceding federal census. Licenses shall
be nontransferable.
A. Applications.
(1) Applications for a taxicab driver's license shall be made to the
Township Administrator. The forms and information required shall
be established by the Township Administrator.
(2) The application shall be accompanied by the fee set forth in
Chapter 135, Fees and Costs, for the initial license period.
B. Issuance of license; contents. Upon approval of the application by the
Township Administrator, the Clerk shall immediately issue the applicant
a taxicab driver's license. The license shall contain a licensee's name
and address, physical description, signature and photograph.
§ 353-4 TATTOO PARLORS AND TATTOO ARTISTS § 353-5
348:489
§ 353-6. Township Council to make rules and regulations.
The Township Council shall, from time to time, make rules and regulations
for the operation of taxicabs.
§ 353-7. Revocation or suspension of licenses.
The Township Administrator may, after due notice and hearing, suspend or
revoke the license of any person who violates any provision of this chapter
or who violates any of the rules or regulations adopted by the Township
Council pursuant to § 353-6.
§ 353-8. Refusal to issue license; suspension or revocation; unused
licenses; car seats.
C. Term of license; fees. An initial license to drive a taxicab shall be valid
for the remainder of the calendar year in which it is issued. A taxicab
driver's license may be renewed annually, unless it has been revoked or
suspended, upon the payment of the fee set forth in Chapter 135, Fees
and Costs.
A. The Township Council or its designee may, in its discretion, refuse to
issue or renew or may, after notice and hearing, revoke or suspend any
license issued under the provisions of this article if the applicant has
been convicted of any crime, disorderly persons offense or petty
disorderly in this state or in any other state or territory, or has been
convicted of a violation under Title 39, Motor Vehicles and Traffic
Regulation of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey, or who violates any
provision of this article or has any judgment unsatisfied of record
arising out of an automobile accident or who has made false answers in
the application for such license or any renewal thereof or who has failed
or fails to render reasonably prompt, safe and adequate taxi services or
who has not complied fully with the requirements of this article for such
class of licensure, or if the licensee or applicant has in any degree
contributed to any injury to person or damage to property arising out of
negligent operation of a motor vehicle or as to any taxicab owner's
license if the motor vehicle licensed or to be licensed by reason of
unsafe or unsanitary conditions is dangerous to the safety or health of
the occupants, and others, or if the policy of insurance required herein
has once lapsed or such coverage is not maintained at all times, or a
taxicab, at any time, carries more passengers than the same is
authorized to carry by the terms of this article.
B. Any taxicab owner's or driver's license which remains unused for a
period of at least one year shall automatically revert to the Township
and shall be deemed null and void.
C. No taxicab owner's license or driver's license shall be issued to, or
renewed for, any taxi owner or taxi driver unless and until proof shall
have been given to the Township Clerk that the owner and/or driver has
adequately provided for the safety of children under the age of five
§ 353-5 WEST MILFORD CODE § 353-8
348:490
§ 353-9. Violations and penalties; suspension or revocation of
license.
Every person or persons, firm or corporation found guilty in a municipal
court of competent jurisdiction of violating any of the provisions of this
article shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $2,000 and/or
imprisoned for a period not to exceed 90 days and/or required to complete
community service for not less than five days nor more than 30 days and/or
suspension of an owner's and/or driver's license for a period not to exceed
60 days and/or a recommendation of a revocation of an owner's and/or
driver's license to the Municipal Council. Each succeeding day of a violation
shall be constructed as a new violation.
§ 353-10. Compliance with state vehicle laws.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to exempt any person, firm or
corporation owning or operating a taxicab from complying with the laws
relating to the ownership, regulation and operation of automobiles in the
State of New Jersey.
years who are passengers in the taxicab or cabs owned and/or operated
by them. In the case of a taxi owner who owns more than one taxi,
such proof shall consist of a written policy and posted notice at the base
of operation and in all taxicabs owned by him, conspicuous to drivers,
setting forth that, prior to the operation of the taxicab, children 18
months of age or younger, who are passengers in a taxicab, shall be
placed in a federally approved child restraint seat, and children over
the age of 18 months, but under the age of five years, must be placed
in a car seat, if riding in the front seat of the taxicab, or in a lap and/
or lap and shoulder harness seat belt, if riding in the rear seat of the
taxicab. The owner of more than one taxicab must, at all times, keep
and maintain in his vehicles or at the base of operation a total number
of federally approved car seats equal to 25% of the number of licensed
taxicabs owned by him, which shall at all times be available for use by
drivers of the cabs owned by said taxicab owner. In the case of an owner
of a single taxicab, such proof shall consist of proof that the owner
keeps and maintains a federally approved car seat in the passenger
compartment or trunk of the licensed vehicle at all times, for use in
accordance with this provision.
§ 353-8 TATTOO PARLORS AND TATTOO ARTISTS § 353-10
348:491

ARTICLE II
Autocabs and Limousines
§ 353-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOCABS — A limousine.
DRIVER — Any person who drives a limousine within this Township.
LIMOUSINE — A motor vehicle used in the business of carrying passengers
for hire to provide prearranged passenger transportation at a premium
fare on a dedicated, nonscheduled, charter basis that is not conducted on
a regular route and with a seating capacity in no event of more than 14
passengers, not including the driver, provided that such a vehicle shall not
have a seating capacity in excess of four passengers, not including the
driver, beyond the maximum passenger seating capacity of the vehicle, not
including the driver, at the time of manufacture. Nothing in this definition
shall be construed to include taxicabs, hotel buses or buses regulated by the
New Jersey Department of Transportation.
LIMOUSINE SERVICE — Includes the business of carrying passengers for
hire by limousine.
OWNER — Includes any individual, copartnership, association, corporation
or joint-stock company, their lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any
court whatsoever.
STREET — Includes any street, avenue, park, parkway, highway, boulevard
or other public place.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of West Milford, Passaic County, New Jersey.
§ 353-12. License required; expiration.
No person shall operate a limousine or engage in the limousine business
within the Township without first obtaining a license from the Township
Council. The license shall expire December 31 of the year in which it was
issued, unless sooner suspended or revoked by the Township Council.
§ 353-13. Types of licenses.
There are hereby established two classes of limousine licenses, to be known
as "limousine driver's license" and "limousine owner's license."
A. Driver's license. The holder of a limousine driver's license shall be
entitled to operate within the Township any limousine whose owner has
been licensed under this chapter. There shall be no limit to the number
of limousine driver's licenses issued by the Township.
B. Owner's license. The holder of a limousine owner's license shall be
entitled to operate a limousine owned by him within the Township,
provided that the person driving the cab holds a valid taxicab driver's
§ 353-11 TATTOO PARLORS AND TATTOO ARTISTS § 353-13
348:493
§ 353-14. Licensing of limousine owners.
§ 353-15. Insurance; operation of limousines.
license. There shall be no limit to the number of limousine owner's
licenses issued by the Township.
A. Application information. Applications for licenses shall be made by the
owner, lessee or bailee of the vehicle in writing to the Township
Administrator and shall be sworn to and filed with the Township Clerk.
The application shall state:
(1) The name and address of the owner, lessee or bailee of the vehicle.
(2) The name and address of the applicant.
(3) The physical location of the vehicle(s).
(4) Type of vehicle and date of last inspection.
(5) Length of time the vehicle has been in use.
(6) The number of persons the vehicle is capable of carrying.
(7) The motor power, make and value of the vehicle.
(8) Proof of insurance in conformance with the requirements of
§ 353-15.
B. License fee. A separate license application shall be filed and a separate
license fee shall be paid for each vehicle. The annual license fee per
vehicle is set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs.
C. Issuance of license; contents; display.
(1) Limousine owner's licenses shall be granted by the Township
Council, and a license certificate shall be issued by the Clerk. The
certificate shall contain:
(a) The name of the applicant.
(b) The official state license plate number of the limousine.
(c) The applicant's place of business.
(d) A statement that in case of any complaint the Chief of Police
shall be notified.
(2) The certificate shall be affixed to a conspicuous part of the interior
of the limousine and shall be open to the view of all passengers.
A. Insurance requirements.
(1) No limousine shall be operated wholly or partly along any street in
this Township until the owner of the limousine shall have filed with
§ 353-13 WEST MILFORD CODE § 353-15
348:494
the Township Clerk, in which the owner has his/her principal place
of business within this Township, a certificate of insurance naming
the Township of West Milford as an additional insured, by a
company duly licensed to transact business under the insurance
laws of this state, in the sum of $1,500,000 against loss by reason
of the liability imposed by law upon every limousine for damages
on account of bodily injury or death suffered by a person as result
of an accident occurring by reason of the ownership, maintenance
or use of the limousine upon any public street.
(2) The operation shall be permitted only so long as the insurance
policy remains in full force and effect as to the full and collectible
amount of $1,500,000. Limousine owners, or anyone on their
behalf, shall not undertake to cancel or have canceled any such
policy without giving the Township Clerk 10 days' notice of the
intention to do so. No such policy shall be filed by the Township
Clerk unless such policy shall contain a provision to the effect that
the Township Clerk shall be afforded at least 10 days' notice of the
intention of the insurance company which issued such policy to
cancel same.
(3) The insurance policy shall provide for a payment of any final
judgment recovered by any person on account of the ownership,
maintenance and use of such limousine upon any public street or
any fault in respect thereto and shall be for the benefit of every
person suffering loss, damage or injury as aforesaid.
B. Every person operating a limousine, whether an owner and/or driver,
who is transporting a child under five years on roadways, streets or
highways of this Township shall be responsible for the protection of the
child by properly using a child passenger restraint system that complies
with federal vehicle safety standards. No driver shall operate a
limousine in which a child five years of age or younger is a passenger
unless:
(1) A child 18 months of age or younger is in a car seat regardless of
whether such child is in the front or rear seat;
(2) A child over 18 months of age but less than five years is in a car
seat, if a front seat passenger, or is in a lap belt or lap belt and
shoulder harness, if a rear seat passenger.
C. Issuance of license of operation; drivers to be licensed.
(1) The Township Clerk, upon the filing of the required application and
certificate of insurance, shall issue a license, in duplicate, showing
that the owner of the limousine service has complied with the terms
and provisions of this chapter.
(2) The license shall state the name of the insurance company, the
number and date of expiration of the policy and a description and
the registration number of each limousine service insured
§ 353-15 TATTOO PARLORS AND TATTOO ARTISTS § 353-15
348:495
§ 353-16. Limousine driver's license.
thereunder. The duplicate license shall be filed with the Division of
Motor Vehicles before any such vehicle is registered as a limousine
service.
(3) A limousine shall not be operated by anyone for service within the
Township unless the driver thereof has been issued a valid
limousine driver's license.
D. Availability of license for inspection; minimum equipment standards.
(1) The original license shall be retained within the limousine and shall
be available for inspection by any police officer of the state.
(2) No limousine shall operate on the highways of this state unless it
has a license issued and the limousine is equipped, in accordance
with minimum standards established by the Director of the Division
of Motor Vehicles in the Department of Transportation, with:
(a) A two-way communications system, which, at a minimum, shall
provide for communication to a person outside the vehicle for a
distance of not less than 100 miles and which requirement may
be satisfied by a mobile telephone.
(b) A removable first-aid kit and an operable fire extinguisher,
which shall be placed in an accessible place within the vehicle.
(c) Sideboards attached to the permanent body construction of the
vehicle if the height of the vehicle floor is 10 inches or more
above ground level.
A. Applications.
(1) Applications for a limousine driver's license shall be made to the
Township Administrator. The forms and information required shall
be established by the Township Administrator.
(2) The application shall be accompanied by the fee set forth in
Chapter 135, Fees and Costs, for the initial license period.
B. Issuance of license; contents. Upon approval of the application by the
Township Administrator, the Clerk shall immediately issue the applicant
a limousine driver's license. The license shall contain a licensee's name
and address, physical description, signature and photograph.
C. Term of license; fees. An initial license to drive a limousine shall be
valid for the remainder of the calendar year in which it is issued. A
limousine driver's license may be renewed annually, unless it has been
revoked or suspended, upon the payment of the fee set forth in Chapter
135, Fees and Costs.
§ 353-15 WEST MILFORD CODE § 353-17
348:496
§ 353-17. Refusal of application for license; suspension or
revocation of license.
The Township Council or its designee may, in its discretion, refuse to
issue or renew or may, after notice and hearing, revoke or suspend any
license issued under the provisions of this article if the applicant has been
convicted of any crime, disorderly persons offense or petty disorderly in
this state or in any other state or territory, or has been convicted of a
violation under Title 39, Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulation, of the
Revised Statutes of New Jersey, or who violates any provision of this article
or has any judgment unsatisfied of record arising out of an automobile
accident or who has made false answers in the application for such license
or any renewal thereof or who has failed or fails to render reasonably
prompt, safe and adequate limousine services or who has not complied fully
with all requirements of this article for such class of licensure, or if the
licensee or applicant has in any degree contributed to any injury to person
or damage to property arising out of negligent operation of motor vehicle
or as to any limousine owner's license if the motor vehicle licensed or to be
licensed by reason of unsafe or unsanitary conditions is dangerous to the
safety or health of the occupants, and others, or if the policy of insurance
required herein has once lapsed or such coverage is not maintained at all
times, or a limousine, at any time, carries more passengers than the same
is authorized to carry by the terms of this article.
§ 353-18. Limousine appearance.
No lettering, emblem or advertising may be placed on a licensed limousine.
§ 353-19. Solicitation prohibited.
Limousine drivers shall not knowingly solicit business in a manner similar
to that of a taxicab or attempt to solicit business by knowingly misleading a
prospective passenger.
§ 353-20. Compliance with state laws.
Nothing in this article shall exempt any person owning or operating a
limousine from complying with the laws relating to the ownership,
regulation and operation of limousines in the State of New Jersey.
§ 353-21. Violations and penalties.
A person who shall own and operate a limousine in any street in this state
in violation of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the following
penalties:
A. For operating a limousine without a license issued by a municipality,
operating a limousine without authority to operate a limousine in
interstate service granted by the Federal Highway Administration, or
the Interstate Commerce Commission, knowingly permitting a driver to
operate a limousine without a validly issued driver's license or a validly
§ 353-17 TATTOO PARLORS AND TATTOO ARTISTS § 353-21
348:497
§ 353-22. Unlicensed drivers; liability of owner.
In the event that the limousine is being operated by a party who does not
have the license called for in this article, both the driver and the owner
of the limousine shall be subject to the penalty provisions hereinabove set
forth.
issued commercial driver's license, if required, failure to have filed
an insurance policy, operating a limousine in which the number of
passengers exceeds the maximum: a fine of $1,000 for the first offense
and a fine of $2,000 for the second or subsequent offense.
B. For operating a limousine without the special registration plates
required or operating a limousine without the limousine being properly
inspected: a fine of $1,000 for the first offense and a fine of $2,000 for
the second or subsequent offense.
C. For operating a limousine without the attached sideboards, if required,
failure to retain within the limousine appropriate proof of insurance or
failure to execute and deliver to the Director of the Division of Motor
Vehicles the power of attorney required: a fine of $250 for the first
offense and $500 for the second and subsequent offense.
D. For failure to be equipped with a two-way communications system, a
removable first-aid kit or an operable fire extinguisher: a fine of $50 for
the first offense and $100 for the second and subsequent offense.
§ 353-21 WEST MILFORD CODE § 353-22
348:498
Chapter 357
TOBACCO USE IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS, PARKS AND
RECREATION FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Use of municipal building and grounds — See
Ch. 220.
§ 357-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms shall have the meanings herein indicated for
the purposes of this chapter:
PARK or RECREATION FACILITY — Any park, ballfield, recreation facility,
owned or leased by the Township of West Milford for public purposes.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Any building or enclosed structure held, used, owned,
leased or controlled exclusively by the Township of West Milford for public
purposes.
TOBACCO USE — The use of or burning of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or
any other matter or substance which contains tobacco, including chewing
tobacco.
§ 357-2. Use of tobacco in public buildings, parks and recreation
facilities.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use tobacco in any public building,
park, or recreation facility.
§ 357-3. Enforcement; violations and penalties.112
A violation of this chapter shall be enforced as follows: Any municipal or
county health official engaged in executing or enforcing this chapter may
order any person using tobacco in violation of this chapter to comply with
the provisions of this chapter. Thereupon any member of the public who
uses tobacco in a public building, park, or recreation facility in violation of
this chapter is subject to the penalties imposed in Chapter 1, Article III,
General Penalty, of the Township Code.
§ 357-4. Intent.113
This chapter is intended to supplement N.J.S.A. 26:3D-55 et seq.
Chapter 360
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 353-22 TOBACCO USE IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS, PARKS § 357-4
357:499
TOILET INSTALLATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 300. Water and sewer service — See Ch. 394.
§ 360-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the
context, the following words shall have the following meanings:
BUILDING — Any building or structure heretofore or hereafter constructed
and designed or used for dwelling purposes, either temporary or
permanent, or for other use or occupancy by persons, or other building or
structure the useful occupancy of which requires sanitary facilities.
CONNECTION DATE — When used with respect to a building constructed
prior to the date of initial operation, as a part of any sanitary sewage
treatment and disposal system in the Township, owned or operated by the
Township, of the Township Municipal Utilities Authority, of a sewer in the
street, upon which the building is located, means 180th day next ensuing
after the date of initial operation, and when used with respect to a building
constructed after the date of initial operation, as a part of any sanitary
sewage treatment and disposal system owned or operated by the Township
or such Authority, of a sewer in the street, upon which the building is
located, means the 60th day after the date of completion of construction, or
the date of initial occupancy of the building, whichever of the dates shall be
earlier in point of time.
SEWER — Any sewer or main designed or used for collection or disposal of
sanitary sewage and located in any street in the Township.
§ 360-2. Installation required.
The owner of any building located upon any street in the Township in which
a sewer is now constructed or shall be hereafter constructed shall, prior
to the connection date with respect to the building, install a toilet in the
building, unless a toilet is then installed therein, and connect such building
and every toilet therein with the sewer.
§ 360-3. Connection requirements.
Every connection required by this chapter shall be made with soil pipe of
extra heavy cast iron, calked and leaded, extending from inside the building
foundation to a sewer, or to a point which is not less than five feet outside
of the foundation and connection therefrom to a sewer with soil pipe of
asbestos cement or extra heavy cast iron pipe, or other material approved
by any code adopted by the Department of Health. All soil pipes shall be
not less than four inches in diameter, and every connection required by this
§ 357-4 WEST MILFORD CODE § 360-3
360:500
chapter shall be made in a manner to discharge into the sewer all sanitary
sewage originating in the building.
§ 360-4. Failure to make connection.114
If the owner of any property in the Township shall fail to make any
connection or installation required by this chapter within the time herein
required, after notice has been given as provided for in N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-1
et seq., the Township may proceed to make such connection or installation,
or cause the same to be made, and charge and assess the cost thereof
against such property pursuant to the authority contained in the Revised
Statutes.
§ 360-5. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the owner of any property,
who shall be allowed an exception by the Department of Health of the
Township to the requirements of mandatory connection to an existing sewer
and to the compliance with the provisions of a mandatory connection
ordinance adopted by the Department of Health.
Chapter 366
TOWING AND STORAGE OF VEHICLES
§ 366-1. Purpose.
§ 366-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
given herein:
A. It is the purpose of this chapter to establish the minimum requirements
for a contractor to do towing work and/or vehicle removal, and/or
impoundment of vehicles, four wheels or less, for the Township of West
Milford when determined necessary by the West Milford Township
Police Department.
B. This work includes but is not limited to vehicles that are impounded for
illegal parking, vehicles found to be stolen, or vehicles that are
abandoned or found to be unregistered and/or uninsured, vehicles
involved in accidents that must be removed from the streets, and
vehicles which have become disabled and in need of removal and the
West Milford Police Department has been asked by the motorist to call
for towing or road service, or that have to be towed and/or impounded
for any other reason at the discretion of the West Milford Police
Department.
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 360-3 TOILET INSTALLATION § 366-2
360:501
AUTOMOBILE — Any private passenger automobile, motorcycle or ATV, as
well as pickup trucks and panel trucks or recreation vehicles up to 1 1/2
tons.
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — The removal and transportation of an
automobile from a highway, street or other public or private road or
property, or a parking area, or elsewhere in the Township, and other
services normally incident thereto, but does not include recovery of an
automobile from a position beyond the right-of-way or berm, or from being
impaled upon any other object within the right-of-way or berm. Flatbedding
and dolly services are included here, and there shall be no extra charge for
same.
CRUISING — Driving an unengaged wrecker to and fro along a public street
in any fashion calculated for the purpose of soliciting business along any
street.
GARAGE — A building or property within the Township of West Milford
where motor vehicles can be sheltered, stored, repaired, and made ready
for use, and it is specifically intended not to include within the meaning
of this definition a gasoline service station used principally for furnishing
gasoline, oil, lubrication service and minor services for automobiles.
OUTSIDE SECURED — An automobile storage facility that is not indoors
and is secured by a fence or wall or other man-made barrier that is at least
six feet high.
POLICE REQUEST — When a tow truck or service is requested by a police
officer.
TOW VEHICLE'S BASE OF SERVICE — The towing operator's principal
place of business where the tow vehicle is stationed when not in use.
WRECKER and TOW TRUCK — A vehicle employed for the purposes of
towing, transporting or conveying and removing any vehicles which are
unable to be operated under their own power from the place where they are
disabled to some other place.
§ 366-3. License required.
No person, firm, or corporation who wishes to engage in municipal towing
at police request shall engage in the business of operating wreckers or tow
trucks for the aforementioned purpose within the Township without first
obtaining the necessary license as hereinafter provided from the Chief of
Police.
§ 366-4. Duration of licenses.
A. Application for a license issued under this chapter shall be made upon
forms prepared and made available by the Chief of Police. The
application shall state the following information:
(1) The location and description of the wreckers owned by the
applicant.
§ 366-2 WEST MILFORD CODE § 366-4
360:502
§ 366-5. Investigation and inspection.
(2) That the applicant has available space at this garage within the
Township of West Milford for properly accommodating and
protecting all disabled motor vehicles to be towed from the place
where they are disabled, and that the disabled vehicles will not be
stored or allowed to remain on public property or any street or
property in the Township which is not permitted by the present
Zoning Ordinance for such storage. A letter must be obtained from
the Zoning Administrator indicating his approval. All storage areas
shall be fenced to screen and protect said vehicles. Such storage
areas shall be verified on a property survey.
(3) Description of vehicles for which the permit is desired, including
year, make, model, type, color, and vehicle identification number;
length of time the vehicle has been in use; and any other
information which the Chief of Police shall deem necessary or
proper.
(4) The application shall have affixed thereto an affidavit, to be sworn
to by the applicant, that all of the information given in the
application is true and correct.
B. Upon this chapter becoming effective, applications shall be received
during the thirty-day period immediately following and shall be acted
upon in accordance with the other provisions of this regulation.
Thereafter, applications shall be received prior to December 1 for
processing prior to January 1.
A. Within 30 days after the receipt of an application, the Chief of Police
shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant and his
proposed business operation and shall make or have made an
inspection of the vehicles. All applicants and/or operators shall be
checked for a criminal history with the New Jersey State Police Bureau
of Identification.
B. The Township of West Milford recognizes that the contractor must be
trustworthy in that he is safeguarding autos belonging to others.
Therefore, in the best public interest, the Township may disqualify
anyone that has been convicted of a crime within the past 10 years,
which crime would indicate that the contractor or his employees may
not be responsible to perform in the best interests of others. Such
crimes would include but not be limited to car theft, stealing of car
parts, breakins, thefts, etc. The Township of West Milford may waive
these standards if it is deemed to be in the best interest of the
Township.
C. If the contractor or his employees are found guilty of any such crime
during the term of the permit, the permit may be canceled by the
Township for the reasons aforesaid. The contractor shall notify the
§ 366-4 TOILET INSTALLATION § 366-5
360:503
§ 366-6. Requirements for approval.
The Chief of Police shall approve an application when he finds that the
following requirements have been met by the applicant:
§ 366-7. Minimum standards for wreckers or tow trucks.
The following shall serve as a minimum standards for wreckers:
Police Department in writing of any criminal charges that may become
pending against him or his employees during the term of the permit.
D. The Police Department reserves the right to investigate at any time the
contractor or anyone employed by the contractor for the purpose of
fulfilling the contract herein.
E. The Chief of Police may delegate the inspection of the vehicle to a
person or persons, who shall make such an inspection and who shall
report to the Chief of Police whether the wrecker is in a thoroughly safe
and sanitary condition and complies with the requirements and
standards of this chapter, as given herein. Upon completion of the
investigation and inspection, the Chief of Police shall either refuse to
approve the application or shall approve the application in accordance
with the standards given herein, and shall inform the applicant of his
decision. If the application is approved, the applicant shall supply the
Chief of Police with the insurance policies or certificates as required.
Upon receipt of the policies or certificates, the Chief of Police shall
make appropriate notations on the application and shall notify the
Administrator that the application has been approved. He shall
maintain a file of the aforementioned documents. [Amended 9-1-2004
by Ord. No. 2004-6]
A. The insurance policies as required have been procured and supplied.
B. The applicant and proposed operators are qualified to operate the
wrecker and conduct a wrecker service in the Township. Permit holders
will be required to submit a list of operators and their legal addresses
and keep the Police Department informed of any changes.
C. The requirements of this chapter and all other laws, statutes and
ordinances have been met.
D. The vehicles have been properly licensed and conform to the State
Motor Vehicle Laws.
E. The wrecker or tow truck to be approved, on inspection, meets the
required minimum standards set forth herein.
A. A wrecker shall be able to handle all makes of passenger cars and small
trucks, such as pickups and small panel trucks up to 1 1/2 tons, and
must have or be equipped with the following:
§ 366-5 WEST MILFORD CODE § 366-7
360:504
§ 366-8. Insurance policies.
(1) All wreckers shall be a minimum of 3/4 ton according to the
manufacturer's specifications and shall be dual rear wheels or the
equivalent.
(2) A power take off controlled winch with a minimum cable thickness
of 3/8 inch or equivalent.
(3) Gross weight equal to the vehicles to be towed, with a minimum of
5,500 pounds.
(4) A 3/8 inch safety chain. The lift chain and the safety chain are not to
be attached in any form or manner to the same part of the wrecker.
(5) Front and rear hazard flashing lights.
(6) A 300° rotating amber beacon light mounted over the cab or
approved light bar.
(7) All lights shall be of such candlepower in intensity as to be visible 1/
4 of a mile away.
(8) All towing company drivers will carry their business cards and
must give it to the owner/driver of the vehicle to be towed.
(9) All companies will have the company name, address, and phone
number permanently affixed in letters and numbers on both sides
of the wrecker prior to said wrecker being used on any Township
rotation calls. The letters and numbers shall be a minimum of three
inches in height.
(10) The wrecker shall be equipped with sufficient equipment to clean
up the debris on the highway. The operators must clean away the
debris at the scene. All wreckers shall be equipped with a fire
extinguisher.
A. No wrecker shall be issued a license unless the wrecker has been
approved and the following insurance policies or certificates of
insurance specifically naming the Township as an insured party are
filed with the Chief of Police:
(1) Garage keeper's policy. A garage keeper's legal liability policy
covering fire, theft and explosion in the minimum amount of
$50,000 and collision coverage subject to $500 deductible, with
each accident deemed a separate claim.
(2) Garage liability policy. A garage liability policy covering the
operation of the applicant's equipment or vehicles for any bodily
injury or property damage. This policy shall be in the amount of
$500,000.
§ 366-7 TOILET INSTALLATION § 366-8
360:505
§ 366-9. Display of identification card.
The Chief of Police shall issue to the person holding a license a card, in
such form as may be set by the Chief of Police, which shall at all times be
displayed on the passenger side of the rear window of each wrecker. The
card shall bear the name of the owner, the rate of the charges, and a notice
that in case of complaint the complainant may notify the Chief of Police,
giving the license number of the wrecker.
§ 366-10. Powers and duties of Chief of Police.
§ 366-11. Appeal. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
An appeal to the Police Chief's ruling shall be filed with the Township
Administrator within 10 calendar days of the Chief's decision. A hearing
may be held within 30 calendar days of the filing, with a ruling forthcoming
from the Administrator within 20 calendar days of the final hearing.
B. Each policy required herein must contain an endorsement providing 10
days' notice to the Township in the event of any material change or
cancellation for any cause.
C. In the event the policy is changed so as to fail to conform to the above
requirements, or if any policy of any approved wrecker is canceled for
any reason, the Chief of Police shall notify the person responsible for
the policy, and it shall be corrected or reinstated or replaced with a
conforming policy within 10 days after the notice is received and before
the date of cancellation. If the policy or certificate is not corrected,
reinstated, or replaced within the required time, the Chief of Police
shall immediately suspend the wrecker's license.
A. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to establish reasonable rules
and regulations for the inspection and operation of wreckers and for the
design, construction, maintenance and conditions for the safe conduct
of a wrecker service business, in accordance with the standards
outlined in this chapter. The Chief shall maintain due vigilance over all
wreckers to see that they are kept in a safe condition for transporting
and hauling disabled vehicles and shall have the right at all times to
inspect all licensed wreckers. If at any time the Chief of Police shall find
any equipment inadequate or unsafe, he shall have the power to
demand immediate correction, and if not corrected to the satisfaction of
the Chief, he shall have the power to revoke or suspend the license and
schedule a hearing, depending upon the nature and circumstances of
the violation.
B. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and empowered to establish
from time to time such additional rules and regulations, not
inconsistent herewith, as may be reasonable and necessary in carrying
out the provisions of this regulation.
§ 366-8 WEST MILFORD CODE § 366-12
360:506
§ 366-12. Records of owners and operators.
The Chief of Police shall keep a record of names of all persons holding a
license together with the license number and description of the wreckers
and the date and complete record of inspection made of them.
§ 366-13. Towing and storage rates. [Amended 12-16-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-030]
Charges for transportation, hauling or service of disabled vehicles by an
approved wrecker or operator of any approved wrecker shall not exceed the
following rates:
A. The basic towing and storage fee schedule shall be that set by the
Township and listed in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs, specifically
§ 135-37B, and updated periodically along with the additions and
exceptions to same contained in this chapter. A schedule of the current
rates shall be available to the public in the office of the Township Clerk
during normal business hours.
B. Mileage rate. The mileage rate shall be calculated based on the total
distance traveled from the tow vehicle's base of service to the job site
and return by way of the shortest available route. The tow operator will
transport the vehicle anywhere in the Township at the request of the
owner/operator. Vehicles transported solely within the Township are
subject to a twelve-mile maximum charge.
(1) If the owner/operator requests the vehicle be transported out of the
Township, the towing service shall receive payment for the
additional miles traveled.
(2) On request, towers shall provide this service for a minimum of five
miles beyond the Township line. Towing beyond this point may be
refused if service to the Township could be affected.
C. When towing services are required, the current rates apply.
(1) Labor. The labor rate is chargeable in quarterly hour increments
after the first 1/2 hour. This rate includes waiting time, winching,
uprighting, etc., for all automobiles. There shall be no charge for
cleanup of common motor vehicle accident debris.
(2) Special recovery. Fee unlisted, but chargeable only after first hour
of labor except when the need for specialized equipment is readily
apparent.
D. Special circumstances.
(1) If the owner of an unattended vehicle to be towed appears on the
scene, and providing that the vehicle does not need to be towed or
impounded, the towing contractor shall make no charge. However,
if the vehicle is hooked up to the towing truck, the vehicle shall be
§ 366-12 TOILET INSTALLATION § 366-13
360:507
§ 366-14. Services to Township.
The Township of West Milford believes there will be occasions that require
the contractor to provide services for the Township. The contractor can
charge the hourly rate as set forth in § 366-13C(1). Each call by the West
Milford Police Department for such service shall be a minimum of one hour
per call. This is the only occasion in which the Township of West Milford
will be paying costs directly to the contractor. This municipal expenditure is
subject to municipal budgeting law. It is expressly noted that the Township
shall only pay the hourly rate. Such hourly rate will include all labor and
unlimited towing. The Township agrees that the hourly rate will commence
when the tow vehicle leaves the contractor's location and will include the
return trip to the contractor's location. This service shall include but not be
limited to jump starts and change of flat tires of police and other vehicles.
§ 366-15. Reports and receipts.
released at the scene of impound upon the payment of 50% of the
authorized towing charge.
(2) There shall be no charge for towing, storage or impoundment if it is
determined by the Police Chief or his designee that such vehicles
have been towed, stored or impounded due to an error by the tow
truck operator. This determination shall be at the sole discretion of
the Police Chief or his designee, and is binding upon the contractor.
The contractor shall make no claims for payment upon the owner of
the vehicle, and, if payment has already been received, the
payment shall be returned.
A. Every license holder shall give the owner of the vehicle a written
receipt for the fee paid. Copies of receipts shall be maintained by the
owner for two years and available for inspection by authorized
Township officials.
B. Every license holder shall file a report in a form acceptable to the Chief
of Police by the 15th day of the month next following the wrecker's
rotating assigned month. Said report shall contain the following
information as a minimum:
(1) Identification of the vehicle towed, location of the vehicle towed
and destination.
(2) Number of calls per month and breakdown of charges applied per
call.
(3) A complete list of all unclaimed vehicles from prior months,
including the vehicle identification number and date of tow.
C. Any license plates removed by the contractor shall be returned to the
Division of Motor Vehicles, receipts shall then be returned to the
Township of West Milford.
§ 366-13 WEST MILFORD CODE § 366-16
360:508
§ 366-16. Conduct of owners and operators.
A wrecker license hereunder shall be issued subject to the following
conditions:
§ 366-17. Records and impoundment rule.
A. No person shall seek employment by driving his wrecker to and fro in a
short space in front of any disabled vehicle or by otherwise interfering
with the proper and orderly progress of traffic along the public
highways.
B. No person owning or operating a wrecker shall engage in cruising.
C. No person owning or operating a wrecker licensed under this chapter
shall permit or invite loitering within or near the wrecker.
D. No person shall solicit or attempt to divert prospective patrons of
another wrecker nor shall he solicit or divert prospective patrons of a
given garage in the Township to another garage.
E. No person shall solicit, demand or receive from any person any
commission or fee except the proper fee for transporting the disabled
vehicle in accordance with § 366-13.
F. No person shall pay any gratuity, tip or emolument to any third person
not involved in the accident or to any police officer for any information
as to the location of any accident or for soliciting the employment of the
operator's services, nor give any gratuities, fees or other compensation
or gifts to any members of the Police Department.
G. No wrecker which happens to be passing by is permitted to solicit
business from any of the drivers involved in the accident. Any wrecker
at the scene may be used by the investigator to clear the scene if traffic
conditions preclude waiting for the authorized wrecker; however, this
may not authorize them to tow the vehicle from the scene.
A. Regular towing service.
(1) Every person holding a license shall keep a record of all details of
each disabled vehicle towed, serviced, or transported, together
with full information concerning the service and the fee charged.
(2) This record shall indicate the date of towing, location and the name
and address of the owner and/or driver of the disabled vehicle. The
record book herein described shall be kept open for inspection at
all times by the Chief or any duly authorized representative of the
Chief.
B. Vehicles impounded by the Police Department. All companies on the
towing list shall maintain a record regarding all vehicles impounded at
the request of the West Milford Police Department. For example,
abandoned vehicles, recovered stolen vehicles, or vehicles held for
§ 366-16 TOILET INSTALLATION § 366-17
360:509
§ 366-18. Rotating call list.
Wreckers licensed to perform towing service under this chapter shall
perform on a rotating basis, which rotating list shall be limited to those
approved wreckers having their garage in the Township of West Milford.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to establish a system of rotation in
the assignment of wreckers in the area. Wreckers shall be assigned from
the rotating list only. No person shall respond to the scene of an accident
except upon notification by the officer in charge of police headquarters or
upon request of the driver or owner of the disabled vehicle.
§ 366-19. Abandoned or unclaimed vehicles.
The Police Department shall be responsible for notifying the owner of an
abandoned vehicle towed under this chapter that his vehicle has been towed
to the impound area. In the event a towed vehicle is not removed within
seven days by the owner, the towing company shall be responsible for
notifying the Police Department of said situation. Failure of the contractor
to notify the Police Department as stated herein shall limit the storage
charge to seven days only. Thereafter it shall be the obligation of the
contractor to contact the owner or operator of a stored vehicle and furnish
proof to the Department that such attempt has been made. Failure to notify
the owner or operator shall cause the storage charges to end at 30 days.
investigation by the Department. This record shall be made available
to any police officer for inspection upon request and shall contain the
following information:
(1) The date, time, location, and name of the wrecker driver who towed
the vehicle at the Department's request.
(2) The name of the police officer who requested the vehicle be
impounded.
(3) The physical location of the vehicle after being towed.
(4) Identification of the impounded vehicle to include make, year,
model, vehicle identification number, license number and name of
registered owner, if known.
(5) A vehicle impounded by the police shall not be released without a
written tow order release form authorizing said release.
(6) A written record shall be kept or maintained by the towing service
indicating the name of the person releasing the vehicle, the type of
proof of ownership presented, and the name of the person
receiving said vehicle.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the towing company to obtain proper
proof of ownership and identification prior to the release of any vehicle.
Release of any vehicle to an unauthorized person by the towing
company shall result in liability against such company.
§ 366-17 WEST MILFORD CODE § 366-19
360:510
After an attempt to make contact or if contact is made, storage charges
will begin again for another 30 days. This procedure shall be followed until
storage fees reach a maximum of 90 days.
§ 366-20. Sale of unclaimed or abandoned vehicles.
§ 366-21. License fee.115
A license fee, as set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs, shall be paid prior
to the issuance of any license under this chapter.
Chapter 371
TREE REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 500.
§ 371-1. Findings; purpose.
The Township Council does herein decide and find that the uncontrolled
destruction, removal and cutting of trees upon lots and tracts within the
Township has resulted in creating increased municipal costs for drainage
control and has further caused increased soil erosion and stream pollution,
A. The Township of West Milford Police Department shall, at its sole
judgment and uncontrolled discretion, arrange for public sale of any
vehicle which has been the subject of impoundment or when the owner
has failed to receive same. Such public sale shall be in accordance with
New Jersey State law.
B. The Township of West Milford will not sell any vehicle without having
first received the proper authorization for the sale as required by the
New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles in accordance with state law.
C. The proceeds from the sale of each vehicle shall be applied to the
payment of any towing and storage charges due per said vehicle sold.
Any surplus funds per each vehicle shall be disposed of according to
law. If the proceeds from such sale of a vehicle are insufficient to pay
the accrued towing or service charges for that vehicle, the contractor
agrees that there shall be no further liability of the Township of West
Milford to pay same (and any excess amounts which may be due shall
be waived).
D. If no bids are received on a vehicle, then the contractor shall receive
title of such vehicle in lieu of any fees.
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 366-19 TREE REMOVAL § 371-1
371:511
decreased the fertility of soil, increased dust which has further deteriorated
property values and has further rendered land unfit and unsuitable for
its most appropriate uses and has caused deterioration in the value of
improved and unimproved real estate within the Township with a resulting
adverse effect upon the health, safety and general well-being of the
inhabitants. The aforesaid findings have caused the passage of this chapter
to regulate and control the indiscriminate and excessive cutting of trees in
the Township.
§ 371-2. Regulation of tree removal; compliance required.
It has been determined, therefore, that no person shall cut or remove any
tree upon any lands within the Township, unless such action accomplishes
a useful purpose and is done in accordance with the regulations and
provisions of this chapter.
§ 371-3. Definitions.
All definitions herein contained shall be considered in conformance with
those set forth in the Zoning Ordinance of the Township of West Milford,
N.J., 1969, and as amended, and as in Chapter 500 of the Code of the
Township of West Milford, with the following additions:
TOWNSHIP FORESTER — The duly appointed officer of the Township given
the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
TREE — Any living deciduous tree having a trunk of a diameter greater
than four inches, measured at a point 4 1/2 feet above the ground, or any
living coniferous tree having a trunk of a diameter greater than four inches,
measured at a point 4 1/2 feet above the ground, or a height greater than
six feet. Nothing in this chapter is intended to conflict with or supersede the
provisions of the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act of the State of New
Jersey, Chapter 251 of the Public Laws of New Jersey.116
§ 371-4. Permit required.
A. Application. Any person desiring to destroy, cut or remove any such tree
which is not excepted under terms of subsection 5-10.3 shall apply to
the Township forester for a permit to remove such tree.
B. Information.
(1) The applicant shall identify by block and lot the land upon which
the tree is located and shall disclose the name and address of the
owner, tenant or duly authorized agent of such owner or tenant,
and the applicant shall also identify the species and generally
designate the location of the tree sought to be cut, removed or
destroyed.
116. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
§ 371-1 WEST MILFORD CODE § 371-4
371:512
§ 371-5. Fees. [Amended 4-16-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-6; 6-6-1990 by
Ord. No. 1990-19117]
Upon application for a permit, the applicant shall pay to the Township the
fees set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs.
§ 371-6. Criteria for determination of permitted tree removal.
As a basis for determining permitted tree removal, the duly appointed
officer shall give due consideration to the following:
(2) A tree removal permit, if required, shall be obtained prior to the
approval of all minor and major subdivisions, site plans, building
applications and certificates of occupancy on a map which shall
include the following:
(a) Area of tract or parcel of land.
(b) General location of wooded areas and trees to be removed.
(c) Exact location of rare or historic trees as required by the
Township forester.
(d) General topographic conditions of site as derived from USGS
map of the West Milford area.
A. For purposes other than commercial lumbering. The lands covered by
each application shall be inspected by the Township Forester who shall
issue a permit upon a finding that the destruction or removal to be
permitted would not impair the growth and development of the
remaining trees on the applicant's property or adjacent properties,
would not cause soil erosion, would not impair existing drainage
patterns, would not lessen property values in the neighborhood and
would not impair substantially the aesthetic values of the area. The
Township Forester shall have the authority to affix reasonable
conditions to the approval of a permit required by this chapter.
B. For the purposes of commercial lumbering in accordance with the
following restrictions:
(1) The lumbering company or individual owner of the property in
question shall file with the duly appointed officer a forest
management plan approved by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Forestry, or other professional
forester. Such plan shall be subject to the approval of or
disapproval of the Township Forester. Any deviation taken from this
plan shall be considered a violation of this chapter.
(2) In no case shall more than 30% of the total number of trees be
removed from the entire tract.
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 371-4 TREE REMOVAL § 371-7
371:513
§ 371-7. Issuance of permit.
If the applicant as defined in § 371-4 discloses that no more than five trees
in excess of the size referred to aforesaid in this chapter are to be removed,
cut or destroyed, or have been cut, removed or destroyed from the lot or
tract of land identified in the application, then the Township Forester may
waive any or all of the items listed in § 371-4 and may issue a permit for the
removal of such trees.
§ 371-8. Exceptions.
Excepted from this chapter shall be:
A. Any tree located on a tract or parcel of land 1 1/2 acres or less in size on
which a residential dwelling is located.
B. Any tree growing on property actually being used as a nursery, garden
center, Christmas tree plantation or orchard.
C. Any tree growing on land actually being used for a sanitary landfill
operation or for surface mining, or on land approved for such use by the
Township or applicable agencies.
D. Any tree growing in a public right-of-way, private right-of-way, drainage
or utility easement, as designated on the West Milford Township Tax
Map.
E. Any tree located on a tract or parcel of land in excess of 1 1/2 acres, to
be cut for personal use as firewood by the owner of such property. Not
more than five trees per acre shall be cut in any one year, and in no case
shall more than 30% of the total number of trees located on such
property be removed.
F. Any tree dead or diseased as a result of natural causes, or other tree
that is likely to endanger life or property.
G. Any tree cut or removed in accordance with a management plan
developed by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
Bureau of Forestry, or other professional forester, and filed with and
approved by the Township Forester duly appointed by the Township.
H. Any tree located on or within 20 feet of a proposed residential
structure, its well, septic system or other accessory structures.
I. Any tree located within 10 feet of the planned paved areas of a
residential driveway, provided that the alignment of the driveway is
planned to save as many trees as possible.
J. Any tree located near utility lines or substations, provided that the
reason for the tree removal is related to public safety purposes.
§ 371-7 WEST MILFORD CODE § 371-9
371:514
§ 371-9. Unique and irreplaceable trees.
No person shall cut, remove or destroy upon any lands within the Township
any tree considered to be unique and irreplaceable by reason of age,
historical associations, or botanical rarity as determined by the Township
Forester.
§ 371-10. Right of appeal. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
The applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision of the Township
Forester to the Township Administrator within 10 days of receipt of such
decision. The appeal shall be by written notice to appeal. The Township
Administrator shall proceed to hear such appeal upon notice to the
applicant within 30 days after the filing of such notice of appeal. The
Township Administrator may, in his discretion and upon complete review of
the application, and after hearing the testimony of the Township Forester
and the applicant, reverse, modify or affirm the aforesaid decision.
§ 371-11. Interpretation.
All trees protected by this chapter shall be protected against construction
damage, soil deposits or other activities to the satisfaction of the Township
Forester.
§ 371-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be, upon
conviction, subject to the penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article III,
General Penalty, of the Township Code.
Chapter 379
VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN AND RECREATIONAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic — See Ch. 10.
Bicycles, skates, skateboards and
scooters — See Ch. 84.
Ice sleds — See Ch. 188.
Noise — See Ch. 226.
Parks, recreation areas and open
spaces — See Ch. 256.
§ 371-9 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN AND § 371-12
379:515

ARTICLE I
Mufflers on Boats and Other Motor-Driven Vehicles
[Adopted as Sec. 5-5 of the 1976 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 379-1. Muffler or silencer required.
No person shall operate any motor-driven boat, snowmobile or other motordriven
conveyance upon waters or lands within or bounding the Township
unless the motor shall be constructed with a muffler or silencer to prevent
excessive noise. The muffler or silencer shall be used while the motor is in
operation.
§ 379-2. Muffler cutouts prohibited.
No person shall use any muffler cutout on any motor-driven conveyance
upon waters or lands within or bounding the Township.
§ 379-1 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN AND § 379-2
379:517

ARTICLE II
Vehicles in Recreational Areas
[Adopted as Sec. 5-11 of the 1976 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 379-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTOR VEHICLE — All on-road and off-road vehicles, including, but not
limited to, cars, trucks, vans, motorcycles, minibikes, mopeds, go-carts,
dune buggies, dirt bikes, all-terrain vehicles (ATV) and snowmobiles and any
other similar motor vehicle of the type that is normally used on land for
recreation, entertainment or pleasure.118
RECREATION AREA — Includes but is not limited to all parks, tennis courts,
ballfields, athletic fields, tracks and beach areas.
§ 379-4. Motor vehicles in recreation areas.
Motor vehicles shall be prohibited in all public or quasi-public recreation
areas when not specifically permitted.
§ 379-5. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to:
§ 379-6. Posting.119
The Department of Parks and Recreation shall be authorized to post signs
on public and quasi-public recreation areas in conformance with this article.
A. Motor vehicles belonging to the Township or the West Milford Board of
Education.
B. Authorized vehicles belonging to the state or county governmental
agencies.
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 379-3 VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN AND § 379-6
379:519
Chapter 385
VITAL STATISTICS
§ 385-1. Certified copies of vital statistics records. [Amended
3-17-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-7; 9-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-14120]
The Registrar of Vital Statistics shall receive for the Township fees for
certifying copies of records of births, marriages, domestic partnerships and
deaths. The fees are set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs.
Chapter 390
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 300.
Water and sewer service — See Ch. 394.
Well capping — See Ch. 399.
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 379-6 WEST MILFORD CODE § 385-1
385:520
ARTICLE I
Water Supply Systems
[Adopted as Sec. 19-8 of the 1976 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 390-1. Fees for applications and permits on construction of water
supply systems.
There are in effect in the Township of West Milford standards for the
construction of water supply facilities for realty improvements, as
promulgated by the State Department of Health and Senior Services. By
virtue of N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq., certifications that such systems are in
compliance with such standards shall be issued by the Sanitary Inspector.
The Local Department of Health shall have the power to fix the fees to be
paid for the filing of applications for such certifications and for the issuance
of such certifications.
§ 390-2. Fees.121
The fees and charges established pursuant to this article are included in
Chapter 135, Fees and Costs.
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-1 WATER § 390-2
390:521

ARTICLE II
Water Use Emergencies
[Adopted as Sec. 5-13 of the 1976 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 390-3. Prohibited uses of water during water emergencies.
The use and withdrawal of water by any person during a water emergency
for the following purposes is hereby prohibited:
§ 390-4. Emergency declaration.122
A water emergency shall exist in any part of the municipality when declared
by resolution of the Township Council, or the Municipal Utilities Authority,
or by proclamation of the Mayor, or in the absence of the Mayor by the
Council President, or at the request of the Executive Director of the West
Milford Municipal Utilities Authority or, in his absence, at the request of the
official in charge of the Municipal Utilities Authority.
§ 390-5. Emergency notification.
All reasonable attempts shall be made to notify citizens and residents
of West Milford of the existence of a water emergency, the restrictions
imposed and the penalties for violations.
§ 390-6. Enforcement.
Every police officer of the Township shall, in connection with all duties
imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this article.
A. Watering yards. The sprinkling, watering or irrigation of shrubbery,
trees, lawns, grass, ground covers, plants, vines, gardens, vegetables,
flowers, or any other vegetation.
B. Washing mobile equipment. The washing of automobiles, trucks,
trailers, or any other type of mobile equipment.
C. Cleaning outdoor surfaces. The washing of sidewalks, walkways,
driveways, porches and other outdoor surfaces.
D. Cleaning buildings. The washing of the outside of dwellings; the
washing of the inside and outside of office buildings.
E. Cleaning equipment and machinery. The washing and cleaning of any
business or industrial equipment and machinery.
F. Ornamental fountains. The operation of any ornamental fountain or
other structure making a similar use of water.
G. Swimming pools. The filling or supplementing of swimming and wading
pools. [Amended 9-2-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-23]
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-3 WATER § 390-7
390:523
§ 390-7. Authority of Health Officer.
The Health Officer of the Township shall have the authority to permit a
reasonable use of water in any case necessary to maintain adequate health
and sanitation standards.
§ 390-8. Private wells excluded.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to privately owned wells
servicing either one or two residential units.
§ 390-9. Violations and penalties.
Penalties for violations of this article shall be imposed in the manner set
forth in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, of the Township Code.
§ 390-7 WEST MILFORD CODE § 390-9
390:524
ARTICLE III
Water at Eating Establishments by Request
[Adopted 8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-25]
§ 390-10. Water served in restaurants.
The serving of water in public eating establishments is prohibited unless
requested by the customer.
§ 390-10 WATER § 390-10
390:525

ARTICLE IV
Individual and Semipublic Water Supply
[Adopted as Sec. 19-5 of the 1976 Revised General Ordinances]
§ 390-11. Establishment of code by reference.
A code regulating the location, construction, alteration, use and supervision
of individual and semipublic water supplies, requiring certain permits
providing for the inspection of such supplies, the fixing of fees and
prescribing penalties for violations is hereby adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A.
26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6. A copy of the code is annexed hereto and made a
part hereof without inclusion of the text herein.
§ 390-12. Title of code.
The code established and adopted by this article is described and commonly
known as the "Individual and Semipublic Water Supply Code of New Jersey
(1966)."
§ 390-13. Public record.
Three copies of the Individual and Semipublic Water Supply Code of New
Jersey (1966) have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of this
Department of Health and will remain on file in such office for the use and
examination by the public.
§ 390-14. License required; permit required.
A. No person shall construct a water supply system for any realty
improvement other than by an owner-occupant unless he or it shall
have been issued a license by the Department of Health to engage in
such a business. Such license shall expire on December 31 in each year.
Such license may be suspended or revoked by the Department of Health
for any violation of this article or the code hereby adopted. No such
license or renewal shall be issued until such person shall file with the
Department of Health a performance guarantee in the amount of
$2,500; such performance guarantee may be in the form of a
performance bond issued by a bonding or surety company authorized to
do business in the State of New Jersey, and in form approved by the
Department of Health, or a certified check, returnable to the applicant
upon full compliance, or any other type of surety approved by the
Department of Health. Such performance guarantee shall commence on
the effective date of the license and shall terminate one year after the
expiration date of such license issued. Such performance guarantee
shall be conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this article,
to any amendatory ordinance thereto, and to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6 of the New Jersey Statutes and any amendments
thereof.
§ 390-11 WATER § 390-14
390:527
§ 390-15. Certificate of compliance.
B. No person shall locate, construct or alter any water supply until a
permit for location, construction or alteration of the water supply shall
have been issued by the Department of Health.
(1) The Department of Health may issue a permit if an application for
the same is accompanied by a certificate made by an engineer
licensed to practice professional engineering in New Jersey stating
that the design of the water supply as proposed is in compliance
with the code.
(2) Such permit, when issued, shall be valid for a period of one year.
C. No person (except a bona fide owner-occupant of a single-family
dwelling) shall install any water pumps or supplies until such person
shall have been issued a license by this Department of Health to engage
in such business. The annual fee for such license is set forth in Chapter
135, Fees and Costs. Such license shall expire on December 31 in each
year.123
(1) No such license shall be issued or renewed until such person shall
have filed with the Department of Health a performance guarantee
in the amount of $1,000.
(2) A valid plumbing license as issued by this Department of Health
will be acceptable in lieu of the foregoing.
D. Upon the completion of or cessation of work on a well, the person to
whom a permit for same has been issued shall, within five days of
written notice or demand by an authorized representative of the
Department of Health, file in detail with the Department the well
drillers certification for such well.
A. New water supplies shall not be placed in operation, nor shall new
dwelling or buildings or additions thereto be sold or occupied, which
must rely on such a supply of water, until the Department of Health
shall have issued a certificate indicating that the water supply has been
located and constructed in compliance with the terms of the permit
issued and the requirements of the aforesaid code. Issuance of such
certificate shall not be required for alteration to an existing water
supply.
B. The Department of Health may issue such a certificate if an engineer
licensed to practice professional engineering in New Jersey submits a
statement in writing signed by him to the Department of Health that the
water supply has been located and constructed in accordance with the
terms of the permit and the requirements of the aforesaid code.
123. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-14 WEST MILFORD CODE § 390-16
390:528
§ 390-16. Denial of permit.
In case any permit or certification required by this article is denied by
the Department of Health, a hearing shall be held thereon before the
Department within 15 days after request therefor is made by the applicant,
and upon such hearing the Department of Health shall affirm, alter or
rescind its previous determination and take action accordingly within 15
days after the date of such hearing.
§ 390-17. Order to stop work.
The Department of Health may order all further work in and about any
water supply, which is being erected or installed in violation of the code,
to be stopped forthwith, except such work as shall be necessary to remedy
such violation, and thereafter, the work continued without any violation of
any of the provisions of the code, and after issuance of any such order and
the service of a copy thereof upon any person connected with or working in
and about the erection or installation of any such water supply, or any part
thereof, no further work shall be done thereon except as aforesaid.
§ 390-18. Fees and charges. [Amended 4-16-1986 by Ord. No.
1986-6; 11-14-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-37; 11-21-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-43; 9-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-14124]
The following fees and charges are herewith established:
A. The fee for the filing of an application and plans, for the issuance of a
permit to locate and drill or dig a well, are set forth in Chapter 135,
Fees and Costs.
(1) In addition, a water sample and analysis, required to comply with
this article of the code (Proof of Potability) shall be performed by
the Department of Health or its authorized agents and the
permittee shall pay the cost of the lab fee.
B. The fee for the issuance of a permit to install a pump and supply for an
individual water supply system is set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and
Costs.
C. The permit fee for each house connection to an approved water supply
system serving three or more consumers is set forth in Chapter 135,
Fees and Costs.
D. The inspection fee for each reinspection of any water supply system or
part thereof caused by the failure of the permittee to locate and
construct or alter the same in accordance with the terms of the permit
issued or the terms of the aforesaid code is set forth in Chapter 135,
Fees and Costs.
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-16 WATER § 390-18
390:529
§ 390-19. Amendments to code.
The following amendments or additions to the code adopted hereby shall be
effective:
2.6. Freezing. All parts of the water supply system shall be designed,
located and constructed to protect against freezing, but this provision may
be waived where the water supply system used is aboveground and used
during nonfreezing periods.
2.8. Frost-proof facilities. No water supply connections shall be made
to a frost-proof toilet or hydrant unless authorized by the administrative
authorities, but this provision may be waived where the water supply
system used is aboveground and used during nonfreezing periods.
3.4. The requirements of the well-room in the code adopted hereby may be
waived by administrative authorities or its authorized agent.
§ 390-20. Rules, standards and provisions.
In order to insure the safety, adequacy and propriety of water supply
systems for realty improvements in the Township, the following rules,
standards and provisions are hereby adopted and made effective and
binding upon all water supply systems, serving three or more realty
improvements, they shall apply to and be binding not only upon all such
future water supply systems placed in operation but also to such systems
in use as of April 23, 1968, whether or not previous certification has been
given, and are to be in addition to such rules, regulations and standards
fixed by the State Department of Health and Senior Services:
E. If additional water samples and analyses are required, the same shall
be performed by the Department of Health or its authorized agents, and
the permittee shall pay the lab costs of each additional sample and
analysis. This shall include but not be limited to all samples required to
comply with this article of the code (Proof of Potability).
F. The fee or charge to be collected by the Department of Health for
certification of an existing individual water supply system, which
includes one water sample, is set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs.
No certificate shall be issued until such fee or charge is paid at the time
of the application thereof.
G. The fee for the renewal of a permit to locate and drill or dig a well is set
forth in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs.
A. Standards for potability. Water supplied shall be in accordance with the
U.S.P.H.S. standards for potable water and Standard Methods as
adopted and approved by the State Department of Health and Senior
Services.
B. Standards for pressure. Minimum pressure of water supplied shall be
such as to furnish a flow in accordance with the provisions of Section
§ 390-18 WEST MILFORD CODE § 390-20
390:530
E-800, 8.8 et seq. of the Plumbing Code of New Jersey (Revised 1964)
adopted by the Township of West Milford.
C. Water quality. The supplier shall at its own cost and expense cause to be
collected by authorized agents of the Department supplies of water for
analysis on May 1 and November 1 of each year and submit such
samples to the authorized agent of the administrative authority to
determine whether the water meets the "Potable Water Standards."
Monthly reports to the State Department of Health and Senior Services
may be accepted in lieu thereof. The administrative authority, or its
authorized agent, shall have the right to cause such inspection and to
require additional samplings of a water supply to be made as may be
deemed necessary from time to time.
D. Supplier.
(1) Every supplier of a water supply system, serving three or more
realty improvements, shall within 30 days after April 23, 1968,
notify the administrative authority or its authorized agent of the
following:
(a) Name and address of supplier and owner of water supply
system.
(b) Name and address of individual responsible for the operation
of the system.
(c) Location of water supply system.
(d) Number of realty improvements served by the supplier.
(2) Where there is a transfer in ownership of a water supply system,
the sellers thereof shall, within 10 days of the transfer thereof,
notify in writing the administrative authority or its authorized
agent of the sale, furnishing the name and address of the purchaser
of the system. The purchaser shall within 10 days of such a sale
furnish the administrative authority or its authorized agent of this
information above recited and required of a supplier.
E. Discontinuance of a system. No water supply system serving three or
more realty improvements shall be discontinued, abandoned, nor shall
the distribution of water for potable or domestic purposes to consumers
be terminated unless and prior thereto the supplier shall have given a
twelve-month notice in writing to each consumer and to the
administrative authority of its intention to discontinue and abandon the
system.
F. Service. The supply of potable water to consumers shall be maintained
at all times, except in cases when repairs to such systems are required.
In which case, there shall not be a shutoff water supply until and unless
a minimum of written notice of eight hours is given each consumer and
§ 390-20 WATER § 390-20
390:531
the Department of Health, except in cases of extreme emergencies.
Repairs in each case must be made without any delay.
G. Applicability. Whatever application the provisions of the plumbing code,
sanitary code and building code shall apply.
H. Connection of realty improvement. No permit shall be issued for the
installation of an individual water supply for service to more than one
lot, nor shall a permit be issued for the connection of an additional
realty improvement to any individual water supply system existing on
an adjoining property or boundary line between two adjoining
properties; provided that the prohibition contained herein may be
modified or waived by the Township Health Officer. A waiver shall be
made only in the event a variance is required to prevent undue hardship
or to accommodate special circumstances. No such variance shall be
granted unless appropriate provisions are made by the property owner
or owners in deeds or other instruments of conveyance, properly
recorded, to ensure that the present and future owners of the property
served by such individual water supply shall have continuing and
perpetual rights to the use water supply regardless of the location
thereof or the ownership of the property in which it is located.
[Amended 7-1-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-21]
§ 390-20 WEST MILFORD CODE § 390-20
390:532
ARTICLE V
Public Water System Connection
[Adopted 3-19-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-4]
§ 390-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Any building or structure heretofore or hereafter constructed
and designed or used for dwelling purposes or occupancy by persons,
whether temporary or permanent, or in which water is used for human
consumption or otherwise.
WATER LINE — Any pipe or conduit designed or used for the transmission
of potable water within the Township, whether owned and operated by
the Township itself or the Township of West Milford Municipal Utilities
Authority (MUA).
§ 390-22. Connection to water supply system required.
§ 390-23. Compliance with plumbing and construction standards.
Every connection required by this article shall comply in all respects with
the Plumbing Code of the Township of West Milford, the Uniform
Construction Code or such other code as shall be in force and effect at the
time connection is required.125
A. The owner or owners of each improved property within the Township of
West Milford and having reasonable access to a street, highway or alley
in which the water supply system of the Township or the MUA is located
shall, upon receipt of written notice from the Township that water
service is available and that connection is required, connect such
improved property to the water supply system within 60 days of said
notice so that the public water supply shall be used for all domestic
purposes, dwelling purposes or for any purpose relating to human
occupancy.
B. As, and from time to time, a public water supply becomes available to
additional properties within the Township by reason of the
improvement of properties located on or having reasonable access to a
street, highway, alley in which the water supply system of the MUA is
located or by reason of the construction of extensions or additions to
the water supply system by the Township or the MUA, the owner or
owners of such additional property shall, likewise, upon receipt of
written notice from the Township ordering the connection, connect his/
their property to the water supply system within 60 days of said notice.
125. Editor's Note: See Ch. 110, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 390-21 WATER § 390-24
390:533
§ 390-24. Notice to connect. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-6]
The Township Administrator, or such department or office as he may, from
time to time, designate shall give notice to the owner of property required
to connect with the public water supply system. Such notice shall be
addressed to the owner of said property as the name of the owner appears
in the last tax duplicate of the Township of West Milford and shall describe
the property by lot and block designation as the same appears in the Tax
Map of the Township of West Milford and by the street address if a street
address exists. The notice shall state that the owner is required to connect
each building on said property with the water line in accordance with the
terms of this article on or before 60 days of receipt of the notice. Said notice
shall also describe the penalty which may be imposed hereunder for failure
to comply with the notice.
§ 390-25. Failure to make connection; connections made by
Township; costs.
§ 390-26. Service of notices.
All notices to be served under this article shall be served in the manner
prescribed by the laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 390-27. Connection fee and water service charges.126
Every owner required to connect to a Township-owned or operated public
water supply shall pay the connection fee set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and
A. If any owner of improved property within the Township required to be
connected to the water supply system of the Township or MUA pursuant
to this article shall fail to connect therewith promptly after written
notice to do so, the Township or the MUA shall give such owner written
notice of this article describing the property required to be connected
sufficiently definite to identify it, describing the required connection
and stating that, unless connection shall be completed within 30 days of
the service of such notice, the Township or MUA may proceed to make
such connection or cause same to be made.
B. Upon failure of such owner to make the required connection within said
thirty-day period, the Township or the MUA may make such connection
or cause the same to be made, and shall send an itemized bill for the
cost of such connection to the property owner, which shall be payable
forthwith. In case of the failure of the owner to pay such bill, it shall be
the duty of the proper Township officials to cause the confirmation and
assessment of the amount thereof as a lien against the property and to
proceed with the collection and enforcement thereof all in the manner
provided by the laws of the State of New Jersey.
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-24 WEST MILFORD CODE § 390-27
390:534
Costs. In addition, every owner shall pay the water service charges set by
the Township.
§ 390-28. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, of the Code of
the Township of West Milford.
§ 390-27 WATER § 390-28
390:535
Chapter 394
WATER AND SEWER SERVICE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 300.
Water — See Ch. 390.
Well capping — See Ch. 399.
§ 394-1. Billing periods. [Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
The billing period for water and sewer service shall be quarterly, with the
actual billing dates being as directed by the Township Administrator.
§ 394-2. Interest.
There shall be an interest charge of 1% per month for all bills that remain
unpaid after 60 days from the date of said bill.
§ 394-3. Liens.
§ 394-4. Charges for service. [Amended 10-3-1984 by Ord. No.
1984-31127]
There are hereby established charges for water and sewer service. The
service charges are included in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs.
§ 394-5. Charges for turn on.128
Water shall be turned on only by representatives of the Township of West
Milford. When supply has been cut off for any purpose except for repairs not
chargeable to the consumer, it shall not be turned on again until all arrears
and charges then due, including a service charge in the amount set forth in
Chapter 135, Fees and Costs, shall have been paid.
A. Under the laws of the State of New Jersey, all charges for water and
sewer service, including interest, are liens upon the premises or
property on account of which such charge is incurred, until paid and
satisfied.
B. Where water or sewer service is terminated because of nonpayment,
service will not be resumed until such charges have been paid,
including the fee for the resumption of service.
127. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-28 WEST MILFORD CODE § 394-6
394:536
§ 394-6. Charges for hook up.129
No one except representatives of the Township of West Milford shall tap the
water mains or supply or attach to the sewer system in order to provide
service without the prior approval of the Township. In the event that such
service is available, there shall be a hookup fee for the water systems for the
connection from the main to the structure and a hookup fee for the sewer
system in the amounts set forth in Chapter 135, Fees and Costs.
§ 394-7. Access for premises.
No person shall hinder or refuse to admit any representative of the
Township of West Milford, upon presentation of identification, access to
their premises for the purpose of making inspection thereof, including the
examination of the entire water supply, plumbing and sewer system upon
said premises.
§ 394-8. Violations and penalties.
Penalties for violations of this chapter shall be imposed in the manner
provided and set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, of the Code
of the Township of West Milford.
Chapter 399
WELL CAPPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water — See Ch. 390. Water and sewer service — See Ch. 394.
§ 399-1. Wells to be capped and filled when public water supply
made available.
When a public water supply is made ready and available for connection,
all owners of property within the declared "red-line" area shall cap and fill,
so as to permanently destroy any water producing capacity of any well,
whether for human consumption or not, located upon said premises within
30 days after such time as public water has been hooked up or 60 days
of receipt of notice to hook into the public water supply, whichever occurs
first.
§ 399-2. Sealing of well.
The sealing of the well shall be done in compliance with all state and
municipal laws.
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 394-6 WELL CAPPING § 399-3
399:537
§ 399-3. No assessments.
There shall be no assessment against any of the properties required to cap
wells, nor shall there be any assessment for connection with the public
water supply.
Part III, Land Development Legislation
Chapter 414
FEES, LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and costs — See Ch. 135.
§ 414-1. List of property owners.
Reference Chapter 420, Land Use Procedures. In accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12c, the fee for the Tax Assessor to make and certify a list from
current tax duplicates of names and addresses of owners within the
Township to whom the applicant is required to give notice shall be a sum
not to exceed $0.25 per name or $10, whichever is greater, for said list.
§ 414-2. Soil removal and soil fill permits. [Amended 5-7-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-018]
In accordance with Chapter 460, Soil Removal and Soil Fill, fees for a soil
removal or soil fill permit are as follows:
§ 414-3. Subdivision of land and site plan review fee schedule.
[Amended 5-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-005; 6-16-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-005]
In accordance with Chapter 470, Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Review,
the following fee schedule constitutes application fees and escrow fees:
A. Minor soil removal or soil fill permit: $100 plus inspection fees required
during the course of operation.
B. Major soil removal or soil fill permit: $750 initial escrow fee deposit,
plus $0.05 per cubic yard of soil to be moved or removed, 1/3 of which
shall be paid upon the filing of an application. The balance of the permit
fee shall be prorated as determined by the Planning Board, based upon
the anticipated period of time of the operation and the proposed
schedule of soil removal, fill or movement.
§ 399-3 WEST MILFORD CODE § 414-3
399:538
Application Fee Escrow Fee
Subdivisions
Concept/Sketch plat One half the application and escrow fee. If
the application for development is filed within
six months of the concept plan, full credit for
the concept fees will be applied. After six
months, the full application and escrow fees
apply.
Minor subdivision $300 $900 + $300/lot
Preliminary
subdivision plat
$350 + $100/lot $1,200 + $300/lot
Final subdivision plat $250 + $50/lot $1,200 + $150/lot
Site plans
Concept/Sketch plat One half the application and escrow fee. If
the application for development is filed within
six months of the concept plan, full credit for
the concept fees will be applied. After six
months, the full application and escrow fees
apply.
Minor site plan $200 $800
Preliminary site plan $300 + $0.10/square
foot of proposed
building and
proposed impervious
coverage
$800 + $0.30/square
foot of proposed
building and proposed
impervious coverage
Final site plan $200 + $0.10/square
foot of proposed
building and
proposed impervious
coverage
$800 + $0.15/square
foot of proposed
building and proposed
impervious coverage
Amended plans If filed within six months of the originally
approved application for development 1/2 of
the application and escrow fees apply. After
six months, full application and escrow fees
apply.
Review and inspection of
development
2.0 times the
individual's hourly rate
Appeals N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70a
$150 $500
Interpretation, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70b
$200 $750
Variance, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70c
§ 414-3 WELL CAPPING § 414-3
399:539
Application Fee Escrow Fee
Private road $55 $450
Residential $205 $950
Nonresidential $255 $950
Fencing on a property
containing a singlefamily
dwelling
$105 $450
Use variance N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d
Additions to existing
residences not
exceeding a footprint
of 250 square feet
$205 $950
For signs $205 $950
For all others $605 $1,500
Zone change request
0 - 10 acres $250 $1,500
10 - 100 acres $500 $4,500
over 100 acres $1,000 $7,500
Wireless
telecommunications
facilities
$1,000 $4,000
§ 414-4. Zoning permits.
A. In accordance with Chapter 470, Subdivision of Land and Site Plan
Review, the fee for a zoning permit shall be as follows: [Amended
5-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-005]
(1) The fee for a zoning permit for additions, accessory buildings and
garage alterations for existing single-family owner-occupied
dwellings shall be: $50.
(2) Decks, fences, pools, sheds, walls and signs: $40.
(3) Home occupation: $40.
(4) New homes: $75.
(5) Commercial: $150.
(6) Commercial additions: $100.
(7) Change in tenancy: $20.
(8) Temporary structures: $40.
§ 414-3 WEST MILFORD CODE § 414-4
399:540
§ 414-5. Christmas tree sales.
In accordance with § 500-36, Seasonal/temporary retail sale of Christmas
trees, the fee for a permit to sell Christmas trees is $10.
§ 414-6. Temporary outdoor commercial sales permit and seasonal
farmers' market permit. [Added 5-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-005;
amended 5-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-007; 7-22-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-016; 5-22-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-011]
A permit shall be required to conduct a temporary outdoor commercial sales
event and a seasonal farmers’ market as defined in Chapter 420, § 420-6,
and as regulated in Chapter 500, § 500-36.1. The fee for each permit shall
be $50. A seasonal farmers’ market shall be entitled to operate on the basis
of one permit per season, which shall constitute the time period from mid-
May through mid-October per calendar year.
§ 414-7. Waiver of application and permit fees. [Added 5-6-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-005]
§ 414-8. Highlands Preservation Area. [Added 9-18-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-018]
B. Any and all zoning permits contemplated for in this chapter and in
Chapter 470 of this Code shall not be issued to the applicant unless all
taxes have been paid and the applicant is considered current on the
payment of taxes with the Township Tax Collector's office. [Added
6-24-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-011]
A. The application and permit fees set forth herein shall be waived,
providing the applicant can demonstrate the following:
(1) It is a nonprofit organization evidenced by a 501(c)(3) status from
the United States Internal Revenue Service; and
(2) It receives funding from the Township of West Milford; and
(3) The application is for a project that is for the benefit of the
residents of West Milford.
B. Escrow fees may not be waived; however, the professionals should be
encouraged to reduce their rates when such application or permit fees
are waived.
A. Application and professional review fees.
(1) A fee of $25 per each exemption determination where no zoning
permit is required.
(2) A fee of $40 for a combined exemption determination and zoning
permit.
§ 414-4 WELL CAPPING § 414-8
399:541
Chapter 420
LAND USE PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land and site plan review — See
Ch. 470.
Zoning — See Ch. 500.
§ 420-1. Short title.
The short form by which the Land Development Legislation of the Township
Code (Chapters 414 through 500) may be known shall be the "Land
Development Ordinance of the Township of West Milford."130
§ 420-2. Purpose.
The Land Development Ordinance is adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq., in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, morals
and general welfare, and in furtherance of the following related and more
specific objectives:
(3) An initial deposit of $750 for a professional review to be established
in an escrow account. The professional review fee may be reduced
or waived entirely at the discretion of the exemption designee in
the event the Township's professional consultants are not required
to conduct a review of the exemption request.
A. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters.
B. To provide adequate light, air and open space.
C. To ensure that the development of the Township of West Milford does
not conflict with the development and general welfare of neighboring
municipalities, the county and the state as a whole.
D. To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons,
neighborhoods, communities and regions, and preservation of the
environment.
E. To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds
by the coordination of public development with land use policies.
130. Editor's Note: The Land Development Ordinance, originally adopted 5-16-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-16, as amended, is contained within Chapter 414, Fees, Land Development; Ch. 420,
Land Use Procedures; Ch. 460, Soil Removal and Soil Fill; Ch. 470, Subdivision of Land
and Site Plan Review; and Ch. 500, Zoning.
§ 414-8 WEST MILFORD CODE § 420-2
399:542
§ 420-3. Interpretation of standards; administration.
F. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
agricultural, residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses
and open space, both public and private, according to their respective
environmental requirements.
G. To encourage the location and design of transportation routes which
will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging location of such
facilities and routes which result in congestion or blight.
H. To promote a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and good civic design and arrangements.
I. To promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural
resources and to prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the
environment through improper use of land.
J. To encourage senior citizen community housing construction.
K. To encourage coordination of the various public and private procedures
and activities shaping land development with a view of lessening the
cost of such development and fostering the more efficient use of land.
L. To encourage planned unit developments which incorporate the best
features of design and relate the type, design and layout of residential,
commercial, industrial and recreational development of the particular
site.
M. To promote utilization of renewable energy sources.
N. To promote the maximum practicable recovery and recycling of
recyclable materials from municipal solid waste through the use of
planning practices designed to incorporate the State Recycling Plan
goals and to compliment municipal recycling programs.
A. These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the
minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety
and welfare of the citizens of the Township. Any action taken by the
Township under the terms of this Land Development Ordinance shall
give primary consideration to the above mentioned matters and to the
welfare of the entire community. Moreover, if an applicant or his agent
can clearly demonstrate that, because of peculiar conditions pertaining
to his land, the literal enforcement of one or more of these regulations
is impractical or will exact undue hardship, the appropriate Township
agency may permit such exception or exceptions as may be reasonable
and within the general purpose and intent of the rules, regulations and
standards established by this Land Development Ordinance.
B. Where this Land Development Ordinance imposes a greater restriction
than is imposed or required by other provisions of law or by other rules
or regulations or resolutions, the provisions of this Land Development
§ 420-2 WELL CAPPING § 420-3
399:543
§ 420-4. Prohibited uses.
All uses not expressly permitted in this Land Development Ordinance shall
be prohibited.
§ 420-5. Time of compliance.
All applicable requirements shall be met at the time of erection or
enlargement of structures and change or expansion of use and shall apply to
the entire parcel or structure whether or not the entire parcel or structure
are involved in the change.
§ 420-6. Definitions.
Any word or term not defined herein shall be defined by the Unabridged
Edition of the Random House Dictionary of the English Language.
Moreover, whenever a term is used in this Land Development Ordinance
which is defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., it shall be utilized unless
specifically defined to the contrary in this Land Development Ordinance. As
used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A residential use located within a principal
or accessory structure on the same lot that is clearly incidental and
subordinate to the principal use of the structure it is located in.
ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE — A building, structure or
use which is customarily associated with but is subordinate and incidental
to the principal building, structure or use and which is located on the same
lot therewith. An accessory building attached to the principal building shall
comply in all respects with the requirements applicable to the principal
building.
ADAPTIVE REUSE — The development of a new use for building with local
historic designation status.[Added 4-3-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-6]
ADDITION — In relation to a historic landmark, means the construction of
a new improvement as a part of an existing improvement when such new
improvement changes the exterior appearance of any designated landmark.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The administrative officer is hereby
designated to be the Planning Director or in the event there shall be at
any time no Planning Director in the Township, the administrative officer
shall be such person as shall be appointed by the Township Administrator
until there shall be a Planning Director to perform such function.[Amended
9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW OR APPROVAL — The process by which a
determination is made by the Construction Official, Township Engineer and
Ordinance shall control. Where other laws, rules, regulations or
resolutions require greater restrictions than are imposed or required
by this Land Development Ordinance, the provisions of such other laws,
rules, regulations or restriction shall control.
§ 420-3 WEST MILFORD CODE § 420-6
399:544
Planning Director. Where administrative approval is required, unanimous
decision by all three above referenced officials is necessary.
ADVERSE EFFECT — Conditions or situations creating, imposing,
aggravating or leading to impractical, unsafe, or unsatisfactory conditions
on a subject property, or off-tract property such as, but not limited to,
improper circulation and drainage, rights-of-way as defined in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-34, inadequate drainage facilities, insufficient street widths,
unsuitable street grades, unsuitable street locations to accommodate
prospective traffic or coordinate and compose a convenient system,
inappropriate design features which are not compatible with the
surrounding environment, locating and/or designing lots and structures
in a manner not adaptable for the intended purposes without danger to
health or peril from flood, fire, erosion or other menace, providing for lots
of insufficient size and neither providing nor making future allowance for
access to the interior portion of the lot or for other facilities required by this
Land Development Ordinance.
ALTERATION — In relation to a historic landmark, means any work done on
any improvement which:
ALTERATIONS OR ADDITIONS, STRUCTURAL — Any change in or addition
to the supporting members of a building such as walls, columns, beams,
girders, posts or piers.
ANIMATED SIGN — Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to
depict action or create a special effect or scene.
APPLICANT — The landowner or the agent, optionee, contract purchaser or
other person authorized to act for and acting for the landowner submitting
an application under this Land Development Ordinance.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application or appeal forms and
all accompanying documents required by this Land Development Ordinance
for approval of a subdivision plat, site plan, planned development,
conditional use, zoning variance or direction of the issuance of a permit
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
AVERAGE HEIGHT OF TREES — The average height of trees shall be
determined by adding the height of each individual tree of six inches
diameter or more along and within 10 feet of each side of the profile lines
and dividing by the number of trees in accordance with the Diagrams and
Tables referenced by §§ 500-12 and 500-38.[Added 12-11-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-51]
BALLOON TEST — The raising, to the proposed maximum height of a
wireless telecommunications facility, of a five-foot-diameter helium-filled
balloon attached to a tether line, said tether line originating at the proposed
ground location of the wireless telecommunications facility. A "balloon test"
shall be conducted on a day that West Milford Town hall is open for
A. Is not an addition to the improvement.
B. Changes the appearance of the exterior surface of any improvement.
§ 420-6 WELL CAPPING § 420-6
399:545
business, shall begin no later than 7:00 a.m. and shall end no earlier than
1:00 p.m.[Added 12-11-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-51]
BANNER — Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is
permanently mounted to a pole or a building by a permanent frame at one
or more edges. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of
any institution or business shall not be considered "banners."
BASEMENT — That portion of a building which is partly below and partly
above grade, having at least one-half its height above grade.
BEACON — Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere
or directed at one or more points not on the same lot as the light source;
also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A private, single-family residence which provides
overnight lodging for transient guests and provides breakfast for registered
guests in the forenoon of each day.[Added 4-3-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-6]
BEDROOM — A room planned or used primarily for sleeping.
BILLBOARD — Any structure or portion thereof on which lettered or
pictorial matter is displayed for advertising purposes other than that on a
building or its grounds.
BOAT — Any vessel or watercraft, other than a seaplane on the water, used
or capable of being used a means of transportation on water.
BOATHOUSE — Any enclosed structure extending into or over a body of
water and used for the sole purpose of storing and mooring boats or boating
equipment.
BUFFER — A strip of land containing natural woodlands, earth mounds or
other planted screening materials and separating one kind of land use from
another or separating a planned development from any other development.
BUILDING — Any structure or extension thereof or addition thereto having
a roof supported by such things as columns, posts, piers or walls and
intended for the shelter, business, housing or enclosing of persons, animals
or property. "Building" shall include the words "structure," "dwelling" or
"residence."
BUILDING COVERAGE — The square footage or other area measurement
by which all buildings occupy a lot as measured on a horizontal plane
around the periphery of the facades and including the area under the roof
of any structure supported by columns, but not having walls, as measured
around the outside of the outermost extremities of the roof above the
columns.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured to the highest point
from the mean elevation finished grade at the foundation along the sides
of the building facing a street or to the street line, whichever is closer
to the foundation. On a corner lot, the height shall be measured on the
street having the greatest slope. In all cases where this Land Development
Ordinance provides for height limitations by reference to a specified height
and a specified number of stories, the intent is to limit height to the
§ 420-6 WEST MILFORD CODE § 420-6
399:546
specified maximum footage and the specified number of stories within such
footage.
BUILDING MARKER — Any sign indicating the name of a building and date
and incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a
masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material.
BUILDING SIGN — Any sign attached to any part of a building, as
contrasted to a freestanding sign.
BULKHEAD LINE — On Greenwood Lake the shoreline occurring at the
time the high water of 10.25 feet on the gauge located at the Awosting dam
as recorded and maintained by the U.S. Geological Survey until such time
as encroachment lines are established by the Bureau of Navigation, State
Department of Environmental Protection, defining the lake's permanent
shoreline.
CAMPER — A person who registers his or her party for the occupancy of
a campsite or who otherwise assumes charge of or is placed in charge of a
campsite.[Added 12-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-21]
CAMPER UNIT — A tent or camping vehicle temporarily located on a
campsite.[Added 12-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-21]
CAMPGROUND — A lot, tract or parcel of land upon which two or more
campsites are located, established or maintained and occupied by camping
units for children or adults, or both.[Amended 12-17-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-21]
CAMPING VEHICLE — A vehicular accommodation not more than 32 feet
in length, operating under its own power or towed by an automobile,
suitable for temporary habitation, used for travel, vacation, or recreational
purposes, and occupied in any one place for a period not exceeding 30
days. This definition shall not include federally approved trailers certified
by BOCA (Building Officials and Code Administrators) International,
Inc.[Added 12-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-21]
CAMPSITE — A plot of ground within a campground intended for the
exclusive occupation by a camping unit or units under the control of a
camper.[Added 12-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-21]
CANOPY SIGN — Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy,
or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance,
window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy.
CARTWAY — The hard or paved surface portion of a street customarily
used by vehicles in the regular course of travel. Where there are curbs, the
"cartway" is that portion between the edges of the paved or graded width.
CATWALK — That part of a dock extending traversly from the main walk.
CELLAR — A portion of building having more than 50% of its clear height
below the averaged finished contact grade along the outside walls of the
building.
§ 420-6 WELL CAPPING § 420-6
399:547
CENTRAL SEWERAGE FACILITIES — A system designed and constructed
for the treatment of sewage for 50 or more dwelling units; all systems shall
be approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
and West Milford Municipal Utilities Authority. The system may be publicly
or privately owned and operated but shall be designed with the capability
of tying into other sewerage facility systems that are planned for the area
and have been endorsed by the Township Wastewater Management Plan. All
proposed central sewerage facilities are subject to site plan review.
CENTRAL WATER FACILITIES — A system designed and constructed to
furnish potable water for 50 or more dwelling units or as recommended
and approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
and West Milford Municipal Utilities Authority. The system may be privately
constructed but must be publicly owned and operated prior to the issuance
of any certificates of occupancy to structures served by the system. All
proposed central water facilities are subject to site plan review.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — A document that is issued by the
Historic Preservation Commission, following a prescribed series of hearings
and review procedures, certifying that the proposed actions by an applicant
are found to be acceptable in terms of design criteria relating to the
individual site, structure or building, or the historic district as a whole.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — A sign or portion thereof with characters,
letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering
the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the message changes
more than eight times per day shall be considered "an animated sign"
and not a "changeable copy sign" for purposes of this Land Development
Ordinance. A sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or
mechanical indication of time or temperature shall be considered a "time
and temperature" portion of a sign and not a "changeable copy sign" for
purposes of this Land Development Ordinance.
CHILD CARE CENTER — Any facility for which, upon completion, a license
is required from the Department of Human Services pursuant to N.J.S.A.
30:5B-1 et seq.
CHURCH — A building or structure, or groups of buildings or structures,
which by design and construction are primarily intended for the conducting
of organized religious services and accessory uses associated therewith. All
other uses shall be interpreted as accessory uses.
COMMERCIAL HORSE STABLE — Any stable, equestrian center, barn,
riding academy, ranch, equestrian arena or other property where horses are
boarded and kept for the owners thereof or for hire to the general public,
and/or where lessons, clinics and other equestrian activities are held for
profit.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE — Any sign wording, logo, or other
representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls
attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity.
COMMON PROPERTY — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a
combination of land and water, together with the improvements thereon and
§ 420-6 WEST MILFORD CODE § 420-6
399:548
designed and intended for the ownership, use and enjoyment shared by the
residents and owners of the development. Common property may contain
such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and
appropriate for the benefit of the residents and owners of the development.
COMMUNITY BUILDING/CLUBHOUSE — A building or structure used for
recreational, social and cultural activities, owned by the homeowners'
association, and for use of said homeowners' association.
COMPLETE APPLICATION —
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with the
conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use and upon
the issuance of an authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
CONDOMINIUM — A group of buildings in which units are owned
individually, and the structures, common areas, and facilities are owned by
all of the individual owners on a proportional, undivided basis.
An application for development shall be complete for purposes of
commencing the applicable time period for action by a municipal
agency when so certified by the municipal agency or its authorized
committee or designee. In the event that the agency, committee or
designee does not certify the application to be complete within 45 days
of its submission, the application shall be deemed complete upon the
expiration of the forty-five-day period for purposes of commencing the
applicable time period unless:
The application lacks information indicated on the checklist
adopted by this Land Development Ordinance and provided to the
applicant; and
(1)
The municipal agency or its authorized committee or designee
has notified the applicant in writing of the deficiencies in the
application within 45 days of submission of the application.
(2)
A.
The applicant must request that one or more of the submission
requirements be waived, in which event the agency or its authorized
committee shall grant or deny the request within 45 days. Nothing
herein shall be construed as diminishing the applicant's obligation to
prove in the application process that he is entitled to approval of the
application. The municipal agency may subsequently require correction
of any information found to be in error and submission of additional
information not specified in this Land Development Ordinance or any
revisions in the accompanying documents, as are reasonably necessary
to make an informed decision as to whether the requirements
necessary for approval of the application for development have been
met. The application shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of any
such additional information or any revisions in the accompanying
documents so required by the Township.
B.
§ 420-6 WELL CAPPING § 420-6
399:549
CUL-DE-SAC — The turnaround area at the terminus of a dead-end street.
Often, but not necessarily, a circle in shape.
DEMOLITION — The razing of any improvement, or the obliteration of any
natural feature of a designated landmark.
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross area of land
to be developed.
DETENTION BASIN — An embankment and associated space for
impoundment of water or, alternately, the space for impoundment partially
or entirely created by excavation rather than by embankment, in either case
designed to temporarily retain stormwater runoff.
DETENTION FACILITY — A detention basin or alternative structure
designed to temporarily retain stormwater runoff.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure, and any use or
change in use of any building or other structure or land or extension of use
of land, for which permission may be required.
DOCK — Any flotation or nonflotation, permanent or temporary structure
extending lakeward of the bulkhead line.
DRAINAGE AND UTILITY RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the
installation and maintenance of stormwater and sanitary sewers, water
pipes or drainage ditches and other utilities, or required along a natural
stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow
of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage.
DRIVE-IN BUSINESS — Any business, including but not limited to
automobile service stations, commercial parking lots, banks, clothes
cleaning establishments, dairy products stores, and restaurants, where
business is conducted or service is provided directly to an automobile and/
or its occupants or when an automobile discharges passengers for quick
service where there is little or no separation of pedestrian and automobile
traffic.
DRY DETENTION BASIN — A detention basin not designed to retain water
on a permanent basis.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or series of connected rooms designed for
permanent residency containing living, cooking, sleeping and sanitary
facilities for one housekeeping unit. The dwelling unit shall be selfcontained
and shall not require passing through another dwelling unit or
other indirect route to get to any portion of the dwelling unit, nor shall there
be shared facilities with another housekeeping unit:
DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY — A building physically detached from
other buildings or portions of building which is occupied or intended
to be occupied for residence purposes by one housekeeping unit and
which has its own sleeping, sanitary and general living facilities. A
dwelling which is designed for and occupied by not more than one
A.
§ 420-6 WEST MILFORD CODE § 420-6
399:550
EASEMENT — A use or burden imposed on real estate by deed or other
legal means to control the use of land by the public, a corporation, or
particular persons for specific uses.
family and surrounded by open space or yards and which is not
attached to any other dwelling by any means.
MULTIFAMILY — Units that share common vertical and horizontal
separations.
B.
TWO-FAMILY — A building containing two dwelling units only, each
having entrances on the first floor, intended for residential occupancy
by two housekeeping units, each living independently of each other and
each with its own sleeping, cooking and sanitary facilities. The dwelling
units shall be entirely separated from one another by vertical walls or
horizontal floors, unpierced except for access to outside or to a common
basement.
C.
TOWNHOUSE — A one-family dwelling in a row of at least three but
not more than six such units in which each unit has its own front
and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit
except as provided for in § 500-18E(3) and each unit is separated from
any other unit by one or more common fire-resistant walls. [Amended
11-2-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-35]
D.
GARDEN APARTMENT — One building containing a number of
individual dwelling units. Each building shall be no longer than 200 feet
in length and 60 feet in depth and may be divided into as many dwelling
units as permitted by applicable health and safety regulations.
E.
DUPLEX — The same as a two-family except that each dwelling unit has
part of its floor space on the ground floor and the units are primarily
separated by vertical walls rather than horizontally.
F.
ZERO-LOT-LINE — A freestanding single-family detached building
serving one family, with one wall of the building abutting a side
property line. Side, rear or front yards may be enclosed by walls,
provided that such yards remain unoccupied and open to the sky.
G.
PATIO HOME — The same as zero-lot-line except the unit shall be
designed to integrate interior and exterior living areas. Open space
intended for private use shall be so located and designed as to
maximize its utility to the dwelling unit it serves. In the SCC Zone
the units are designed for independent residents of the community;
however, they share in the common social, recreational and other
facilities offered by the community.
H.
TRIPLEX — The same as a duplex except that the building has three
dwelling units.
I.
QUADRAPLEX — The same as a duplex except that the building has
four dwelling units.
J.
§ 420-6 WELL CAPPING § 420-6
399:551
ENVIRONMENTAL AND COMMUNITY IMPACT STATEMENT (ECIS) — A
statement on the effect of development proposals and other major actions
which significantly affect the community and environment. The
environmental and community impact statement provides the information
needed to evaluate the effects of a proposed project upon the host
community and the environment. The statement usually consists of an
inventory of existing community and environmental conditions at the
project site and in the surrounding region. The ECIS also includes a project
description and a list of all licenses, permits or other approvals required
by law. The environmental and community impact statement assesses the
probable impact of the project upon all the inventory items and includes
a listing of adverse environmental and community impacts during
construction and operation and whether there are alternatives to any part
of the project.
EQUESTRIAN CENTER — Any stable, barn, riding academy, ranch,
equestrian arena or other property where horses are boarded and kept for
the owners thereof or for hire to the general public, and/or where lessons,
clinics and other equestrian activities are held.
ESSENTIAL SERVICE — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other government agencies
of electrical, gas, water transmission or distribution systems or collection,
communication, water supply or sewage treatment and collection systems,
including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire
alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, light stanchions, telephone
lines, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in connection
therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate services by
such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for the
public health, safety or general welfare, but not including buildings.
EVAPOTRANSPIRATION — The evaporation of water from a landscape,
including evaporation from a landscape, including evaporation from
inorganic surfaces and transpirational water loss from foliage.
EXCAVATE — To remove or move any soil from or on the premises on which
it is located.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — Any private residence approved by the New
Jersey Division of Youth and Family Services or an organization with which
the Division contracts for family day care in which child-care services are
regularly provided to no less than three and no more than five children for
no less than 15 hours per week. A child being cared for under the following
circumstances is not included in the total number of children receiving
child-care services:
A. The child being cared for is legally related to the provider; or
The child is being cared for as part of a cooperative agreement between
parents for the care of their children by one or more of the parents,
where no payment for the care is being provided.
B.
§ 420-6 WEST MILFORD CODE § 420-6
399:552
FARM —
FARM ANIMALS — Animals produced or used in agriculture, including, for
example, but not limited to horses, cattle, swine, sheep, goats, poultry, fowl,
fur-bearing animals, but excluding dogs, cats, and other animals commonly
kept as household pets.
FARMERS' MARKET PERMIT — A permit issued in accordance with the
standards set forth in § 500-36.1 of Chapter 500.[Added 7-22-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-016]
FARMLAND ASSESSMENT — As defined by N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.20 et seq.
FERTIGATION — In IPM, liquid products applied through the sprinkler
irrigation system rather than through conventional broadcast methods,
achieving 30% to 50% reductions in application rates.
FILL MATERIAL — Any soil similar to the natural surrounding soils with
respect to permeability, water capacity and acidity or any soil approved
by the Township Engineer. Soil shall be clean and free of stumps, organic
matter, building materials or any other foreign materials; provided,
however, that, at the direction of the Township Engineer, soil testing may be
required as follows:
FIRST FLOOR AREA — The residential portion of a dwelling unit, excluding
basements, garages, carports and breezeways, measured by using the
outside dimensions of the residential portion of the building. For a splitlevel,
bi-level or tri-level dwelling, the area shall be considered to be the
sum of the areas of two adjoining levels, excluding basements and garages,
provided both levels are connected by permanent built-in stairs in the
interior of the building.
FLAG — Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors,
patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political
subdivision, or other entity.
FLOODPLAIN — The relatively flat area adjoining a water channel which
has been or may be covered by floodwater of the channel, including the
following components:
Principal uses. A lot of at least five acres used for the growing and
harvesting of crops and the raising and breeding of certain animals,
including truck farms, fruit farms, nurseries and greenhouses, dairies
and livestock produce. Commercial piggeries are prohibited.
A.
Accessory uses. Buildings incidental to farms such as barns and
packing, grading and storage buildings for produce raised on the
premises, except that no processing of produce shall be permitted in
buildings for keeping of poultry and permitted livestock or in garages
for the keeping of equipment and trucks used in farm operations.
B.
A. Soil testing shall be done by a certified lab at the applicant's cost;
Sampling shall be for hydrocarbons, heavy metals and other substances
considered to be a health hazard.
B.
§ 420-6 WELL CAPPING § 420-6
399:553
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The gross floor area of all buildings on a lot
divided by the lot area.
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any sign supported by structures or supports that
are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from
any building or other structure.
GENERAL IMPROVEMENT — An improvement, the cost of which is to be
paid out of the tax revenues of the entire Township.
GRADE — The average finished ground elevation adjoining a building at
project completion or the slope of a road, path, driveway, swales or other
surfaces.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The area measured by using the outside dimension
of the building, excluding the area of a garage, attic, open porch or patio.
Only those floor areas which have a ceiling height as prescribed by the
Township building code for residential uses and those floor areas either
having a ceiling height of eight feet or more or used for storage space in
nonresidential uses shall be included in the gross floor area.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — One or more historic sites and intervening or
surrounding property significantly affecting or affected by the quality and
character of the historic site or sites.
HISTORIC SITES — Any real property, man-made structure, natural object
or configuration or any portion or group of the foregoing which have been
formally designated in the Master Plan as being of historical,
archaeological, cultural, scenic or architectural significance.
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation conducted entirely within a
detached dwelling unit or an accessory building, but not both, which is
clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the lot for residential
purposes. Such occupations shall be conducted solely by the residents of
the detached dwelling except that no more than two persons not residents
of the building may be employed and provided that:
FLOODWAY — The river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
area that must be reserved in order to discharge the design flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
one foot.
A.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Land in the floodplain subject to a twotenths-
percent or greater chance of flood in any given year.
B.
FLOOD FRINGE AREA — The portion of the flood hazard area outside
of the floodway.
C.
A. No more than 450 square feet shall be used for such occupation.
B. No display of products shall be visible from the street.
C. The residential character of the lot and building shall not be changed.
D. No occupational sounds shall be audible outside the building.
§ 420-6 WEST MILFORD CODE § 420-6
399:554
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — An incorporated, nonprofit organization
operating in a cluster residential development under recorded land
agreements through which:
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — An occupation for gain or support
conducted by any member of the family residing in a dwelling unit and
conducted within the dwelling unit or accessory building, such as physician,
dentist, lawyer, planner, engineer, architect, accountant etc. Any retailoriented
or distribution-oriented use shall not be interpreted as "home
professional office."
HORSE — Any member of the equine family, including horses, ponies,
mules, asses and donkeys.
HOTEL — A building which contains furnished living units for its occupants
which has entrances from inside the building and in which no living unit
contains more than two rooms, exclusive of bathroom, foyer, closet or
dressing area, terraces or balconies and providing, among other things,
such services and features such as central dining rooms, lounges, public
assembly areas.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — One or more persons living together in one
dwelling unit on a nonseasonal basis and sharing living, sleeping, cooking
and sanitary facilities on a nonprofit basis.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any ground cover which reduces the rate of
absorption of stormwater into undeveloped land. Retention and detention
basins and dry wells allowing water to percolate directly into the ground
shall not be considered as impervious surfaces.
IMPROVEMENT — Any structure or part thereof constructed or installed
upon real property by human endeavor and intended to be kept at the
location of such construction or installation for a period of not less than 60
contiguous days.
No equipment shall be used which will cause interference with radio
and television reception in neighboring residences.
E.
The home occupation does not reduce the parking or yard requirements
of the detached dwelling.
F.
There is no exterior evidence of the home occupation other than one
nameplate sign identifying the home occupation, not exceeding four
square feet in area, either attached or freestanding and set back at
least 15 feet from the street right-of-way.
G.
A. Each owner is automatically a member.
Each occupied dwelling unit is automatically subject to a charge for
a proportionate share of the expenses for the organization's activities
and maintenance, including any maintenance costs levied against the
association by the Township.
B.
C. Each owner and tenant has the right to use the common property.
§ 420-6 WELL CAPPING § 420-6
399:555
INCIDENTAL SIGN — A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose
secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as "no parking,"
"entrance," "loading only," "telephone," and other similar directives. No sign
with a commercial message legible from a position off the lot on which the
sign is located shall be considered incidental.
INDUSTRIAL PARK — A large tract of land (25 acres or more) that has been
planned, developed, and operated as an integrated facility for a number
of individual industrial uses, with special attention to circulation, parking,
utility needs, aesthetics, and compatibility.
INDUSTRIAL, INDIVIDUAL USE — Any lot containing an individual
industrial use that is not part of a planned industrial park.
INFILTRATION BASIN — A detention basin designed to infiltrate retained
water to the subsurface and which is not an injection well.
INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT (IPM) — The use of multiple tactics to
maintain pest populations below levels that cause unacceptable economic
and aesthetic injury without posing a hazard to human health or the
environment.
LANDMARK DESIGNATION — The official recognition of any site, building,
structure or district that has been documented to have or contain
architecturally, historically or archaeologically significant features or
elements and that adheres to the criteria as established by the National
Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a
building or group of buildings for the temporary parking of a commercial
vehicle while loading or unloading, with 15 feet of vertical clearance.
LOCAL DESIGNATION — The status granted to a landmark or historic
site pursuant to § 500-138 of the Land Development Ordinance.[Added
4-3-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-6]
LOCAL IMPROVEMENT — An improvement, the cost of which, or a portion
thereof, may be assessed upon the lands in the vicinity thereof benefited
thereby. (N.J.S.A. 40:56-1)
LOT — Any parcel of land separated from other parcels or portions as
by a filed map or deed of record, except that for purposes of this Land
Development Ordinance, contiguous undersized lots under one ownership
shall be considered one lot and except further that no portion of a street
shall be included in calculating the lot boundaries or areas, except as
modified by § 500-72, Nonconforming lots, structures and uses.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the lot lines of a lot not including
any portion of a street right-of-way.
LOT, CORNER — A lot on the junction of and abutting two or more
intersecting streets where the interior angle of an intersection does not
exceed 135 degrees.
§ 420-6 WEST MILFORD CODE § 420-6
399:556
LOT DEPTH — The shortest horizontal distance between the front lot line
and a line drawn parallel to the front lot line through the midpoint of the
rear lot line.
LOT FRONTAGE — The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured
along the street line. The minimum lot frontage shall be the same as the lot
width except that, on curved alignments with an outside radius of less than
500 feet, the minimum distance between the side lot lines measured at the
street line shall not be less than 50% of the required minimum lot width.
In no case shall the required frontage on a cul-de-sac be less than 50 feet.
In the case of a corner lot, either street frontage which meets the minimum
frontage required for that zone may be considered the lot frontage.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE — Any line forming a portion of the exterior boundary of a lot and
the same line as the street line for that portion of a lot abutting a street.
LOT WIDTH — The straight and horizontal distance between side lot lines at
setback points on each side lot line measured an equal distance back from
the street line. The minimum lot width shall be measured at the minimum
required building setback line.
LOW-INCOME HOUSING — Housing that is economically feasible for
families whose income level is categorized as low within the standards
promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development or the appropriate state housing agency.
MAINTENANCE BOND — Any security acceptable to the Township Council
to assure the maintenance of duly approved improvements installed by the
developer after the final acceptance of the improvement and in accordance
with this Land Development Ordinance.
MAIN WALK — That part of a dock extending into a body of water from the
shoreline.
MAJOR SOIL REMOVAL OR SOIL FILL PERMIT — A permit for the removal,
fill or moving of 500 cubic yards or more of soil.
MANUFACTURING — Establishments engaged in the mechanical or
chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products,
including assembling of component parts, manufacturing of products, and
the blending of materials such as oils, resins or liquors.
MARINA — Any public, semipublic or private facility capable of berthing or
mooring five or more boats.
MARQUEE — Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a
building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building,
generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
MARQUEE SIGN — Any sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of
a marquee.
§ 420-6 WELL CAPPING § 420-6
399:557
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals
for development of the Township of West Milford as set forth and adopted
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
MEMORIALIZATION —
MINOR SOIL REMOVAL OR SOIL FILL PERMIT — A permit for the removal,
fill or moving of more than 50 but less than 500 cubic yards of soil.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING — Housing which is constructed and kept
available for families or individuals, including senior citizens, whose
incomes do not exceed 80% of the median income of the area, with
adjustments for smaller and larger families as defined for the Township by
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
MOTEL — A building which contains living or sleeping accommodations for
transient occupancy and has individual outside entrances to each unit.
As provided by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10g, the Township shall include findings
of fact and conclusions based thereon in each decision on any
application for development and shall reduce the decision to writing.
The municipal agency shall provide the findings and conclusions
through:
A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period
provided in the act for action by the municipal agency on the
application for development; or
(1)
A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held not later
than 45 days after the date of the meeting at which the municipal
agency voted to grant or deny approval.
(2)
A.
Only the members of the municipal agency who voted for the action
taken may vote on the memorializing resolution, and the vote of a
majority of such members present at the meeting at which the
resolution for adoption shall be sufficient to adopt the resolution. An
action pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9 (resulting from the failure of a
motion to approve an application) shall be memorialized by resolution
as provided above, with those members voting against the motion for
approval being the members eligible to vote on the memorializing
resolution. The vote on any such resolution shall be deemed to be
a memorialization of a prior action of the municipal agency and not
to be itself an action of the municipal agency; however, the date of
the adoption of the resolution shall constitute the date of the decision
for purposes of the mailings, filings and publications required by
Subsections h and i of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10. If the municipal agency
fails to adopt a resolution or memorializing resolution as hereinabove
specified, any interested party may apply to the Superior Court in
a summary manner for an order compelling the municipal agency to
reduce its findings and conclusions to writing within a stated time, and
the cost of the application, including attorney's fees, shall be assessed
against the municipal agency.
B.
§ 420-6 WEST MILFORD CODE § 420-6
399:558
MOTHER/DAUGHTER — A dwelling unit attached by common entrance,
hallway with shared utilities (electric, gas, oil, water, etc.).
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The Planning Board, Board of Adjustment, or
Township Council, or any agency created by or responsible to one or more
municipalities, when acting pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building or structure,
the size, dimension or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption,
revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance but which fails to conform to
the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reasons of
such adoption, revision or amendment.131
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning
ordinance but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.132
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign lawfully existing on the effective date
of this chapter, or any amendment to it rendering such sign nonconforming,
which does not comply with all of the standards and regulations of this
chapter or any amendment hereto.133
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NURSING HOME/LONG-TERM CARE — A use of building or land for the
care of two or more unrelated persons who are suffering from an acute or
chronic illness or are being treated for or convalescing from the effects of
an injury and surgical or obstetrical treatment who require nursing care
as a result of one or more of the above-mentioned conditions. The term
"nursing home" as used herein does not include the term "boardinghouse
or other home for the sheltered care of adult persons," as defined by law,
but it does include any structure licensed by the State of New Jersey
Department of Human Services to operate a "nursing home." This facility
will be serviced 24 hours a day by a registered nurse and include medical
facilities, meals, housekeeping, social service, and physical therapy.134
OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER — The official newspaper as designated by the
Township Council.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within
the property, of which the lot is a part, which is the subject of a development
application or contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
131. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
132. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
134. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 420-6 WELL CAPPING § 420-6
399:559
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OUTDOOR PERFORMING ARTS CENTER — A land use consisting of an
amphitheater or pavilion with either fixed, permanent or temporary seating,
or a combination thereof, used for musical performance theater or similar
productions.[Added 12-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-21]
OWNER — Any person in legal possession of the fee simple title to a
parcel of land or having such other interest or estate therein as will permit
exercise of effective rights of ownership, possession thereof or dominion
thereover.
PARKING SPACE — An area of not less than nine feet wide by 18 feet in
length, either within a structure or in the open, for the parking of motor
vehicles, exclusive of driveways, access drives, fire lanes, and public rightsof-
way, except that nothing shall prohibit private driveways for detached
dwelling units from being considered off-street parking space. The area
shall be sufficient to accommodate the exterior extremities of the vehicles,
whether in addition thereto wheel blocks are installed within this area to
prevent the bumper from overhanging one end of the parking space. The
width and length of each space shall be measured perpendicular to each
other regardless of the angle of the parking space to the access aisle or
driveway.
PATIO HOME — See the definition of "dwelling unit," Subsection H, "Patio
home."
PENNANT — Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether
or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or
string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security in accordance with the
requirements of this Land Development Ordinance which may be accepted
in lieu of a requirement that certain improvements be made, including
performance bonds, escrow agreements, and other similar collateral or
surety agreements.
PERMITTED USE — Any use of land or buildings as permitted by this Land
Development Ordinance.
PERSON — Includes individual, firm, association, partnership or
corporation.
PIER — A vertical support structure to which a deck, dock, boathouse, or
other structure may be affixed.
PIERHEAD LINE — A line running parallel with the bulkhead line and
extending lakeward not more than 50 feet from the bulkhead line and until
such time as established by the Natural Resources Council and Bureau
§ 420-6 WEST MILFORD CODE § 420-6
399:560
of Navigation, New Jersey State Department of Environmental Protection,
beyond which no dock, pier, boathouse, or marina or other structure,
permanent or temporary, floating or affixed to shore or water bottom, may
be located.
PLAT — The map of a subdivision of site plan and used interchangeably in
this Land Development Ordinance with "plan."
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or
other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including,
but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels;
signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons
used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or
painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless
said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business.
PREMISES — One or more contiguous parcels of property under single
ownership. Parcels shall not be deemed to be contiguous if separated by a
road, railroad, right-of-way, brook, stream or other natural division.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — The building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is located. Lots with multiple principal uses may
have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages, and other
clearly accessory uses shall not be considered "principal buildings."
PRINCIPAL USE — The main purpose or purposes for which a lot or building
is used.
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a
manner that its leading edge extends more than six inches beyond the
surface of such building or wall.
PUBLIC PURPOSE USES — The use of land or buildings by the Township
Council of the Township of West Milford or any officially created authority
or agency thereof.
PUBLIC UTILITY — A facility for public use or to provide services to the
public, such as telephone systems or plant and equipment, electric power
substations or equipment, cable television facilities, sewerage treatment
and water treatment facilities including pumping stations, gas transmission
stations, but excluding actual transmission lines and towers and microwave
facilities.135
SKETCH PLAT — The sketch map of a subdivision of sufficient accuracy
to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification and meeting
the requirements of this Land Development Ordinance.
A.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map indicating the proposed
layout of the subdivision or site plan which is submitted to the Planning
Board for Planning Board consideration and preliminary approval and
meeting the requirements of this Land Development Ordinance.
B.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision or
site plan which is presented to the Planning Board for final approval in
accordance with these requirements.
C.
§ 420-6 WELL CAPPING § 420-6
399:561
REPAIR — Any work done on any improvement which:
REPAIR SHOP, BODY — The land and buildings designed and used
predominantly for the mechanical repair of passenger or commercial
vehicles. No shop in which a majority of the mechanical repair work done
is on vehicles owned by the operator or owner of such shop, or leased
or rented to such operator or owner, shall be designated as a mechanical
repair shop under this definition.
REPLACEMENT — The repairs when a building permit is required for same.
RESIDENTIAL AGRICULTURE —
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — An area to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing residential housing units which have a
common or public open space area as an appurtenance.
RESIDENTIAL HEALTH CARE FACILITY — An institution or a distinct part
of an institution which is licensed by the State of New Jersey Department
of Health and Senior Services to provide health care under medical
supervision to two or more patients who are not related to the governing
authority or its members by marriage, blood, or adoption. This facility is
to assist with semi-independent personal care but includes provisions for
A. Is not an addition to the improvement;
Does not change the appearance of the exterior surface of any
improvement.
B.
The growing and harvesting of plant life and the keeping of farm
animals for the enjoyment of the residents on the property and not
primarily for commercial purposes. A small roadside produce stand
associated with the residential agricultural use shall be permitted,
provided that:
(1) All of the produce offered for sale is grown on the property.
(2) The produce is not grown primarily for commercial purposes.
(3) The stand is not furnished with permanent heating facilities.
(4) The floor area of the stand does not exceed 100 square feet.
The stand is set back from all street rights-of-way and property
lines at least 20 feet.
(5)
(6) Sufficient on-site, off-street parking is provided.
A.
One unlighted sign, not exceeding four square feet in area, shall be
permitted and shall be attached flat against the front facade of the
stand.
B.
135. Editor's Note: Former definitions "recreation facilities," "recreation, active or passive,"
"recreation, commercial," "recreation, private" and "recreational vehicle," which all
previously followed this definition, were repealed 12-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-21.
§ 420-6 WEST MILFORD CODE § 420-6
399:562
meals, social services, medical and/or personal service and emergency care
if necessary.
RESIDENTIAL SIGN — Any sign located in a district zoned for residential
uses that contains no commercial message except advertising for goods or
services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located, if offering
such service at such location conforms to all requirements of this Land
Development Ordinance.
RESTAURANT — Any establishment, however designated, at which food is
sold primarily for consumption on the premises. However, a snack bar or
refreshment stand at a public or community swimming pool, playground,
golf course, operated by the recreational facility and for the convenience of
patrons of the facility, shall not be deemed to be a restaurant.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — Any restaurant, refreshment stand, snack bar,
dairy bar, hamburger stand, or hot dog stand where food is served primarily
for consumption at counters, stools, or bars outside the building or
primarily for consumption in automobiles parked on the premises whether
brought to the automobiles by the customer or by the employees of the
restaurant, regardless of whether or not additional seats or other
accommodations are provided for customers inside the building.
RESUBDIVISION — The further division of a lot or the adjustment of a lot
line or lot lines.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication,
prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied or occupied by
a road, crosswalk, railroad, transmission line, pipeline, water line, sanitary
storm sewer and other similar uses.
RINGELMANN SMOKE CHART — A device used to measure and gauge the
significance of smoke pollution by the utilization of shaded samples which
is matched to the color of the actual pollution.
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the
roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically
above the highest portion of the roof.
ROOF SIGN, INTEGRAL — Any sign erected or constructed as an integral
or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such
that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the
roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof
by a space of more than six inches.
SEASONAL FARMERS' MARKET — The offering for sale of fresh
agricultural products, organic merchandise, food products, and other
merchandise typical of a seasonal market directly to the consumer at an
open-air market on a seasonal basis which shall constitute the time period
from June 1 through October 31 per calendar year under the sponsorship of
a nonprofit, civic, or religious organization.[Added 7-22-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-016]
SENIOR CITIZENS' HOUSING — Apartment-type housing for independent
residents with some common facilities provided for the occupants of said
§ 420-6 WELL CAPPING § 420-6
399:563
housing. However, they also share in common social, recreational and other
facilities.[Amended 5-1-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-13]
SERVICE STATION — Lands and buildings providing for the sale of fuel,
lubricants, and automotive accessories. Maintenance and minor repairs for
motor vehicles may be provided, but no body repairs or painting or the
extended storage of inoperable or wrecked vehicles shall be permitted.
SETBACK — The distance from the property line to the nearest part of
the applicable building, structure, or sign, measured perpendicularly to the
property line.
SETBACK LINE — A line drawn parallel with a street line or lot line and
drawn through the point of a building nearest to the street line or lot line.
The term "required setback" means a line that is established a minimum
horizontal distance from the street line or the lot line and beyond which a
building or part of a building is not permitted to extend toward the street
line or lot line.
SHORELINE — Where land, air, and water meet.
SIGHT EASEMENT AT INTERSECTION — A triangular shaped area
established in accordance with the requirements of this Land Development
Ordinance in which no grading, planting, except ground covers or low
growing species, or structure shall be erected or maintained, except for
street signs, fire hydrants and light standards.
SIGN — A device on any building or structure or portion thereof on which
any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, or
insignia used to advertise or promote the interest of any person or product
when the same is placed in view of the general public.
SITE — Any plot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous lots or
parcels of land. A site can be vacant or developed.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown:
SITE PLAN REVIEW — The examination of the specific development plans
for a lot. Wherever the term "site plan approval" is used in this Land
Development Ordinance, it shall be understood to mean a requirement that
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including, but not
necessarily limited to, topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes, waterways, and wetlands.
A.
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting, screening
devices.
B.
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed determination concerning the adequacy of the plan
in accordance to the requirements of this Land Development
Ordinance.
C.
§ 420-6 WEST MILFORD CODE § 420-6
399:564
the site plan be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment.
SOIL — Any earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus, rock or dirt, and
includes both surface (or top) soil and subsoil.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — The flow of water on the surface of the ground,
resulting from precipitation.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the next above it or, if there is no floor above it, then
the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. For the purpose
of this Land Development Ordinance, the interior of the roof shall not be
considered a ceiling. A "half story" shall be the area under a pitched roof
at the top of a building, the floor of which shall be at least four feet, but no
more than six feet, below the plate.
STREAM — A watercourse having a source and terminus banks and channel
through which waters flow at least periodically.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway, is
shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law, is approved by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., or is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in
the office of the County Recording Officer prior to the appointment of a
Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the power to review plats.
"Streets" shall include the land between the street lines, whether improved
or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks,
parking areas and other areas within the street line.
STREET LINE — The edge of the existing or future street right-of-way,
whichever would result in the widest right-of-way, as shown on the adopted
Master Plan or Official Map, forming the dividing line between the street
and a lot.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed, assembled, or erected which
requires location on the ground or attachment to something having such
location on the ground, including buildings, fences, tanks, towers, signs,
advertising devices and swimming pools. For purposes of Chapter 500,
Article XIII, Historic Preservation Commission, a combination of materials
to form a construction for occupancy, use or ornamentation whether
installed on, above, or below the surface of a parcel of land.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning
of this Land Development Ordinance if no new streets are created:
Divisions of land found by the Planning Board or subdivision
committee thereof appointed by the Chairman to be for agricultural
purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres or larger in size;
(1)
(2) Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
A.
§ 420-6 WELL CAPPING § 420-6
399:565
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any division of land not classified as a minor
subdivision.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — Any division of land containing an aggregate
of not more than three lots (two new lots and the remaining parcel),
each fronting on an existing street or streets; not involving a planned
development or any new street or the extension of any off-tract
improvement, the cost of which is to be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-42 and Chapter 470, Article VIII, On-Tract Improvements,
Guarantees and Inspections, of this Land Development Ordinance or the
extension of Township facilities; and not in conflict with any provision of
the Master Plan, Official Map, or this Land Development Ordinance; not
being a further division of an original tract of land for which previous minor
subdivision(s) have been approved by a municipal agency within the past
five years and where the combination of the proposed and approved minor
subdivision(s) constitutes a major subdivision; and not being deficient in
those details and specifications required of minor subdivisions as specified
in this Land Development Ordinance. The original tract of land shall be
considered any tract in existence at the time of the adoption of this Land
Development Ordinance of which this is a revision as shown on the
Township tax maps. Any readjustment of lot lines resulting in no new lots
shall be classified as a "minor subdivision."
SUMMER STOCK THEATER — Areas, buildings or structures designed and
used for plays, acts or dramas by actors and actresses performing on a
stage and not including the exclusive showing of motion pictures.[Added
12-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-21]
SUSPENDED SIGN — A sign that is suspended from the underside of a
horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface.
SWIMMING POOL, PORTABLE — Portable pools shall not be subject to
the requirements of this Land Development Ordinance and shall be those
pools which are not otherwise permanently installed, do not require water
filtration, circulation and purification, do not exceed a water surface area of
100 square feet, and do not require braces or supports.
Divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited to
judgments of foreclosure;
(3)
Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded
instrument; and
(4)
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of
land owned by the same person or persons and all of which are
found and certified by the administrative officer to conform to the
requirements of the municipal development regulations and are
shown and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the tax
map or atlas of the municipality.
(5)
B. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision."
§ 420-6 WEST MILFORD CODE § 420-6
399:566
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL — Includes an artificially
constructed pool, whether located above or below the ground, having a
depth of more than 18 inches and/or a water surface of 100 square feet
or more, designed and maintained for swimming and bathing purposes
by an individual for use by members of his household and guests, and
located on a lot as an accessory use to a detached dwelling; "private
residential swimming pool" includes all buildings, structures, equipment
and appurtenances thereto. "Private residential swimming pool" shall be
further classified into types in accordance with the suitability of a pool for
use with diving equipment and shall meet the appropriate design standards
as set forth by the National Swimming Pool Institute.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC — Any pool other than a private residential
swimming pool, designed to be used collectively by persons for swimming
and bathing purposes, including pools designed as part of any hotel or motel
use or any cluster residential development. "Public swimming pools" shall
be further classified into types in accordance with their particular use and
shall meet the appropriate design standards as set forth by the National
Swimming Pool Institute.
TEMPORARY OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL SALES EVENT — The outdoor
display and/or sale of merchandise, which shall also include a farmers’
market for a specified period of time in accordance with the requirements
set forth in Chapter 500.[Added 7-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-016]
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign that is used only temporarily and is not
permanently mounted.
TOWNHOUSE — See the definition of "dwelling unit," Subsection D,
"Townhouse."
TOWNSHIP — Township of West Milford, Passaic County, New Jersey.
TOWNSHIP MASTER PLAN — A composite of the mapped and written
proposals recommending the physical development of the Township which
shall have been duly adopted by the Planning Board.
TRANSCRIPT — A typed or printed verbatim record of the proceedings or
reproduction thereof.
USED — Includes arranged, designed, constructed, altered, converted,
rented, leased or intended to be used.
VARIANCE — A departure from the terms of this Land Development
Ordinance authorized by the appropriate municipal agency in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
WALL SIGN — Any sign attached parallel to, but within six inches of, a wall,
painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits of
an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall
or building, and which displays only one sign surface.
WAREHOUSE — A building used primarily for the storage of goods and
materials.
§ 420-6 WELL CAPPING § 420-6
399:567
WATER LOT AREA — That area of water surface bounded by bulkhead line,
the pierhead line and the side lot lines extended to the pierhead line which
would extend, for the purpose of this definition only, the side lot lines of
those lots having water frontage from the bulkhead line to the pierhead line.
WETLANDS — An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known
as "hydrophytic vegetation"; provided, however, that the applicant, in
designating a wetland, shall use the three-parameter approach, as outlined
in N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign, picture, symbol, or combination thereof,
designed to communicate information about an activity, business,
commodity, event, sale, or service, that is placed inside a window or upon
the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — A commercial facility,
consisting of antennas, pole and equipment, providing customary support
facilities, access, and security facilities in accordance with and in
compliance with the regulations promulgated by the FCC in the
Telecommunications Act of 1996.[Added 7-1-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-12;
amended 12-11-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-51]
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending across the full width of the lot
and lying between the street line and the closest point of any building on the
lot. The depth of the front yard shall be measured horizontally and at right
angles to either a straight street line or the tangent lines of curved street
lines. The minimum required front yard shall be the same as the required
setback.
YARD, REAR — An open space extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the rear lot line and the closest point of the principal building
on the lot. The depth of the rear yard shall be measured horizontally and at
right angles to either a straight rear lot line or the tangent of curved rear
lot lines. The minimum required rear yard shall be the same as the required
setback.
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard
and lying between each side lot line and the closest point of the principal
building on the lot. The width of the required side yard shall be measured
horizontally and at right angles to either a straight side line or the tangent
lines of curved side lot lines.
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the Township officer:
Which is required as a condition precedent to the commencement of a
use or the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion
or installation of a structure or building; and
A.
Which acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with
the provisions of Chapter 500, Zoning, or variance therefrom duly
authorized.
B.
§ 420-6 WEST MILFORD CODE § 420-7
399:568
§ 420-7. Board of Adjustment.136
A. Establishment; composition; alternates. The Zoning Board of
Adjustment heretofore created is continued and is hereby established
pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law as the Board of Adjustment for
the Township. It shall consist of seven members, plus two alternates
who shall be appointed by the Township Council. Alternate members
shall be designated at the time of appointment by the Township Council
as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The term of each regular
member shall be four years, and the term of each alternate member
shall be two years.
B. Voting powers of alternate members. Alternate members may
participate in discussions of the proceedings, but may not vote except in
the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be
delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
C. Vacancy. Any vacancy on the Board occurring other than by expiration
of term shall be filled by appointment by the Township Council to serve
for the unexpired term of the member whose term shall become vacant.
A member may be removed by the Township Council for cause but only
after public hearing and other requested procedural due process
protections.
D. Officers and operation of the Board.
(1) The Board of Adjustment shall organize annually by selecting from
among its regular members a Chairman and Vice Chairman. The
Board shall also select a Secretary who may or may not be a
member of the Board or a Township employee.
(2) The Township Administrator shall appoint a person to perform
secretarial and clerical functions for the Board of Adjustment.
[Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
(3) The Township Council shall make provisions in its budget and
appropriate funds for the expenses of the Board of Adjustment.
E. Attorney for the Board of Adjustment. The office of the Board of
Adjustment Attorney is hereby created. The Board of Adjustment may
annually appoint to such office an attorney at law of New Jersey other
than the Township Attorney and any additional staff as needed. The
Board of Adjustment shall fix compensation or rate of compensation of
an Attorney so appointed.
F. Powers and jurisdiction of the Board of Adjustment.
(1) The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to:
136. Editor's Note: For current statutory provisions related to zoning boards of adjustment, see
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq.
§ 420-7 WELL CAPPING § 420-7
399:569
(a) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant
that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or
refusal made by the administrative officer based or made in the
enforcement of any provision of the Land Development
Ordinance.
(b) Hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of the Land
Development Ordinance, requests for interpretation of the
Official Map or Chapter 500, Zoning, or for decisions upon
other special questions upon which the Board is authorized to
pass by any ordinance or Official Map.
(c) Variance of area or yard requirements.
[1] Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness
or shape of a specific piece of property; or by reason of
exceptional topographic conditions or physical features
uniquely affecting a specific piece of property or by reason
of other extraordinary and exceptional situation uniquely
affecting a specific piece of property or the structures
lawfully existing thereon, the strict application of any
regulation of Chapter 500, Zoning, would result in peculiar
and exceptional practical difficulties or to exceptional and
undue hardship upon the developer of such property,
grant, upon an application or an appeal relating to such
property, a variance from such strict application of such
regulation so as to relieve any difficulties or hardships.
[2] Where in an application or appeal relating to a specific
piece of property the purposes of the Municipal Land Use
Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) and of this Land
Development Ordinance would be advanced by a deviation
from the requirements of this Land Development
Ordinance, and the benefits of the deviation would
substantially outweigh any detriment, grant departure
from regulations of Chapter 500, Zoning; provided,
however, that no variance shall be granted under this
subsection to allow a structure or use in a district
restricted against such structure or use; and provided
further that the proposed development does not require
approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan
or conditional use in conjunction with which the Planning
Board has the power to review a request for a variance
pursuant to this Land Development Ordinance.
(d) Variance of use regulations. In particular cases and for special
reasons, grant a variance to allow departure from Chapter 500,
Zoning, including, but not limited to, permit a use or principal
structure in a district restricted against such use or principal
structure, an expansion of a nonconforming use, a deviation
from a specification or standard pertaining solely to a
§ 420-7 WEST MILFORD CODE § 420-7
399:570
conditional use, an increase in the permitted floor area ratio,
and an increase in the permitted density except as applied to
the required lot area for a lot or lots for detached one- or twodwelling-
unit buildings which lot or lots are either an isolated
undersized lot or lots resulting from a minor subdivision. A
variance under this subsection shall be granted only by
affirmative vote of at least five members of the Board.
(2) General provision. No variance or other relief may be granted
under the terms of this section unless such variance or other relief
can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good
and will not substantially impair the intent and purpose of the zone
plan and Chapter 500, Zoning. In respect of the airport hazard
areas, no variance or other relief may be granted permitting the
creation or establishment of a nonconforming use which would be
prohibited under the standards promulgated pursuant of the Air
Safety and Zoning Act of 1983,137 except upon issuance of a permit
by the New Jersey Commissioner of Transportation. An application
under this section may be referred to an appropriate person or
agency, including the Planning Board, for its report; provided that
such reference shall not extend the period of time within which the
Board of Adjustment shall act.138
G. Other powers.
(1) The Board of Adjustment shall have such other powers as
prescribed by law, including but not limited to the following:
(a) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32; or
(b) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a
building or structure not related to a street.
(2) The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to the same
extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board,
subdivision or site plan approval or conditional use approval
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67 whenever the proposed
development requires approval by the Board of Adjustment of a
variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d. The developer may elect
to submit a separate application requesting approval of the
variance and a subsequent application for any required approval of
a subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The separate approval of
the variance shall be conditioned upon grant of all required
subsequent approvals by the Board of Adjustment. No such
subsequent approval shall be granted unless such approval can be
137. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et seq.
138. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 420-7 WELL CAPPING § 420-7
399:571
granted without substantial detriment to the public good and
without substantial impairment of the intent and purpose of the
zone plan and Land Development Ordinance. The number of votes
of Board members required to grant any such subsequent approval
shall be as otherwise provided for in this Land Development
Ordinance for the approval in question, and the special vote
provision pursuant to § 420-7F(1)(d) of this chapter shall not be
required.
(3) Whenever an application for development requests relief pursuant
to this subsection, the Board of Adjustment shall grant or deny
approval of the application within 120 days after submission by a
developer of a complete application to the administrative officer or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
In the event that the developer elects to submit separate
consecutive applications, the aforesaid provision shall apply to the
application for approval of the variance. The period for granting or
denying any subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided
for in this Land Development Ordinance. Failure of the Board of
Adjustment to act within the period prescribed shall constitute
approval of the application, and a certificate of the administrative
officer as to the failure of the Board of Adjustment to act shall be
issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu
of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval, herein
required, and shall be so accepted by the county recording officer
for purposes of filing subdivision plats. Whenever review or
approval of the application by the County Planning Board is
required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3 in the case of a subdivision, or
N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6 in the case of a site plan, the Township Board of
Adjustment shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely
receipt of a favorable report on the application by the County
Planning Board or approval by the County Planning Board by its
failure to report thereon within the required time. An application
under this section may be referred to any appropriate person or
agency, for its report, provided that such reference shall not extend
the period of time within which the Board of Adjustment shall act.
H. Appeals and applications to the Board of Adjustment.
(1) Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested
party affected by any decision of the administrative officer of the
Township based on or made in the enforcement of the Land
Development Ordinance or Official Map. Such appeal shall be taken
within 20 days by filing a notice of appeal with the administrative
officer specifying the grounds of such appeal. The administrative
officer shall immediately transmit to the Board of Adjustment all
the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed
from was taken.
§ 420-7 WEST MILFORD CODE § 420-7
399:572
§ 420-8. Planning Board.139
(2) The applicant may file an application for development with the
Board of Adjustment for action under any of its powers without
prior application to the administrative officer.
(3) The Board of Adjustment shall render a decision not later than 120
days after the date that an appeal is taken from the decision of the
administrative officer, or a complete application for development is
submitted to the Board by an applicant. Failure of the Board to
render a decision within such one-hundred-twenty-day period or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant
shall constitute a decision favorable to the applicant.
(4) Whenever review or approval of the application by the Passaic
County Planning Board is required in the case of a subdivision or
site plan, the Board of Adjustment shall condition any approval
upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the
Passaic County Planning Board or approval by the Passaic County
Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the required
time.
A. Establishment; composition. A Planning Board is hereby established
consisting of nine members of the following four classes:
(1) Class I: The Mayor.
(2) Class II: One of the officials of the Township other than a member of
the Township Council, appointed by the Mayor; provided that, if
there is an Environmental Commission, the member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning
Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be deemed to be the
Class II Planning Board member if there is both a member of the
Board of Adjustment or Historic Preservation Commission and a
member of the Board of Education among the Class IV members or
alternate members of the Planning Board.
(3) Class III: A member of the Township Council to be appointed by the
Township Council.
(4) Class IV: Six citizens of the Township plus two other citizens to act
as alternate members, to be appointed by the Township Council.
The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office,
except that one member may be a member of the Board of
Adjustment or Historic Preservation Commission and one may be a
member of the Board of Education. A member of the Environmental
Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board as
required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be a Class IV Planning Board
member unless there be among the Class IV members of the
139. Editor's Note: For current statutory provisions related to planning boards, see N.J.S.A.
40:55D-23 et seq.
§ 420-7 WELL CAPPING § 420-8
399:573
Planning Board both member of the Board of Adjustment or
Historic Preservation Commission and a member of the Board
of Education, in which case the member of the Environmental
Commission shall be deemed to be the Class II member of the
Planning Board.
B. Terms.
(1) The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with
his official tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II
and Class III shall be for one year or shall terminate at the
completion of their respective terms in office, whichever comes
first, except for a Class II member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission. The term of a Class II or Class IV
member who is also a member of the Environmental Commission
shall be for three years or terminate at the completion of his term
of office as a member of the Environmental Commission, whichever
comes first.
(2) The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board
of Adjustment, Historic Preservation Commission, or the Board of
Education shall terminate whenever he is no longer a member of
such other body or at the completion of his Class IV term,
whichever comes first.
(3) The terms of all Class IV members shall be four years except as
otherwise provided herein. All terms shall run from July 1 of the
year in which the appointment was made.
(4) Alternate members shall be appointed by the Township Council and
shall meet the qualifications of Class IV members. Alternate
members shall be designated, at the time of appointment, by the
Mayor as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms of the
alternate members shall be such that the term of not more than one
alternate member shall expire in any one year, provided, however,
that in no instance shall the terms of the alternate members first
appointed exceed two years. A vacancy occurring otherwise than
by expiration of a term shall be filled by the Township Council for
the unexpired term only.
(5) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings, but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member of any class. The vote shall not
be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to
which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
C. Vacancy. If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by
expiration of term, it shall be filled by appointment as above provided
for the unexpired term.
D. Organization.
§ 420-8 WEST MILFORD CODE § 420-8
399:574
(1) The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from
the members of Class IV and select a Secretary who may be either a
member of the Planning Board or a Township employee designated
by it.
(2) The Township Administrator shall appoint a person to perform
secretarial or clerical functions for the Planning Board. [Amended
9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
E. Powers and jurisdictions of the Planning Board.
(1) The Planning Board shall have the powers listed below in addition
to other powers established by law:
(a) Make, adopt and from time to time amend the Township
Master Plan for the physical development of the Township,
including any areas outside its boundaries which, in the
Planning Board's judgment, bear essential relation to the
planning of the Township.
(b) Subdivision control and site plan review and approval pursuant
to this Land Development Ordinance.
(c) Review and comment on the Official Map of the Township prior
to its adoption by the Township Council, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-25a.
(d) Participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulation.
(e) Assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous
planning process.
(f) Annually prepare a program of municipal capital
improvements projects projected over a term of six years and
amendments thereto and recommend same to the Township
Council.
(g) Consider and report to the Township Council within 35 days
after referral regarding any proposed development regulation
submitted to it and also pass upon other matters specifically
referred to the Planning Board by the Township Council.
(2) The Planning Board shall have such other powers as prescribed by
law, including, but not limited to, the power to grant the following
variances, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions
as the Board of Adjustment, when the Planning Board is reviewing
applications for approval of subdivision plans, site plans or
conditional uses:
(a) Grant variances pursuant to § 420-6F(1)(c) of this chapter.
§ 420-8 WELL CAPPING § 420-8
399:575
§ 420-9. Provisions applicable to both the Planning Board and
Board of Adjustment.
(b) Direction pursuant to § 420-6G(1)(a) for issuance of a permit
for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or
public drainageway, flood control basin or public area.
(c) Direction pursuant to § 420-6G(1)(b) for issuance of a permit
for a building or structure on a lot not abutting a street.
F. Operating funds. The Township Council shall make provisions in its
budget and appropriate funds for the expenses of the Planning Board.
G. Attorney for the Planning Board. The office of the Planning Board
Attorney is hereby created. The Planning Board may annually appoint
to such office an Attorney at law of New Jersey other than the Township
Attorney and any additional staff as needed. The Planning Board shall
fix compensation or rate of compensation of an Attorney so appointed.
A. Conflicts of interest. No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment shall act on any matter in which he has either directly or
indirectly any personal or financial interest. Whenever any such
member shall disqualify himself from acting on a particular matter, he
shall not continue to sit with the Board on the hearing of such matter
nor participate in any discussion or decision relating thereto.
B. Meetings.
(1) Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be scheduled no less often than once a month, and
any meeting so scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless
canceled for lack of applications for development to process.
(2) Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or
on the request of any two Board members, which shall be held on
notice to its members and the public in accordance with all
applicable legal requirements.
(3) No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present. A quorum shall be the majority of the full authorized
membership of the Board.
(4) All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of the members of the
municipal agency present at the meeting except as otherwise
required by a provision of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(5) All meetings shall be open to the public. Notice of all such meetings
shall be given in accordance with the requirements of the Open
Public Meeting Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
C. Records.
§ 420-8 WEST MILFORD CODE § 420-9
399:576
(1) Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall
include the names of the persons appearing and addressing the
Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment, and of the persons
appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment, the findings, if any, made by it and reasons
therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made available for public
inspection during the normal business hours at the office of the
administrative officer. Any interested party shall have the right to
compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal
proceedings concerning the subject matter of such minutes.
(2) A verbatim recording shall be made of every hearing. The
recording of the proceedings shall be made by either stenographer,
mechanical, or electronic means. The Township shall furnish a
transcript or duplicate recording in lieu thereof on request to any
interested party at his expense. The municipal agency, in furnishing
a transcript of the proceedings to an interested party at his
expense, shall not charge such interested party more than the
maximum permitted in N.J.S.A. 2B:7-4. Said transcript shall be
certified in writing by the transcriber to be accurate.140
D. Public hearings.
(1) The Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, as the case may be,
shall hold a hearing on each application for development. Each
Board shall make the rules governing such hearings.
(2) Any maps and documents for which approval is sought at a hearing
shall be on file and available for public inspection at least 10 days
before the date of the hearing during normal business hours in the
office of the administrative officer. The applicant may produce
other documents, records, amended maps, or testimony at the
hearing to substantiate or clarify or supplement the previously filed
maps and documents.
(3) All corporations filing an application before the Planning Board
shall, at the public hearing, be represented by an attorney licensed
to practice law in New Jersey, or have all the principals and officers
of the corporation present at the meeting. All corporations
appearing before the Board of Adjustment shall be represented by
an attorney licensed to practice law in New Jersey, or officers and
partners of the corporation or partnership shall produce
documentation of authorization for them to act for said corporation
or partnership.
(4) The officer presiding at the hearing, or such person as he may
designate, shall have the power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant evidence, including witnesses and
140. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 420-9 WELL CAPPING § 420-9
399:577
documents presented by the parties, and the provisions of the
County and Municipal Investigations Law, N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.,
shall apply.
(5) The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the
presiding officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be
permitted to all interested parties through their attorneys, if
represented, or directly, if not represented, subject to the
discretion of the presiding officer and to reasonable limitations as
to time and number of witnesses.
(6) Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing,
but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly
repetitious evidence.
E. Public notice of a hearing. Public notice of a hearing shall be given for
the following applications for development:
(1) Any request for a variance.
(2) Any request for conditional use approval.
(3) Any request for the issuance of a permit to build within the bed of a
mapped street or public drainageway or on a lot not abutting a
street. [See § 420-6G(1)(a) and (b).]
(4) Any request for minor subdivision approval involving one or more
of the aforesaid elements.
(5) Any request for preliminary subdivision or site plan.
(6) Any request for an appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a where it is alleged by the appellant
that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal
made by an administrative officer based on or made in the
enforcement of Chapter 500, Zoning. [Added 2-3-1999 by Ord.
No. 1999-7]
(7) Any request for an interpretation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b
of the Zoning Map or for decisions upon other special questions
upon which the Zoning Board of Adjustment is authorized to pass
by any zoning or official map ordinance. [Added by 2-3-1999 Ord.
No. 1999-7]
(8) Any request to the Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-68 for the certification that a use or structure existed
before the adoption of the Land Development Ordinance which
rendered the use or structure nonconforming. [Added 2-3-1999
by Ord. No. 1999-7]
(9) Any request for minor site plan approval. [Added 5-21-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-22]
§ 420-9 WEST MILFORD CODE § 420-9
399:578
F. Notice requirements.141
(1) The Secretary of the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, as the
case may be, shall notify the applicant at least two weeks prior to
the public hearing at which the application will be discussed.
Notice of a hearing requiring public notice shall be given by the
applicant at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing in the
following manner:
(a) By publication in the official newspaper of the Township, if
there be one, or in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township. A copy of the notice, as printed in the newspaper,
shall be submitted to the administrative officer.
(b) To all owners of real property as shown on the current tax
duplicate located in the state and within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of the hearing;
provided that this requirement shall be deemed satisfied by
notice to the condominium association, in the case of any unit
owner whose unit has a unit above and below it, or horizontal
property regime, in the case of any co-owner whose apartment
has an apartment above or below it. Notice shall be given by
serving a copy thereof on the property owner, as shown on the
current tax duplicate, or his agent in charge of the property, or
by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property
owner at his address as shown on the said current tax
duplicate. It is not required that a return receipt be obtained.
Notice is deemed complete upon mailing (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14).
(c) Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon
any partner; notice to a corporate owner may be made by
service upon its president, a vice president, secretary or other
person authorized by appointment or by law to accept service
on behalf of the corporation. Notice to a condominium
association, horizontal property regime, community trust or
homeowners' association, because of its ownership of common
elements or areas located within 200 feet of the property which
is the subject of the hearing, may be made in the same manner
as to a corporation without further notice to unit owners, coowners,
or homeowners on account of such common elements
or areas.
(d) To the Municipal Clerk of any adjoining municipality or
municipalities when the property involved is located within
200 feet of the adjoining municipality or municipalities; such
notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail.
(e) To the Passaic County Planning Board when the application for
development involves property adjacent to an existing county
141. Editor's Note: For current statutory provisions related to notice of applications, see
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
§ 420-9 WELL CAPPING § 420-9
399:579
§ 420-10. Decisions.
road or proposed road shown on the Passaic County Official
Map or the Passaic County Master Plan or adjoins county land.
(f) To the Commissioner of Transportation of the State of New
Jersey when the property abuts a state highway.
(g) To the State Planning Commission when the hearing involves
an application for development of property which exceeds 150
acres or 500 dwelling units, in which case the notice shall
include a copy of any maps or documents required to be on file
with the Township Clerk.142
(2) The applicant shall file an affidavit or proof of service with the
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, as the case may be.
(3) The notice shall state the date, time, and place of the hearing and
the nature of the matters to be considered, and an identification of
the property proposed for development by street address, if any, or
by reference to the block and lot numbers as shown on the current
tax duplicate in the Tax Assessor's office, and the location and
times at which any maps or documents for which approval is sought
are available for inspection.
G. List of property owners. Upon the written request of an applicant, the
Tax Assessor shall, within seven days, make and certify a list from said
current tax duplicates of names and addresses of owners within the
Township to whom the applicant is required to give notice. The
applicant shall be charged a sum not to exceed the amount set forth in
Chapter 414, Fees, Land Development, for said list and shall be entitled
to rely upon the information contained in such list, and failure to give
notices to any owner not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing or
proceeding. Additionally, the applicant shall be responsible for giving
proper notice to all property owners pursuant to Subsection F(1)(b) of
this section who do not reside in the Township. Such list for advertising
purposes shall not be issued by the Tax Assessor until the application
for which advertising is necessary has been declared complete, as
defined herein in § 420-6, by the administrative officer.143
A. Each decision on any application for development shall be reduced to
writing as provided in the following subsections and shall include
findings of facts and conclusions based thereon:
(1) Failure of a motion to approve an application for development to
receive the number of votes required for approval shall be deemed
an action denying the application.
142. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
143. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Editor's Note: Former Section 16-10, Appeals of use variance approvals, which previously
followed this section, was repealed 4-17-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-10.
§ 420-9 WEST MILFORD CODE § 420-10
399:580
(2) The municipal agency may provide such written decision and
findings and conclusions either on the date of the meeting at which
the municipal agency takes action to grant or deny approval, or, if
the meeting at which such action is taken occurs within the final 45
days of the applicable time period for rendering a decision on the
application for development, within 45 days of such meeting by the
adoption of a resolution of memorialization setting forth the
decision and the findings and conclusions of the municipal agency
thereon. An action resulting from the failure of a motion to approve
an application shall be memorialized by resolution as provided
above, notwithstanding the time at which such action occurs within
the applicable time period for rendering a decision on the
application.
(3) The adoption of a resolution of memorialization pursuant to this
subsection shall not be construed to alter the applicable time
period for rendering a decision on the application for development.
Such resolution shall be adopted by a vote of the majority of the
members of the municipal agency who voted for the action
previously taken and no other member shall vote thereon. The vote
on such resolution shall be deemed to be a memorialization of such
an action of the municipal agency and not to be an action of the
municipal agency; except that failure to adopt such a resolution
within the forty-five-day period shall result in the approval of the
application for development, notwithstanding any prior action
taken thereon.
(4) Whenever a resolution of memorialization is adopted in accordance
with this subsection, the date of such adoption shall constitute the
date of the decision for purposes on the mailings, filings and
publications.
B. Notice of decisions. Any decision of the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment when acting upon an application for development and any
decisions of the Township Council when acting upon an appeal shall be
given notice in the following manner:
(1) A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant or appellant
or, if represented, then to his attorney without charge, and for a
reasonable charge to any interested party who has requested it, not
later than 10 days after the date of the decision.
(2) A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the Township if there be one or in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township. Such publication shall be
arranged by and paid for by the applicant and shall be published
within four weeks from the date of the decision.
(3) A copy of the decision and all submitted documents of record shall
be filed with the Township Clerk.
§ 420-10 WELL CAPPING § 420-10
399:581
Chapter 460
SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 158.
§ 460-1. Purpose and findings.
The Township Council finds that the unregulated and uncontrolled
excavation, removal, placement and movement of soil and other mineral
deposits can result in conditions detrimental to the public safety, health and
general welfare. Such conditions substantially hamper and deter the efforts
of the Township to effectuate the general purposes of municipal planning.
Soil removal, movement operations, and filling operations should relate to
the overall physical development of the area within which the operation
is located. It is essential that all soil removal, movement operations and
filling operations be reviewed and approved by the Township Planning
Board. All soil removal, movement operations, and filling operations must
be conceived and operated in such a way that there will be no appreciable
harmful effects to the environment. In order to best ensure that all soil
removal, movement operations, and filling operations are an asset to the
Township of West Milford, rather than a liability, all such operations shall
adhere to the conditions, restrictions and provisions outlined in this chapter.
§ 460-2. Permit required.
No person shall excavate, scrape, dig, quarry, fill or otherwise disturb the
soil on any premises in the Township of West Milford for use on the premises
from which it shall be taken or placed; nor shall any person remove or cause
the removal of any soil from any premises in the Township of West Milford
for use on other premises or fill or cause the placement of any soil on any
premises in the Township of West Milford whether such removal or fill be
for sale, gift or otherwise, unless a permit therefor is first secured from
the Township Planning Board as hereinafter provided. A permit shall not be
required for the removal, fill or moving of less than 50 cubic yards of soil.
§ 460-3. Exceptions and exemptions.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to excavations for building
foundations, septic tanks or sanitary installations, provided that no
excavation or construction of any kind shall take place until a site plan
or permit has been approved by the Construction Official and/or
Department of Health as required by law.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect or apply to any
person engaged in the moving of soil in and upon lands enrolled in the
Soil Conservation Program of the Hudson, Essex and Passaic Soil
§ 420-10 WEST MILFORD CODE § 460-3
460:582
§ 460-4. Application for permit.
Conservation District of the United States, Department of Agriculture
Soil Conservation Service and for which lands an approved farm plan
has been established by said agency, provided that all soil moving
and removal operations and fill operations in and upon such lands are
performed in accordance with said approved farm plan and provided
further that a copy of said approved farm plan is placed on file with the
Township Engineer prior to any soil moving, removal operations or fill
operations.
C. A separate soil permit under this chapter shall not be required for
subdivisions and/or site plans approved pursuant to Chapter 470,
Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Review, of the Land Development
Ordinance:
(1) By the Planning Board;
(2) By the Board of Adjustment;
(3) By the Township Engineer; or
(4) Administrative review and approval.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect or apply to any
person engaged in a state-mandated cleanup plan; provided that all soil
moving, removal operations and fill operations are performed in
accordance with said cleanup plan and provided further that notice of
the state-mandated cleanup plan is placed on file with the Township
Engineer prior to any soil moving, removal operations or fill operations.
A. Application for a minor soil removal or soil fill permit shall be filed with
the Township Engineer, who shall issue the permit based upon
substantial compliance with the provisions of §§ 460-9 and 460-11 of
this chapter; provided, however, that the Township Engineer shall have
the authority to deny a permit if he determines that the removal or fill
would be detrimental to the health, welfare or safety of the general
public. The denial shall be in writing setting forth reasons for same.
B. Application for a major soil removal or soil fill permit shall be filed with
the Township Planning Board and shall be accompanied by a fee
prescribed in § 460-7. Five copies of the application shall be submitted
on forms prescribed by the Township Planning Board and supplied by
the Secretary to the Board. The application shall set forth the following:
(1) Name and address of the applicant.
(2) Name and address of the owner, if other than the applicant.
(3) The description and location of the land in question, including the
tax map block and lot numbers.
(4) The purpose or reason for moving, filling, or removal of the soil.
§ 460-3 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 460-4
460:583
§ 460-5. Referral.
Upon receipt of an application for a major soil removal or soil fill permit,
the Planning Board Secretary shall forthwith send a copy of same to the
Planning Director, Construction Official, Township Engineer, Township
Health Officer and Environmental Commission who shall review the
application, and they shall submit their reports and recommendations, and
their reasons, to the Township Planning Board within 30 days of receipt of
the application. Failure to file such a report within the required time period
shall be deemed an approval of the application by such department, officials
and commissions.
§ 460-6. Action by Planning Board; notice of hearing on major soil
removal or fill applications.
(5) The nature and quantity, in cubic yards, of soil to be removed or
filled.
(6) The place to which the soil is to be removed or placed.
(7) The proposed date of completion of the soil removal or fill.
(8) The name and address of the person having direct charge or
supervision over the soil removal, filling operation movement
operation.
(9) Supporting documentation as required to adequately address and
comply with the purpose and the provisions of this chapter.
(10) An approved soil conservation permit.
(11) Environmental and community impact statement in conformance
with § 470-15, Environmental and community impact statement, of
the Land Development Ordinance.
A. The Township Planning Board shall grant or deny the application within
45 days after receipt of the reports and recommendations of the
Planning Director, Construction Official, Township Engineer, Township
Health Officer, and Environmental Commission. On an application for a
major soil removal or soil fill permit, the Planning Board shall schedule
a public hearing and shall notify the applicant of the date of such
hearing. The applicant shall notify in writing all property owners within
200 feet of the extreme limits of the property, as their names appear on
the Township tax records, at least 10 days prior to the date of the
hearing in the application. The notice shall be given in person or by
registered mail and shall state the reason for the hearing; the time and
place of the hearing as fixed by the Township Planning Board; a brief
description of the property; and that a copy of the application and map
has been filed with the Township Clerk for public inspection. The
applicant shall also cause notice of the hearing to be published in the
official newspaper of the Township, at least 10 days prior to the date of
the hearing.
§ 460-4 WEST MILFORD CODE § 460-6
460:584
§ 460-7. Permit fees; inspections.
§ 460-8. Supporting documentation for major soil removal or fill
permits.
B. At the hearing, the applicant shall present to the Township Planning
Board the following:
(1) Certification, in the form of an affidavit, signed and sworn by the
applicant, affirming that he has notified all property owners, as
required in Subsection A of this section.
(2) Proof of publication of the newspaper notice required in Subsection
A of this section.
A. The fees for a minor or major soil removal or soil fill permit are set forth
in Chapter 414, Fees, Land Development.144
B. Inspections. On an annual basis, the Township Engineer may require
the submission of a topographic map and quantity estimates prepared
by a professional engineer or land surveyor, or any other method
approved by the Township Engineer, on behalf of the application and at
the applicant's expense, in order to determine the quantity of soil
removed, filled or moved. Should the original quantity estimates be
exceeded at any time, the fee shall be increased accordingly and the
matter will be reviewed by the Township Planning Board.
A. In addition to the application forms submitted to the Township Planning
Board, the applicant shall submit reports and maps as required which
will address the following points:
(1) Procedures and measures that will be taken by the applicant to
ensure that noise and dust problems will be held to a minimum.
(2) Procedures and measures that will be taken by the applicant to
assure lateral support of remaining soil and the prevention of
erosion, floods and siltation of watercourses during the active life
of the operation and after the soil removal operation ceases.
(3) Procedures and measures that will be taken by the applicant that
will protect adjoining and downstream properties from the affects
of the soil removal or fill operation.
(4) The routes over which the material will be transported, the method
of traffic control and the ability of the road network to handle the
amount and type of traffic generated by the soil removal or fill
operation.
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 460-6 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 460-8
460:585
§ 460-9. Standards governing the issuance of permits.
In considering and reviewing applications for soil removal or fill permits,
the Township Planning Board and Township Engineer shall be guided by the
general purpose of municipal planning and shall take into consideration the
following factors:
(5) Procedures and measures that will be taken by the applicant to
ensure that the land in question can be used as intended by the
Land Development Ordinance of the Township.
(6) The type, capacity and description of each piece of equipment to be
used during the soil removal, fill, and movement operation.
B. The application for a major soil removal or soil fill permit shall be
accompanied by a topographical map of the lands on question. Said
map shall be prepared and certified by a professional engineer or land
surveyor. Same shall be prepared at a scale of not more than 100 feet to
the inch and shall show the following:
(1) The present grades on a one-hundred-foot grid layout, using tenfoot
contour intervals.
(2) The proposed finished grades using ten-foot contour intervals.
(3) The quantity, in cubic yards, of soil to be moved.
(4) The grades of all streets and lots within 100 feet of the property in
question.
(5) Proposed sloped and lateral supports.
(6) Present and proposed surface water drainage.
(7) A plan for the restoration of the site when soil removal or fill
operations cease.
A. Soil erosion by water and wind.
B. Surface water drainage (no sharp declivities to be formed) and water
pollution.
C. Soil fertility.
D. Public health and safety.
E. Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and land.
F. Land values and uses.
G. Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious physical development of the Township.
§ 460-8 WEST MILFORD CODE § 460-10
460:586
§ 460-10. Bond requirements.
Prior to the issuance of a major soil removal or soil fill permit, the applicant
shall have posted with the Township a performance bond conditioned upon
full compliance with all the terms and conditions of approval, including
the provisions of this chapter. The amount of such bond shall be fixed by
the Township Planning Board and shall be submitted in the form required
by Chapter 470, Article IX, Off-Tract Improvements, Guarantees and
Inspections, of the Land Development Ordinance. The performance bond
shall not be canceled or released until all conditions set forth in the permit
have been met. The bond is to assure compliance with this chapter,
restoration work, minor road repair and street cleanup. Neither the bond
nor permit shall be transferable to another party without the prior approval
of the Township Planning Board.
§ 460-11. Soil removal, fill and movement restrictions.
A. The soil removal, fill operations, and movement operations shall be so
conducted that there shall be no sharp declivities pits or depressions
and in such a manner that the area shall be properly leveled off, cleared
of debris and graded to conform to the finished contour lines and
grades as approved by the Township Planning Board.
B. The developer or excavator shall not remove or move from the premises
or take away the top layer of arable soil for a depth of four inches, but
such top layer of soil shall be set aside on the premises and shall be
respread over the premises when the rest of the soil has been removed
in conformity with the contour lines approved by the Township Planning
Board.
C. The grading of slopes shall not exceed 45 degrees. Benching, as may be
required by the Township Engineer, shall be provided for by the
applicant. Grading of slopes in quarry operations shall be as
determined by the Township Engineer.
D. Hours of operation shall be restricted completely on Sundays. On
weekdays, work shall commence no sooner than 7:00 a.m. and shall end
no later than 7:00 p.m. except that on Saturday, work shall commence
no sooner than 8:00 a.m. and shall end not later than 7:00 p.m.
E. A one-hundred-foot buffer shall be retained from each property line
wherein the soil operation is adjacent to developed residential uses. A
fifty-foot buffer shall be retained from each property line in all other
areas. When compliance with buffer requirements is impracticable
because of the physical configuration of the property of preexisting
uses, the distance requirements may be waived upon the
recommendation of the Township Engineer if:
(1) Natural screening is to be preserved by the applicant.
(2) Additional screening of fencing as may be required by the Township
Engineer shall be provided by the applicant.
§ 460-10 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 460-11
460:587
§ 460-12. Enforcing officer; duty to make inspections. [Amended
9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
The Township Engineer is hereby designated as the officer whose duty
it shall be to enforce the provisions of this chapter. He shall, from time
to time, upon his own initiative, and whenever directed by the Township
Administrator, inspect the premises for which permits have been granted
to ensure compliance with the terms of the permit and of this chapter. The
F. Dust is to be controlled by water or calcium chloride or as may be
directed by the Township Engineer.
G. Noise shall be controlled as per Chapter 226, Noise, of the Township
Code.
H. Sedimentation ponds shall be installed and maintained as may be
required by the Township Engineer.
I. Restoration will include replacing topsoil, seeding, fertilizing, mulch
and crown vetch on slopes as may be directed by the Township
Engineer.
(1) The applicant shall file an as-built plan and restoration plan with
the Township Engineer upon completion of soil removal, fill, and
movement operations.
(2) The pit shall be left in a condition without holes and completely
stabilized.
J. Soil removal, fill operations and movement operations shall be allowed
only in zoning districts where such an operation is a permitted use or on
a site that has been the subject of a use variance approval.
K. All new site plans and all new soil removal, fill operations or movement
operations must show and install soil erosion controls, including:
(1) Stone blanket for wheel cleaning to be 30 feet in length and consist
of 2 1/2 inches stone and be 12 inches in depth.
(2) Stockpile and land disturbance controls shall be installed and
shown on all new site plans and consist of fabric fence or hay bales
staked in place.
(3) For new site plans, soil erosion controls shall be in place prior to
commencement of any soil removal, fill, or movement operations.
(4) With respect to open bed inspections, stone beds must be in place
prior to any excavation of the site.
(5) All disturbed lands must be stabilized prior to a certificate of
occupancy for new site plans or 30 days, whichever occurs first,
unless an extension is approved in writing by the Township
Engineer.
§ 460-11 WEST MILFORD CODE § 460-12
460:588
Engineer shall have the right to enter upon any lands for the purpose of
examination and inspection of the operation without advance notice.
§ 460-13. Use of streets for soil transportation.
In the removal of soil or fill operation, only such streets of the Township
shall be used for transportation as may be designated for that purpose by
the Township Planning Board upon the recommendation of the Township
Engineer. The applicant shall cause such streets to be kept free from dirt
and debris resulting from such soil removal or fill operation.
§ 460-14. Conformance with Land Development Ordinance;
conflicts.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to modify or repeal any of
the provisions of the Land Development Ordinance of the Township of
West Milford. In the event of any inconsistency between the provisions
of this chapter and the provisions of Chapter 500, Zoning, of the Land
Development Ordinance, such inconsistency shall be resolved in favor of the
enforcement of Chapter 500, Zoning.
§ 460-15. Violations and penalties.
§ 460-16. Other permits.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to affect the owner's
application for a soil conservation service permit or a water policy permit
(if necessary) or to affect any other state or federal regulations or permits
as required.
§ 460-17. Preexisting soil removal and movement operations.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100, and not
exceeding the maximum penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article III,
General Penalty, as may be amended from time to time, in the discretion
of the Judge before whom such conviction shall be had. Each and every
violation and nonconformance of this chapter, or each day that any
provision of this chapter shall have been violated, shall be construed as
a separate and distinct violation thereof.145
B. In addition to the penalty set forth herein, the Township may institute
an action to enjoin or take any other appropriate action or proceeding
in order to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
A. Soil removal, fill and movement operations are of such public concern
that its control is deemed necessary for the protection of the
environment, public health, welfare and safety. The Township Council
deems it necessary that all existing soil removal, fill and movement
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 460-12 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 460-17
460:589
Chapter 470
SUBDIVISION OF LAND AND SITE PLAN REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 110.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 332.
Land development fees — See Ch. 414.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 420.
Zoning — See Ch. 500.
operations within the Township of West Milford must comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Requirements of § 460-8A for supporting documentation of applications
for a soil removal or fill permit should be waived by the Township
Planning Board for the review of existing soil removal, fill and
movement operations.
C. The Township Planning Board, in the interest of the protection of the
health, safety or welfare of the public, may require that existing soil
removal, fill and movement operations comply with all of the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 460-17 WEST MILFORD CODE § 460-17
460:590
ARTICLE I
Jurisdiction of Responsibility During Development Application
Review
§ 470-1. Overlapping powers.
The Planning Board and Board of Adjustment have certain overlapping
powers designed to expedite the review process. Their respective
responsibilities are as outlined.
§ 470-2. Powers of Planning Board.
§ 470-3. Board of Adjustment action in lieu of Planning Board.
The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to the same extent
and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board, site plan,
subdivision or conditional use approval when reviewing an application for
approval of a use variance as set out in § 420-7G(2) of this Land
Development Ordinance.
§ 470-4. When an application is required. [Amended 5-21-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-22]
A. The Planning Board shall have the power to grant subdivision or
conditional use approval simultaneously with site plan approval.
B. The Planning Board shall have the power to act in lieu of the Board of
Adjustment and subject to the same extent and restrictions of the Board
of Adjustment on the following matters, but only when the Planning
Board is reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plans, site
plans, or conditional uses:
(1) Grant variances as set out in § 420-7F(1)(c) of this Land
Development Ordinance.
(2) Direct the issuance of a permit for a building or structure in the bed
of a mapped street or public drainageway, flood control basin or
public area reserved as set out in § 420-7G(1)(a) of this Land
Development Ordinance.
(3) Direct, as set out in § 420-7G(1)(b) of this Land Development
Ordinance, the issuance of a permit for a building or structure not
related to a street.
C. Whenever relief is requested pursuant to Subsection B of this section,
the public notice shall include reference to the request for a variance or
direction for issuance of a permit, as the case may be.
A. Subdivision. All subdivisions, as defined under § 420-6, shall be subject
to the review procedures specified herein.
§ 470-1 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-4
460:591
B. Major site plan. No nonresidential development, expansion, alteration
or change of use shall occur, and/or a construction permit shall not be
issued until a site plan has been approved by the applicable board of the
Township.
C. Minor site plan.
(1) Any addition or alteration to an existing conforming nonresidential
structure which does not account for more than 400 square feet or
10% additional building square footage, whichever is less.
(2) Any decrease in the size of the parking lot or number of parking
spaces.
(3) Any increase in the parking lot that results in two new spaces or
500 square feet additional square feet of pavement.
D. A construction permit for a customary accessory building incidental to
farms shall not require site plan approval by the Board of Adjustment or
the Planning Board. A site plan application shall be filed together with
appropriate fees and maps with the administrative officer.
E. Exemptions. A change in use, occupancy or tenancy which involves a
permitted principal use in the applicable zone district and which does
not require additional off-street parking pursuant to Township
ordinance standards is exempt from the requirements of this section
but shall obtain a zoning permit in accordance with the requirements
set forth in Chapter 470, § 470-44. Exemptions shall not apply to any
use which is classified as a conditional use or any proposed change in
use, occupancy or tenancy within a building or structure that was
approved by the approving authority subject to a condition that
requires an amended site plan review and approval for any such
change. [Amended 5-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-007]
§ 470-4 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-4
460:592
ARTICLE II
Informal Review of Concept Plan
§ 470-5. Conceptual sketch.
A conceptual sketch of the proposed subdivision or site plan is not required.
The submission of a conceptual sketch affords the applicant the opportunity
to discuss the proposal in its formative stages and receive the nonbinding
advice of the Board.
§ 470-6. Procedure for submission.
§ 470-7. Details required for sketch plats and sketch plans.
The submitted sketch shall be based on tax map information or some other
similarly accurate base and shall be neatly and accurately drawn. Sketch
A. Filing an application. All applications for informal review (as the term is
used in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.1) shall be filed with the administrative
officer or designee.
B. Distribution. At least 10 days prior to the first scheduled monthly
meeting of the Board, the administrative officer or designee shall
distribute copies of the sketch and the application in the following
manner:
(1) Township files.
(2) Board Chairman.
(3) Township Engineer.
(4) Township Planner.
(5) Township Health Department.
(6) Construction Official.
(7) Fire Subcode Officer.
(8) Environmental Commission.
(9) Subdivision or Site Plan Committee Chairman.
(10) Board Attorney.
(11)MUA.
(12) Tax Assessor (for subdivision sketches only).
(13) Police Department.
(14) At the direction of the Board, additional copies of the sketch and
the application may be forwarded to other Township, county or
state officials.
§ 470-5 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-7
460:593
plans shall be prepared by a licensed engineer, architect, planner, land
surveyor or landscape architect.
A. Procedural requirements. All applications for concept review shall
include the following support documents and information:
(1) Sketch plat application form.
(2) Payment of required application and escrow fees as per Article VII,
Fees, of this chapter.
(3) Completed escrow agreement form.
(4) Completed sketch plat and sketch plan checklist.
(5) Thirteen sketch plans, folded and collated.
(6) Completed checklist waiver request form.
(7) Proof of submission to County Planning Board.
B. Map requirements. All applications for concept review shall include
maps and/or exhibits depicting the following information:
(1) A key map showing the entire tract and its relation to the
surrounding areas, at a scale of one inch equals not less than 1,200
feet. The key map shall include a North arrow.
(2) Title block.
(a) Name of subdivision or development, Township of West Milford
and County of Passaic.
(b) Name and address of subdivider or developer.
(c) Name and address of the owner or owners of record.
(3) Scale, both written and graphic, and North arrow.
(4) Date of original preparation and of each subsequent revision
thereof.
(5) Existing block and lot numbers of the lots to be subdivided or
developed as they appear on the Township tax map.
(6) The location of existing and proposed property lines, streets,
buildings, with an indication as to whether existing buildings will
be retained or removed, parking spaces, loading areas, driveways,
watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts and drainpipes.
(7) The approximate location and approximate width of all existing and
proposed utility easements.
(8) Zoning district boundaries affecting the tract.
(9) Proposed buffer and landscaped areas.
§ 470-7 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-7
460:594
§ 470-8. Action by Township.
The Board shall place on the agenda and grant review of concept
applications within 45 days after submission of a complete application. If
the application is determined to be deficient by the Board or designee,
a revised concept may be required to be submitted to the administrative
officer or designee as in the first instance.
(10) All natural features in accordance with § 500-71, Natural features,
of this Land Development Ordinance.
(11) Topography at ten-foot intervals.
(12) List of proposed variances, if any.
(13) List of proposed design waiver requests for preliminary approval, if
any.
(14) Plans drawn by the appropriate professional per N.J.A.C. 13:40-7 et
seq.
§ 470-7 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-8
460:595

ARTICLE III
Minor Subdivisions
§ 470-9. Procedure for submission.
§ 470-10. Details required for minor subdivisions.
No plat shall be classified as a minor subdivision unless drawn by the
appropriate professional per N.J.A.C. 13:40-7 et seq. No plat involving any
corner lot shall be classified as a minor subdivision unless a sight triangle
easement is granted as specified in this Land Development Ordinance. If
possible, the entire tract shall be shown on one sheet, and such plat shall
show or include the following information:
A. Filing an application. All applications for minor subdivision shall be
filed with the administrative officer or designee.
B. Distribution. At least 10 days prior to the regularly scheduled monthly
meeting of the board for which an application is scheduled, the
administrative officer or designee shall distribute copies of the minor
subdivision plat and the application in the following manner:
(1) Township files.
(2) Board Chairman.
(3) Township Engineer.
(4) Township Planner.
(5) Township Health Department.
(6) Construction Official.
(7) Fire Subcode Officer.
(8) Environmental Commission.
(9) Subdivision Committee Chairman.
(10) Board Attorney.
(11)MUA.
(12) Tax Assessor.
(13) Police Department.
(14) At the direction of the Board, additional copies of the maps and
application may be forwarded to other Township, county or state
officials.
A. Procedural requirements. All applications for minor subdivisions shall
include the following support documents and information:
§ 470-9 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-10
460:597
(1) Thirteen map copies folded and collated.
(2) Health Department approval.
(3) Escrow agreement form.
(4) Minor subdivision application form.
(5) Application and escrow fees as specified in Article VII, Fees, of this
chapter.
(6) Affidavit of ownership, if applicant is not owner of the property in
question.
(7) Completed minor subdivision checklist.
(8) An environmental and community impact statement as may be
required in accordance with § 470-15, Environmental and
community impact statement, herein.
(9) Completed checklist waiver request form.
(10) Proof of submission to the County Planning Board.
B. Map requirements. All applications for minor subdivisions shall include
maps and/or exhibits depicting the following information:
(1) Indicate "Township of West Milford" and "County of Passaic" in the
title block.
(2) Name and address of subdivider or developer.
(3) Name and address of owner or owners of record.
(4) Scale, both written and graphic.
(5) North arrow.
(6) Key map at a scale of one inch equals 1,200 feet with North arrow.
(7) Names and addresses of all property owners within 200 feet of
subject property.
(8) Date of original preparation and revisions, if any.
(9) Existing block and lot numbers and proposed block and lot
numbers as provided by the Township Tax Assessor.
(10) Location of existing streets and rights-of way surrounding the
property with edge of pavements depicted.
(11) Location of existing structures within 200 feet of subject property.
(12) Location of existing and proposed structures and their setbacks
from existing and proposed property lines.
§ 470-10 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-10
460:598
(13) Indications of whether existing buildings are to remain or be
removed.
(14) Zoning district boundaries affecting the tract.
(15) Zone analysis for all lots, existing and proposed. (A chart showing
correct bulk requirements, per ordinance, for the zone and
proposed bulk dimensions for the subject property.)
(16) Location of existing wells and septic systems.
(17) Location of proposed wells and septic disposal fields.
(18) Driveways, existing and proposed.
(19) All natural features in accordance with § 500-71, Natural features,
of this Land Development Ordinance.
(20) Location of existing and proposed property lines:
(a) Shown in degree, minutes and seconds.
(b) With dimensions in feet to the nearest two decimal places.
(21) Locations of bridges and culverts, existing and proposed, on the
site and within 200 feet of the site.
(22) Location and width of existing and proposed utility easements on
the tract and within 200 feet of the site.
(23) Contours to determine the natural drainage of the land. Intervals
shall be:
(a) Up to 10% grade: two feet.
(b) Over 10% grade: five feet.
(24) Proposed grading plan.
(25) Limit of areas to be disturbed by grading or construction.
(26) Plans and calculations for any storm drainage system.
(27) Perc test location(s) and results.
(28) Location and description of monuments, whether set or to be set.
(29) Proposed sight easements where required.
(30) Proposed drainage easements where required.
(31) Locations of existing easements or rights-of way.
(32) Proposed street and driveway profiles where the natural slope
exceeds 10%.
(33) List of design waivers, if any.
§ 470-10 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-11
460:599
§ 470-11. Action by Township.146
A. An application for development shall be complete for purposes of
commencing the applicable time period for action by a municipal
agency when so certified by the municipal agency or its authorized
committee or designee. In the event that the agency, committee or
designee does not certify the application to be complete within 45 days
of the date of its submission, the application shall be deemed complete
upon the expiration of the forty-five-day period for purposes of
commencing the applicable time period unless:
(1) The application lacks information indicated on a checklist adopted
by ordinance and provided to the applicant; and
(2) The municipal agency or its authorized committee or designee has
notified the applicant, in writing, of the deficiencies in the
application within 45 days of submission of the application. The
applicant may request that one or more of the submission
requirements be waived, in which event the agency or its
authorized committee shall grant or deny the request within 45
days. Nothing herein shall be construed as diminishing the
applicant's obligation to prove in the application process that he is
entitled to approval of the application. The municipal agency may
subsequently require correction of any information found to be in
error and submission of additional information not specified in this
chapter or any revisions in the accompanying document, as are
reasonably necessary to make an informed decision as to whether
the requirements necessary for approval of the application for
development have been met. The application shall not be deemed
incomplete for lack of any such additional information or any
revisions in the accompanying documents so required by the
municipal agency.147
B. Any proposed subdivision or development determined by the Board to
be creating, imposing, aggravating, or leading to the possibility of an
adverse effect upon either the subject property or upon any adjacent
properties may be required to be revised to remove such adverse effect
prior to further review, classification, or approval by the Board or,
where the remaining portion of the original tract is of sufficient size to
be subdivided or developed further, the applicant may be required to
submit a sketch of the entire remaining portion of the tract to indicate a
feasible plan whereby the proposed subdivision or development,
together with subsequent subdivisions or developments, may be
submitted that will not create, impose, or aggravate, or lead to any such
adverse effect.
146. Editor's Note: For current statutory provisions related to minor subdivision approval, see
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47.
147. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 470-11 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-11
460:600
C. The Board shall act on the proposed plat within 45 days of submission of
a complete application to the administrative officer or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the
Board to act within the prescribed time period shall constitute minor
subdivision approval. If approved, all prints of the plat shall be signed
by the Chairman and Secretary of the Board, or the Acting Chairman or
Secretary where either or both may be absent, and returned to the
subdivider within one week thereof. No further approval of the
subdivision shall be required. In the event the same is disapproved by
the Board, the Secretary of the Board shall, within three days of such
action, notify the subdivider of such disapproval and reasons therefor.
In acting on the application, the Township shall consider a report
received, in writing, from the Passaic County Planning Board within 30
days after their receipt of the plat. If a reply is not received from the
Passaic County Planning Board within 30 days, the minor plat shall be
deemed to have been approved by it.
D. Within 190 days from the date of approval by the Board of a minor
subdivision, a plat map drawn in compliance with the Map Filing Act,
N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq., or deed description shall be filed by the
subdivider with the county recording officer. Unless filed within the 190
days, the approval shall expire and Board approval will be required, as
in the first instance.
§ 470-11 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-11
460:601

ARTICLE IV
Major Subdivisions and Preliminary Plats
§ 470-12. Preliminary submission required for major subdivisions.
A preliminary submission shall be required of all subdivisions classified as a
major subdivision.
§ 470-13. Procedure for submission.
§ 470-14. Preliminary subdivisions.
A. Filing of application. All applications for development, as the term is
defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, shall be filed with the administrative
officer or designee.
B. Distribution. At least 10 days prior to the first regularly scheduled
monthly meeting of the Board for which an application is scheduled, the
administrative officer or designee shall distribute copies of the
preliminary plan and application in the following manner:
(1) Township files.
(2) Planning Board or Board of Adjustment Chairperson.
(3) Township Engineer.
(4) Township Planner.
(5) Township Health Department.
(6) Construction Official.
(7) Fire Subcode Officer.
(8) Subdivision Committee Chairman.
(9) Environmental Commission.
(10) Board Attorney.
(11)MUA.
(12) Tax Assessor.
(13) Police Department.
(14) At the direction of the Board, additional copies of the preliminary
plan and the supportive material may be forwarded to other
Township, county or state officials.
A. Procedural requirements. All applications for preliminary subdivision
shall include the following support documents and information:
(1) Thirteen map copies folded and collated.
§ 470-12 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-14
460:603
(2) Health Department approval.
(3) Completed preliminary subdivision checklist.
(4) Completed preliminary subdivision application forms.
(5) Completed checklist waiver request form.
(6) An environmental and community impact statement in accordance
with § 470-15, Environmental and community impact statement, of
this chapter.
(7) Application and escrow fees as specified in Article VII, Fees, of this
chapter.
(8) Affidavit of ownership if the applicant is not the owner of the
property in question.
(9) Completed escrow agreement.
(10) Affidavit of disclosure for corporations.
(11) Proof of submission to the County Planning Board.
B. Map requirements. All applications for preliminary subdivision shall
include maps and/or exhibits depicting the following information:
(1) All preliminary plans shall be prepared by a licensed professional
as set out in N.J.A.C. 13:40-7 et seq.
(2) Key map. A key map showing the entire tract and its relation to the
surrounding areas at a scale of one inch equals 1,200 feet. The key
map shall include a North arrow.
(3) Identification information:
(a) Title block:
[1] Name of subdivision or development, municipality and
county.
[2] Name and address of subdivider or developer.
[3] Name and address of the owner or owners of record and
the names and addresses of all property owners within 200
feet of the extreme limits of the tract as shown on the most
recent tax list available in the Township Tax Assessor's
office.
[4] Name, address, signature, seal, and license number of the
professional person who prepared the drawing.
[5] Acreage of tract to nearest 1/10 of an acre.
[6] Date of preparation and subsequent revisions.
§ 470-14 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-14
460:604
[7] Zoning analysis. (A chart showing correct bulk
requirements, per ordinance, for the zone and proposed
bulk dimensions for the subject property.)
(b) Scale, both written and graphic, and North arrow.
(c) All property and structures within 200 feet of the extreme
limits of the tract.
(d) Existing block and lot numbers and the lots to be subdivided or
developed as they appear on the municipal tax map, and
proposed block and lot numbers as provided by the Township
Tax Assessor upon written request. These proposed block and
lot numbers shall only be accepted if assigned by the Tax
Assessor.
(e) Zoning district boundaries affecting the tract and tax map
sheet numbers.
(4) The proposed locations and types of street trees to be provided
shall also be indicated.
(5) Cross sections of watercourses and/or drainage swales at an
approximate scale showing the extent of floodplain, top of bank,
normal water levels and bottom elevations at any point where a
course crosses a boundary of the tract.
(6) The location and extent of drainage and conservation easements
and stream encroachment lines.
(7) The location, extent and water level elevation of all existing or
proposed lakes or ponds within and adjacent to the tract.
(8) Contours; intervals shall be:
(a) Up to 10% grade: two feet.
(b) Over 10% grade: five feet.
(9) Existing and proposed structures. Locations of all existing
structures showing existing and proposed front, rear and side yard
setback distances, and an indication of whether the existing
structures and uses will be retained or removed.
(10) Location of existing and proposed trails.
(11) Proposed street names.
(12) Traffic study for development of 50 or more lots.
(13) Traffic patterns. Conformity with state, county or West Milford
access management codes must be shown where applicable.
§ 470-14 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-14
460:605
(14) Storm drainage. The application shall include plans and
computations for any storm drainage systems, including the
following:
(a) All existing or proposed storm sewer lines within or adjacent to
the tract showing size and profile of the lines, direction of flow
and the location of each catch basin, inlet, manhole, culvert
and headwall.
(b) The location and extent of any proposed drywells, groundwater
recharge basins, detention basins or other water or soil
conservation devices.
(c) Stormwater quality for on-site and off-site effects shall be
addressed on each application.
[1] Stormwater calculations.
[2] Drywell/retention/recharge measures.
[3] Project phasing.
[4] Management report.
(d) Stormwater quantity measures.
[1] Flood and erosion controls.
[2] Stormwater calculations.
[3] Project phasing.
[4] Outlet controls.
[5] Facilities map.
(15) Cross sections and grade details. Plans, typical cross sections,
center line profiles, tentative grades and details of all proposed
streets and of the existing streets abutting the tract.
(16) Locations of monuments to be set.
(17) Limit of disturbance lines showing areas to be disturbed by grading
and construction.
(18) Location of existing wells and septic systems on the property.
(19) All natural features in accordance with § 500-71, Natural features,
of this Land Development Ordinance.
(20) Finished grade elevation where changes in contour are proposed.
(21) Soil erosion and sediment control plan.
(22) Location and results of percolation tests.
§ 470-14 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-14
460:606
(23) Curbline radii and street sign locations.
(24) Indicate location and ownership of easements on tract and within
200 feet of the tract.
(25) Property line dimensions in feet.
(26) All property lines shown in degrees, minutes and seconds.
(27) Driveway profiles where the natural slope exceeds 10%.
(28) Proper sight easements, where required.
(29) Proper drainage easements, where required.
(30) List of design waivers requested, if any.
C. Land disturbance criteria. [Added 4-6-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-11]
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to protect lands from
excessive land disturbance associated with development that are
characterized by moderate to steep slopes as follows:
(a) To protect the existing wooded characteristics of the slopes
within the Township.
(b) To preserve the general character and the vistas found within
the Township.
(c) To protect slopes from soil erosion.
(d) To protect the surface water quality from runoff and
sedimentation.
(e) To mitigate stormwater runoff and encourage groundwater
recharge.
(2) Permitted maximum lot disturbance: single-family zone.
Zone Minimum Lot Size
Percent
Disturbance
LR 20,000 square feet 45%
R-1 1 acre 35%
R-2 2 acres 25%
R-3 3 acres 25%
R-4 4 acres 20%
(3) The maximum permitted lot disturbance shall include all clearing
and/or land disturbance on the lot required for the construction of a
single-family house and its utility connections, amenities, etc.
(4) Maximum permitted land disturbance: cluster zones.
§ 470-14 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-14
460:607
§ 470-15. Environmental and community impact statement.
Cluster Zone
Minimum Lot Size
(acres)
Percent
Disturbance
R-2 1 35%
R-3 1.5 30%
R-4 2.0 25%
R-1/PN 50 50%
(5) Slopes in excess of 35% shall not be disturbed in connection with
the development on an individual lot.
A. General provisions.
(1) The environmental impact generated by land development projects
necessitates comprehensive analysis of the variety of problems that
may result and the actions that can be taken to minimize those
problems. This constitutes an environmental and community
impact statement. In evaluating environmental impact, the
Planning Board and the Board of Adjustment shall not approve any
submission until it determines and finds that the proposed
development:
(a) Will not result in appreciable harmful effects to the
environment.
(b) Has been designed and conceived with a view toward the
protection of the regional resources.
(c) Will not place a disproportionate or excessive demand upon the
total resources available for such proposal and for any future
proposals.
(2) In order to accomplish these goals, the Board shall condition any
approval upon the implementation of those performance controls
deemed necessary to assure the protection of the environment. Any
approval shall also be conditioned upon the receipt of licenses,
permits or other approvals required by law. Those factors outlined
in Subsection D along with supplemental requirements adopted by
the Board shall be used to determine the environmental
performance controls that are necessary.
B. Exemptions. The following applications are exempt from complying
with the environmental and community impact statement
requirements:
(1) Site plan applications for single-family detached or two-family
dwellings on existing lots of record unless affecting a wetland,
floodplain, FW1 or FW2 stream.
§ 470-14 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-15
460:608
(2) Minor subdivision and site plans that will not result in potential
new construction or alteration to the site.
(3) All agricultural operations that are conducted in accordance with a
plan approved by the Soil Conservation District.
(4) Silviculture operations, the development and/or maintenance of a
forest or wooded preserve, that are conducted in accordance with a
plan prepared by a professional forester or the New Jersey Division
of Parks and Forests.
C. General requirements. It is further recognized that the level of detail
required for various types of applications will vary depending on the
size of the proposal, the nature of the site and the location of the
project. Therefore, having determined that some flexibility is needed in
preparing the environmental and community impact statement, the
requirements for such a document are listed as follows:
(1) A preapplication conference shall be held with the Planning
Director and a representative of the Environmental Commission to
determine the content of the environmental and community impact
statement as outlined in Subsection D along with any supplemental
guidelines adopted by the Board. Waivers of specific environmental
and community impact statement requirements shall be appealed
to the respective Board.
(2) The environmental and community impact statement shall be
prepared by an individual or group of individuals, each recognized
in their field of expertise, the credentials and expertise of that
individual(s) shall be submitted with the environmental statement.
All applicable material on file in the West Milford Department of
Planning and Development pertinent to local conditions shall be
consulted. Any additional material pertinent to evaluation of
potential regional impacts shall also be considered. Furthermore,
as much original research as necessary shall be conducted to
develop a comprehensive environmental and community impact
statement.
(3) Eight copies of each environmental and community impact
statement shall be submitted with the appropriate development
application. One copy of the environmental and community impact
statement shall be forwarded to the Environmental Commission for
review and comment. The Environmental Commission shall submit
its comments expeditiously to the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment. Four copies of the environmental and community
impact statement shall be circulated among the Township
departments that participate in the application review process. The
remaining copies shall be retained by the Department of Planning
and Development and the West Milford Township Library and shall
be made available for public review and comment.
§ 470-15 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-15
460:609
(4) The environmental and community impact statement shall consist
of written and graphic materials which will clearly present the
information that is required. The scale of all maps shall be no
greater than one inch equals 50 feet, unless the Planning Director
and/or Board agree to another scale. Contours, when required,
shall be provided at two-foot intervals and extend for 100 feet
beyond the boundaries of the property.
(5) Upon receipt of the environmental and community impact
statement, the Board shall determine within 45 days if it is
complete or incomplete; if incomplete, it shall be returned to the
applicant with recommendations regarding the additions, deletions
and/or corrections which are needed.
(6) In preparing the environmental and community impact statement,
the applicant shall make himself aware of the requirements
specified in other sections of the Land Development Ordinance so
that unnecessary duplication of effort is avoided.
D. Application types.
(1) All minor subdivision applications, preliminary subdivisions and
site plan applications, consisting of less than 10 acres, shall be
accompanied by a limited environmental and community impact
statement as determined by the Environmental Commission and
Planning Director, except as set forth in § 470-15 herein. The
information required shall be presented in a concise report unless
environmentally sensitive areas are involved. When
environmentally sensitive areas are involved, the report shall be
supplemented with additional graphic and explanatory material.
Environmentally sensitive areas in West Milford include, but are
not limited to:
(a) Stream corridors and floodplains.
(b) Streams and water bodies.
(c) Wetlands.
(d) Slopes greater than 20%.
(e) Erodible soils.
(f) Mature forests of sugar maple or hemlock.
(g) Aquifer recharge areas.
(h) Aquifer discharge areas.
(i) Unique natural features and habitats.
(j) Scenic vistas and trail systems.
(k) Areas of potentially high and low water yields.
§ 470-15 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-15
460:610
(2) All preliminary major subdivision applications, preliminary site
plan applications, consisting of 10 acres or more, conditional use
applications, and all use variances shall be accompanied by an
environmental and community impact statement. The information
required shall be presented in a detailed report which shall include
written, graphic or other explanatory material.
E. Contents of environmental and community impact statement. When an
environmental and community impact statement is required, the
following format shall be utilized and the information requested shall be
provided:
(1) Project description. Indicate the purpose and scope of the proposed
project. Enumerate the benefits to the public which will result from
the proposed project and describe the suitability of the site for the
intended use. A description of the proposed project shall be
presented to indicate the extent to which the site must be altered,
the kinds of facilities to be constructed, how they are to be
considered and the uses intended. The resident population,
working population and visitor population shall be estimated. The
compatibility or incompatibility of the proposed project shall be
described in relation to the following:
(a) Township Master Plan, especially the land use and open space,
housing, circulation and infrastructure elements.
(b) Master plans of adjacent municipalities.
(c) Passaic County Master Plan.
(d) Regional and state plans.
(e) Other pertinent planning documents.
(2) Site description and inventory. Provide a description of
environmental conditions on the site which shall include, but not be
limited to, the following items:
(a) Types of soils. List and description of each soil type located on
the site. If applicable, percolation data and soil analysis as
required by the West Milford Health Department shall be
provided. Where the proposed area of land disturbance will
involve soils with moderate or severe limitations, as per Soil
Survey of Passaic County, Soil Conservation Service, relative to
the type of project proposed, a complete mapping of all soil
types on the site shall be required indicating where those
moderate and severe limitations exist.
(b) Topography. Description of the topographic conditions within
the site and extending 200 feet beyond the property lines.
When 15% or more of the proposed area of land disturbance
encompasses slopes in excess of 10%, the following slope
§ 470-15 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-15
460:611
ranges shall be mapped for the entire site: 10% to 15%; 15% to
20%; 20% and up.
(c) Geology. Description of the geologic formations and features
associated with the site as well as depth to bedrock conditions.
Delineation of these areas where bedrock is in close proximity
to the surface, within two feet of the surface as well as major
bedrock outcroppings.
(d) Vegetation. Description of the existing vegetation on the site.
When required, sketch the location of major vegetative
groupings such as woodland, open field and wetland. Where
woodlands are delineated, the forest type shall be indicated.
(e) Surface water. Description of existing watercourses and water
bodies that are partially or totally on the site and their
relationship to the area of land disturbance. Existing surface
runoff from the site shall be calculated using the methods
contained in Soil Conservation Survey Manual No. 55. When
the natural drainage pattern will be significantly altered, an
analysis shall be conducted which will investigate flow, depth,
capacity and water quality of receiving waters. When required,
floodplain and wetlands areas shall be mapped in consultation
with the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
Existing drainage structures shall be mapped and the capacity
of the drainage network shall be determined.
(f) Subsurface water. Description of the subsurface water
conditions on the site, both in terms of depth to groundwater
and water supply capabilities of the site. Where existing
conditions warrant, detailed information regarding existing
wells within 500 feet of the site relative to depth, capacity and
water quality shall be provided. A successful five-day test
including adjacent well monitoring is required prior to
preliminary approvals. The water supply capabilities of the
adjacent areas and the recharge capabilities of the site shall be
discussed.
(g) Unique, scenic and/or historic features. Description and map of
those portions of the site that can be considered to have unique
scenic and/or historic qualities.
(h) Existing development features. Description of any existing
features on the site that are not considered to be part of the
natural environment. This may include, but not necessarily be
limited to, roads, housing units, accessory structures and
utility lines.
(i) Existing wood roads and/or trails whether blazed or otherwise.
(j) Miscellaneous. When warranted, an analysis shall be
conducted of existing air quality and noise levels as prescribed
§ 470-15 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-15
460:612
by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection or
the West Milford Health Department.
(3) Area and regional description. A description of the surrounding
environs shall be provided as well as the existing land use pattern.
When required, the existing infrastructure, with respect to the
drainage and transportation network, as well as any central
sewerage and water supply facilities shall be described in detail. An
appropriate regional analysis relative to the proposed project shall
be included.
(4) Impact. Discuss the negative and the positive on- and-off-site
impacts as they affect the items listed in Subsection E(2)(c) and (d)
hereinabove. Indicate those negative impacts that are unavoidable.
Indicate those resources affected by the proposal which will be
irretrievably lost and those resources which are renewable. The
specific concerns that shall be considered include, but are not
limited to, the following:
(a) Soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from surface runoff.
(b) Flooding and floodplain disruption.
(c) Degradation of surface water quality.
(d) Groundwater pollution.
(e) Reduction of groundwater capabilities.
(f) Sewage disposal.
(g) Solid waste disposal.
(h) Vegetation destruction.
(i) Disruption of wildlife habitats.
(j) Destruction of scenic and historic features.
(k) Air quality degradation.
(l) Noise levels.
(m) Energy utilization.
(n) Neighborhood deterioration.
(o) Affect on public services, such as schools, fire and police.
(p) Traffic congestion.
(q) Health, safety and welfare of existing residents.
(r) Regional development policies.
(s) Open space or trail elimination.
§ 470-15 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-15
460:613
(t) Cost-benefit analysis, which is an analytic method whereby the
actual and hidden costs of a proposed project are measured
against the benefits to be received from the project.
(5) Recommendations to mitigate adverse environmental impact.
Describe in detail what measures will be employed during the
planning, construction and operation phases which will minimize or
eliminate negative impacts on and off site that could result from the
proposed project. Of specific interest are:
(a) Drainage plans which shall include, but not be limited to, soil
erosion and sedimentation controls. Every effort should be
made to limit off-site runoff to predevelopment levels.
(b) Sewage disposal techniques.
(c) Water supply and water conservation proposals.
(d) Site design techniques to the natural environment which
should include innovative landscape, building and circulation
design.
(e) Energy conservation measures.
(f) Noise reduction techniques.
(g) Construction schedule.
(h) Miscellaneous on-site and off-site public improvements.
(6) Alternatives. Discuss what alternatives were considered both in
terms of site design and project location. Indicate why an
alternative was rejected if it would have resulted in less of a
negative impact than the subject proposal.
(7) Licenses, permits and other approvals required by law. The
applicant shall list all known licenses, permits and other forms of
approval required by law for the construction and operation of the
proposed project. The list shall include, but will not be limited to,
approval required by the Township, as well as agencies of the
county, state and federal governments. Where approvals have been
granted, copies of such approvals shall be attached. Where
approvals are pending, a note shall be made to that effect.
(8) Documentation. All publications, file reports, manuscripts or other
written sources of information related to the project, the project
site and the Township which were consulted and employed in
compilation of the environmental and community impact statement
shall be listed. A list of all agencies and individuals from whom
pertinent information was obtained orally or by letter shall be listed
separately. Dates and locations of all meetings shall be specified.
§ 470-15 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-15.1
460:614
§ 470-15.1. Water supply and water quality requirements. [Added
11-7-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-028]
A. Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to ensure
that:
(1) All preliminary subdivision approval or final subdivision approval
applications, residential developments that at any time consist of
four or more new lots or dwelling units and all applications for
nonresidential uses that will result in total groundwater
withdrawals greater than 800 gallons per day and all nonexempt
agricultural uses shall demonstrate that adequate water supply is
available for the existing and proposed use(s) on site without
adverse impacts on neighboring wells and other resources,
including but not limited to wetlands and streams.
(2) Groundwater quality is acceptable for drinking water purposes (or
other intended use in the case of a nonresidential or agricultural
application).
(3) The impacts of the proposed withdrawal of the groundwater
resource will not interfere with use of the resource by existing
proximate users.
B. Definitions. In addition to the definitions of terms set forth in Chapter
420, § 420-6, the following additional definitions shall apply to the
enforcement and implementation of this section:
ABANDONED WELL — Any well which is not in use, has been illegally
installed or improperly constructed, has been improperly maintained or
is damaged, has not been maintained in a condition that ensures that
the subsurface or percolation waters of the state are protected from
contamination, has been replaced by another well or connection to a
public supply, is contaminated, is nonproductive, or no longer serves its
intended use pursuant to the State Act.
ABANDONMENT OR DECOMMISSIONING OF A WELL — The
permanent closure or sealing of a well in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:9D-3 et seq.
ACT, STATE — Refers to the Private Well Testing Act, P.L. 2001, c. 40;
N.J.S.A. 58:12A-26 et seq., which applies to buyers, sellers and lessors
of certain real property as follows:
All contracts of sale for any real property in which the potable
water supply is a private well located on the property, or for any
other real property in which the potable water supply is a well
that has less than 15 service connections or that does not regularly
serve an average of at least 25 individuals daily at least 60 days out
of the year, shall include a provision requiring the testing of that
water supply for certain parameters as set forth in the Act.
(1)
§ 470-15.1 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-15.1
460:615
ACUTE PARAMETER — A parameter in drinking water that has
significant potential to have serious and adverse affects on human
health as a result of short-term or limited exposure.
ALTER — To enlarge, deepen, replace or in any other way change any
portion of an existing water supply system. The terms "alteration" and
"altered" shall be construed accordingly.
APPLICANT — A developer or property owner submitting an
application for development or permit to locate, construct or alter a
water supply.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by the West Milford Township Land
Development Ordinance for approval of a subdivision, site plan,
planned development, conditional use, zoning variance, or direction
of the issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or N.J.S.A.
40:55D-36.
APPLICATION FOR WELL PERMIT — The application form and all
accompanying documentation required by the NJDEP for approval to
locate, construct or alter a water supply.
AQUIFER — A formation, group of formations, or part of a formation
that contains sufficient saturated permeable material to yield economic
quantities of water to wells and springs.
AQUIFER, CONFINED — An aquifer that is overlain by a confining
bed (aquitard). The confining bed has a significantly lower hydraulic
conductivity than the aquifer. "Artesian aquifer" is a synonym.
AQUIFER, SEMICONFINED — An aquifer overlain by a lowpermeability
layer that permits water to slowly migrate through to the
aquifer. Also termed "leaky artesian" or "leaky confined" aquifer.
AQUIFER TEST — A three-part test conducted to obtain background,
pumping, and recovery data/information from a pumping well and
observation wells in order to determine aquifer hydraulic
characteristics and assess potential water-level drawdown (well
interference) to nearby wells.
AQUIFER TEST LOCATION — A location(s) most representative of
site geologic conditions where the aquifer test shall be conducted
to evaluate potential impacts to proximate users of the groundwater
resource.
The lessor of any real property in which the potable water supply
is a private well for which testing of the water is not required
pursuant to any other state law shall test that water supply for
certain parameters as set forth in the Act. Testing of the water is
required at least once every five years. In addition, within 30 days
after receipt of the test results, a written copy of the results must
be provided to each rental unit and each new lessee.
(2)
§ 470-15.1 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-15.1
460:616
AQUIFER, UNCONFINED — An aquifer in which there are no confining
beds between the zone of saturation and the ground surface. "Watertable
aquifer" is a synonym.
AQUITARD — A low-permeability unit that can store groundwater and
also transmit water slowly from one aquifer to another (also see
"aquifer, confined").
BOARD — The West Milford Township Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment, whichever land use body has jurisdiction to hear the
application for development.
CERTIFIED LABORATORY — Any laboratory, facility, consulting firm,
government or private agency, business entity or other person that
the NJDEP has authorized pursuant to the Regulations Governing the
Certification of Laboratories and Environmental Measurements,
N.J.A.C. 7:18, to perform analysis in accordance with the procedures
of a given analytical method using a particular technique as set forth
in a certain methods reference document, and to report the results
from the analysis of environmental samples in compliance with a NJDEP
regulatory program.
COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM, PUBLIC — A source and
distribution system for potable water subject to the requirements of
N.J.S.A. 58:12A-1.1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 7:10-1.1 et seq.
CONE OF DEPRESSION — The area around a pumping well in which
the head (water level) in the aquifer has been lowered by pumping
action.
CONFINING BED — A body of low hydraulic conductivity material that
is stratigraphically adjacent to one or more aquifers.
CONTAMINANT — Any physical, chemical, biological, or radiological
substance or matter that has an adverse affect on air, water or soil
quality.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DEVELOPER — As used in this section, the legal or beneficial owner or
owners of a lot or of any land which is the subject of an application for
a permit to locate, construct or alter a water supply or the subject of
a development application regulated by this section, and shall include
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DRAWDOWN — The lowering of the water table of an unconfined
aquifer or the potentiometric surface of a semiconfined or confined
aquifer caused by pumping of the groundwater from a well or wells.
Drawdown is determined by calculating the difference between the
depth to water during pumping and the static water level determined
prior to the start of pumping.[Amended 12-20-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-017]
§ 470-15.1 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-15.1
460:617
DRINKING WATER QUALITY STANDARD — A standard that applies
to a constituent or contaminant that is required to be tested pursuant
to the New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act, N.J.S.A. 58:12A-1 et seq.,
including a maximum contaminant level, recommended limits, or, in the
case of lead, an action level.
EXCEEDANCE — The concentration of a constituent or contaminant
that is greater than a maximum contaminant level (MCL), action level,
standard or recommended upper limit for that given constituent or
contaminant.
FRACTURE TRACE — The surface representation of a fracture zone as
determined from an analysis of aerial photographs in stereo pair.
GROUNDWATER — Water in the ground that is in the zone of saturation
from which wells, springs and stream baseflow (dry weather
streamflow) are supplied.
HEAD, STATIC — Static head is the height above a standard datum of
the surface of a column of water that can be supported by the static
pressure at a given point. In a groundwater system, it is composed of
elevation head and pressure head.
HYDRAULIC CONDUCTIVITY — The capacity of a geologic formation to
transmit water. It is expressed as the volume of water at the prevailing
density and viscosity that will move in unit time under a unit hydraulic
gradient through a unit area measured at a right angle to the direction
of flow.
HYDRAULIC GRADIENT — The change in static head per unit of
distance measured in a given direction.
HYDROGEOLOGY — The study of groundwater with particular
emphasis given to its chemistry, mode of migration, and relation to the
geologic environment.
INFILTRATION — The flow of water downward from the land surface
into and through the upper soil layers.
IRRIGATION SYSTEM — Equipment including but not limited to pumps,
piping, and sprinkler heads used to distribute water to grasses,
landscape materials, crops, and other vegetation.
LOT or LOT IN QUESTION — For the purposes of this section, any
designated parcel, tract or area of land, whether established by plat
or otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed or built upon as
a unit, regardless of the nature of the use contemplated, which is the
subject of an application for a permit to locate, construct or alter a
water supply or the subject of an application for development that is
regulated by this section.
MAXIMUM CONTAMINANT LEVEL (MCL) — The maximum
permissible concentration of a constituent or contaminant in drinking
water. Maximum contaminant levels shall apply to public and nonpublic
§ 470-15.1 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-15.1
460:618
water systems, in accordance with the New Jersey Safe Drinking Water
Act, N.J.S.A. 58:12A-1 et seq. and implementing rules at N.J.A.C. 7:10.
NJDEP — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
OBSERVATION WELL (MONITORING WELL) — A nonpumping well
used to observe the elevation of the water table or the potentiometric
surface. An observation well is generally constructed similar to a
pumping well. Observation wells are also referred to as monitoring
wells. Observation wells are required to measure water-level drawdown
during the aquifer pumping test and also for the calculation of aquifer
hydraulic characteristics. The specific requirements for observation
wells are provided in Appendix II, Observation Well Requirements –
Well Testing, of this chapter.148
PARAMETER — A general standard or scope that includes other terms
such as contaminant, constituent, substance, metal, organic/inorganic
chemical, and characteristics that are used to designate an analyte,
group of analytes, attribute, or physical property.
POINT-OF-ENTRY TREATMENT (POET) DEVICE — A water treatment
device applied to the drinking water entering a house or building for
the purpose of reducing contaminants in the drinking water distributed
to the entire house or building. Examples of POET include devices such
as calcite filters and ion exchange (water softeners).
POROSITY — The voids or openings in rock and soil. Porosity may be
expressed quantitatively as the ratio of the volume of openings in a rock
or soil to the total volume of the rock or soil.
POROSITY, EFFECTIVE — The amount of interconnected pore space
available for fluid transmission.
POROSITY, PRIMARY — The porosity that represents the original pore
openings when a rock or sediment was formed.
POROSITY, SECONDARY — The porosity that has been caused by
fractures or weathering in a rock or sediment after it has been formed.
POTABLE WATER — Any water used, or intended to be used, for
drinking and/or culinary purposes which is free from impurities in
amounts sufficient to cause disease or harmful physiological effects,
and complies with the bacteriological and chemical quality standards of
the New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act rules at N.J.A.C. 7:10.
PRIVATE WELL — A potable water well that serves or will serve a
dwelling unit or nonresidential or agricultural use and is located on the
same real property as the dwelling unit or nonresidential or agricultural
use.
PROPERTY OWNER NOTIFICATION – NEARBY WELLS AND SPRINGS
— Appendix III of this chapter149 outlines the notification requirements
148. Editor's Note: Appendix II is included at the end of this chapter.
149. Editor's Note: Appendix III is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 470-15.1 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-15.1
460:619
and procedures for owners of existing wells and springs within 500 feet
of any boundary of the lot in question.
PUBLIC NOTIFICATION — A general notice of private well test failures
sent by the appropriate local health authority to surrounding and/
or neighboring owners of real property. The notification can include
recommendations to test for the parameters of concern to the owners
of surrounding or neighboring properties served by wells.
PUMPING TEST — A test made by pumping a well for a period of time
and observing the change in water levels (hydraulic head) in pumping
and observation wells in the aquifer.
PUMPING TEST, CONSTANT RATE — A pumping test during which the
discharge rate from the pumping well is maintained at a constant rate
for the duration of the test.
PUMPING TEST, STEP DRAWDOWN — A pumping test that involves
pumping at sequentially increasing rates for fixed time periods.
QUALIFIED HYDROGEOLOGIST — An individual who has received a
minimum of a bachelor's degree in geology at an accredited institution
or has completed an equivalent of 30 semester hours of geological
education (including at least two accredited courses in hydrogeology)
while obtaining a bachelor's or master's degree in a related field of
engineering or science at an accredited institution. Such a person
must also demonstrate eight years of professional work experience
in the practice of applying geologic and hydrogeologic principals to
interpretation of groundwater conditions and in the running of aquifer
tests and the analysis of aquifer test data. The individual shall provide
a resume or curriculum vitae to document education and experience
requirements.
RECHARGE, AQUIFER — The volume of water that infiltrates to an
aquifer, often expressed in million gallons per year per square mile or
gallons per day per acre.
RECHARGE AREA — An area in which there are downward components
of head (water levels) in an aquifer. Infiltration moves downward to
deeper parts of an aquifer in a recharge area.
RECOVERY — The percentage rise of the water table of an unconfined
aquifer or the potentiometric surface of a semiconfined or confined
aquifer, as compared to the drawdown, measured at the end of a
recovery phase duration from the cessation of pumping, wherein the
recovery phase duration is equal to the pumping phase duration.
Recovery is determined by calculating the difference between the depth
to water at the end of the recovery phase and the static water level
determined prior to the start of pumping, then subtracting that
difference from the drawdown as measured at the end of the pumping
phase, and dividing the result by the drawdown as measured at the
end of the pumping phase, and then multiplying by 100 to determine
percent.[Amended 12-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-017]
§ 470-15.1 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-15.1
460:620
REPORTING LABORATORY — The certified laboratory responsible for
reporting to the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection a
complete set of required information related to the analysis of a private
well sample.
RESIDUAL DRAWDOWN — The difference between the depth to water
as measured during the recovery phase and the static water level as
measured prior to the start of pumping.[Added 12-20-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-017]
SATURATED ZONE — The zone in which the voids in the rock or soil
are filled with water at a pressure greater than atmospheric. The water
table is the top of the saturated zone in an unconfined aquifer.
SECONDARY PARAMETER — A drinking water parameter regulated for
aesthetic purposes rather than health effects under the Safe Drinking
Water Act (hereinafter "SDWA") rules at N.J.A.C. 7:10. Secondary
parameters include pH, iron and manganese.
SPECIFIC CAPACITY {Q/S} — The specific capacity of a well is the
rate of discharge of water from the well divided by the drawdown of
water level within the well. Specific capacity will vary with the duration
of pumping. Specific capacity should be described on the basis of the
number of hours pumping prior to measurement of drawdown. Specific
capacity will generally decrease with increased time of pumping.
STATIC WATER LEVEL — The depth from ground surface to water in a
well prior to the commencement of pumping.
STORAGE COEFFICIENT (STORATIVITY) — The volume of water an
aquifer releases or takes into storage per unit surface area of the
aquifer per unit change in head. It equals the product of specific
storage and aquifer thickness. Also known as "storativity."
TRACT — See definition of "lot" or "lot in question."
TRANSMISSIVITY — The rate at which water of a prevailing density
and viscosity is transmitted through a unit width of an aquifer under
a unit hydraulic gradient. Transmissivity equals hydraulic conductivity
times aquifer thickness.
UNSATURATED ZONE — The zone between ground surface and the
water table. Pore spaces in the unsaturated zone contain water at
pressures less than atmospheric. Also referred to as "zone of aeration"
and "vadose zone."
WATER QUALITY TEST FAILURE — An exceedence of an applicable
drinking water quality standard of a required test parameter under the
Private Well Testing Act. This term includes all applicable maximum
contaminant levels or recommended limits, or an action level for lead
analysis.
WATER TABLE — The surface in an unconfined aquifer or confining bed
at which the pore water pressure is atmospheric. It is defined by the
§ 470-15.1 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-15.1
460:621
levels at which water stands in wells that penetrate the water body just
far enough to hold standing water.
WATER TREATMENT SYSTEM — A device applied to the drinking water
at a house or building for the purpose of reducing contaminants in the
drinking water distributed in the house or building. Examples: point-ofentry
devices and point-of-use devices.
WELL — A hole or excavation larger than four inches in diameter or a
hole or excavation deeper than 10 feet in depth that is drilled, bored,
cored, driven, jetted, dug, or otherwise constructed for the purpose
of removal or emplacement of, or investigation of, or exploration for,
fluids, water, oil, gas, minerals, soil, or rock.
WELL INTERFERENCE — The result of two or more pumping wells,
the drawdown cones of which intercept. At a given location, the total
well interference is the sum of the drawdown due to each individual
pumping well.
WELL PERMIT — Refers to a written approval issued by the NJDEP,
pursuant to the Well Construction and Maintenance Act regulations at
N.J.A.C. 7:9D, to a licensed well driller which authorizes a licensed well
driller of the proper class to construct a well or wells in accordance
with the permit.
WELL RECORD — The form provided by the NJDEP that depicts the
construction details of a well, which is completed by the well driller
subsequent to well permit issuance and well installation.
C. Applicability. The provisions of this section are applicable to:
(1) All residential developments of four or more new lots or dwelling
units and all applications for nonresidential uses involving either
the creation of a new water use or a total projected water use or
consumption greater than 800 gallons per day.
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any agricultural
wells that do not trigger either a water allocation permit pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 7:19-2.2 or a water usage certification for agriculture,
aquaculture or horticulture pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:20A-2.
(3) Where New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
approval is required for a water allocation permit pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:19-2.2 or a water usage certification for agriculture,
aquaculture or horticulture pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:20A-2, the
Board's approval shall be contingent upon receipt of the permit or
certification, as applicable, as well as compliance with this section.
(4) All terms and conditions contained in this section are consistent
and in accordance with New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection guidelines. Wherever there is a conflict of such terms
then, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38b(13), the DEP guidelines shall
apply.
§ 470-15.1 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-15.1
460:622
D. Aquifer test and hydrogeologic evaluation.
(1) The purpose of undertaking an aquifer test and hydrogeologic
evaluation is to:
(a) Determine if sufficient water is available to supply a proposed
residential or commercial development or expansion thereof.
(b) Assess the magnitude of water-level drawdown (well
interference) impacts on existing and future nearby
residential, institutional and commercial wells/springs.
(c) Predict the effect of long-term pumping on water levels in
existing and future wells.
(d) Determine the potability of the proposed well source(s)
through laboratory testing.
(2) Where applicable pursuant to this section, the requirements for
aquifer testing and hydrogeologic evaluation are as follows:
(a) The hydrogeologic evaluation shall include the review of
available information including but not limited to published
maps and reports, stereo pairs of aerial photographs, New
Jersey Geological Survey (NJGS) reports, and other applicable
documents.
(b) An evaluation of the bedrock structure/structural
characteristics shall be conducted which shall include an
evaluation of the strike and dip of the bedding planes,
orientation of faults, joints and fractures, plunges, and trends
of folds. Published geological literature may be used, if
appropriate and sufficient. The results of this evaluation along
with the locations of the proposed observation well(s) in
relation to the test well(s) shall be submitted with the aquifer
test plan report required below.
(c) In addition, the hydrogeologic evaluation shall include a report
of the recommended design, execution and analysis of the
aquifer test(s). The data collection shall be designed and
evaluated by a qualified hydrogeologist. A geologic and
hydrogeologic report containing appropriate maps, well logs,
aquifer test data and observation well data shall be prepared
and submitted.
(d) The aquifer test shall consist of at least one constant-rate
pumping test conducted at a sufficient rate and duration to be
able to determine aquifer characteristics such as
transmissivity and storage coefficient. As part of the aquifer
test, observation wells are to be monitored to determine and
evaluate water-level drawdown in these wells (the cone of
§ 470-15.1 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-15.1
460:623
depression) and aquifer parameters, and predict the effect of
long-term pumping on water levels in existing and future wells.
(e) Prior to conducting any aquifer test, a preliminary
hydrogeologic evaluation and the aquifer test plan shall be
submitted for review and approval by the municipality's
consulting hydrogeologist of which the applicant shall
reimburse the Township for such services by way of an escrow
account.
(3) The procedures for aquifer testing and hydrogeologic evaluation
shall be as follows:
(a) Submit a preliminary hydrogeologic evaluation and aquifer test
plan for review and approval by the municipality's consulting
hydrogeologist, with copies to the Board.
(b) Following the approval of the preliminary hydrogeologic
evaluation and aquifer test plan by the municipality's
consulting hydrogeologist, conduct notification of proximate
well/spring owners and prepare selected wells/springs as
observation points, as necessary. Proof of notification of
proximate well/spring owners shall be provided to the
municipality's consulting hydrogeologist and to the Board
Secretary and Attorney.
(c) Perform the "Three Phases of Aquifer Test," specifically:
[1] Background monitoring.
[2] Pumping test.
[3] Recovery monitoring.
(d) Conduct water quality sampling and analysis for required
parameters on representative wells.
(e) Prepare and submit hydrogeologic report to Planning Board
simultaneously with application for preliminary site plan and/
or subdivision approval. [Amended 12-20-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-017150]
(4) The requirements for the aquifer test plan and aquifer test shall be
as follows:
(a) Prior to conducting an aquifer test, the applicant shall submit
to the municipality's consulting hydrogeologist the design of
such aquifer test and the qualifications of the persons and firm
who will be performing the test.
150. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection D(3)(f), regarding
submission of a final hydrogeologic report, and which immediately followed this
subsection.
§ 470-15.1 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-15.1
460:624
(b) The design of the aquifer test shall be developed based on the
required hydrogeologic evaluation, using applicable guidance
from "Guidelines for Preparing Hydrogeologic Reports for
Water Allocation Permit Application with an Appendix on
Aquifer Test Analysis Procedures," NJGS GSR 29 (1992 or most
recent edition), or successor document.
(c) The aquifer test shall be conducted in three phases: the
background phase, the pumping phase, and the recovery
phase. Appendix I, Aquifer Test Procedures, of this chapter151
outlines the procedures for aquifer test design, data collection
and reporting.
(d) If the lot in question is underlain by two or more geologic
formations, then an aquifer test will be required for each
portion of the lot in question underlain by each formation. The
test requirements for each formation will depend on the
number of lots and anticipated water usage per formation.
(e) The aquifer test(s) shall be required to be conducted at the
location(s) most representative of site geologic conditions and
also most effective for evaluating the potential impacts to
proximate users of the groundwater resource. Where it is not
possible to meet both objectives, then a location shall be
chosen to optimize the two.
(f) Observation wells shall be required to measure water-level
drawdown during the aquifer pumping test and also for the
calculation of aquifer hydraulic characteristics. The specific
requirements for observation wells are provided in Appendix
II, Observation Well Requirements - Well Testing, of this
chapter.152
(g) Appendix III of this chapter153 outlines the notification
requirements and procedures for notification of owners of
existing wells and springs within 500 feet of the boundaries of
the lot in question. Inadequate notification will require the
aquifer test to be repeated after new notice. A form of notice
and access agreement are included in Appendix IV.154
(h) In the event that the preliminary hydrogeologic evaluation
indicates that a surface water and/or groundwater divide
separates the lot in question, an aquifer test will be required
for each side of the divide.
(i) The aquifer test plan shall include an implementation
schedule, subject to the approval of the municipality's
151. Editor's Note: Appendix I is included at the end of this chapter.
152. Editor's Note: Appendix II is included at the end of this chapter.
153. Editor's Note: Appendix III is included at the end of this chapter.
154. Editor's Note: Appendix IV is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 470-15.1 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-15.1
460:625
consulting hydrogeologist, which shall establish deadline dates
for the completion of the aquifer test and submission of the
preliminary hydrogeologic report. In the event that the aquifer
test cannot be completed by the deadline date, the applicant
may request, and the Board may grant, an extension of up to
60 days for good cause, and the implementation schedule will
be revised accordingly. If the applicant fails to complete the
aquifer test in accordance with the implementation schedule,
a revised aquifer test plan shall be resubmitted with a new
implementation schedule, subject to the approval of the
municipality's consulting hydrogeologist, and all owners of
monitored off-site wells shall be notified of their option to
have the monitoring equipment removed from their wells. The
applicant will provide additional escrow funds as necessary
for the municipality's consulting hydrogeologist to review the
revised aquifer test plan. [Added 7-18-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-012]
(5) The requirements for the submission of the hydrogeologic report
and the evaluation of the results of the aquifer test shall be as
follows:
(a) A hydrogeologic report must be submitted with each
application to which this section is applicable. This report shall
document the design and implementation of the aquifer test
and include the following data, information and analysis:
[1] An evaluation of the bedrock structure/structural
characteristics, including an evaluation of the strike and
dip of the bedding planes, orientation of faults, joints and
fractures, plunges, and trends of folds.
[2] Calculations of aquifer characteristics such as
transmissivity and storage coefficient, calculations of the
cone of depression, potential impacts to adjacent well
owners, and an evaluation of the long-term sustained yield
for the wells.
[3] All water-level and precipitation measurements obtained
during the three phases of the aquifer test in electronic
format acceptable to the municipality.
[4] A detailed hydrogeologic description of the aquifers
encountered beneath the lot in question and adjacent
properties.
[5] A detailed evaluation of the water-supply demand for an
average and peak day. This demand must be supported
with information on anticipated population, expected unit
density, size of units, including number of bedrooms and
bathrooms, lawn and garden irrigation demands, pool-
§ 470-15.1 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-15.1
460:626
filling requirements, and other anticipated water uses. If
the calculated demands do not include water use for
irrigation, pool filling, or other nonpublic purposes, the
applicant must agree to deed restrict the lots from using
the well for these purposes. [Amended 12-20-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-017]
[6] An inventory of all wells within 1,000 feet of the lot in
question appended and placed on a base map of the entire
lot. This inventory must be submitted in electronic format
acceptable to the municipality.
[7] Figures depicting site geology, topography, surface water
bodies, water-level elevations, groundwater flow, and
development plans.
[8] All laboratory water-quality sampling data tabulated and
summarized. A copy of the laboratory reports shall be
provided to the municipality's consulting hydrogeologist
with one complete copy to the Board. The laboratory
reports can be submitted to the municipality's consulting
hydrogeologist electronically in PDF format.
[9] A detailed evaluation of potential impacts from subsurface
sewage disposal systems on groundwater quality. A site
plan or survey of the lot in question depicting topography,
actual and planned well locations, septic leach field
locations, and fracture trace locations at a minimum scale
of one inch equals 200 feet should be included. For any
and all locations where a fracture or set of fractures
intersects one or more wells and/or septic leach fields, a
detailed assessment of treatment technologies should be
included. The treatment technologies should provide
adequate assurances that any and all groundwater
pumped from the wells will satisfy federal and New Jersey
drinking water standards (MCLs) and will not be degraded
by the septic leach field discharges.
[10] The hydrogeologic report shall be prepared and signed by
a qualified hydrogeologist using applicable sections of
GSR 29 (New Jersey Geologic Survey, Guidelines for
Preparing Hydrogeologic Reports for Water Allocation
Permit Applications, with an Appendix on Aquifer Test
Analysis Procedures) or successor document as a guide.
[11] The hydrogeologic report shall include the name and
license number of the well driller and pump installer. The
report shall include the names of the persons and firm
responsible for collecting the water level measurements.
In addition, the report shall include copies of the
completed NJDEP well records. Appendix V provides a
§ 470-15.1 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-15.1
460:627
checklist of all items that must be addressed in the
hydrogeologic report.155
(b) The evaluation of the hydrogeologic report and test results
shall include consideration of the following, any or all of which
will result in a requirement that the test be repeated:
[1] Precipitation. A test conducted during a period in which
0.5 inch or more of precipitation are recorded at or near
the lot in question must be repeated or technical
documentation provided that the precipitation event had
no impact on water levels 24 hours before, during, and 24
hours after the test.
[2] Background phase. Antecedent influences (from recent
precipitation events, changes in barometric pressure,
outside pumping influences, etc.) must be determined,
and, if necessary, water-level data from the pumping phase
and recovery phase must be corrected. Insufficient data to
assess these influences will require repetition of all three
phases of the aquifer test.
[3] Pumping phase.
[a] If, during the pumping phase, the pumping rate, in
gallons per minute, cannot be maintained at a rate
equal to 120% of the rate calculated by dividing the
average daily demand in gallons by 1440 minutes, or
the peak-day demand cannot be withdrawn from the
aquifer within a single twenty-four-hour period, the
aquifer beneath the lot in question is deemed
insufficient to meet the anticipated demands, and the
applicant shall review and adjust the proposed
demand and/or extent of the development proposed.
The following alternatives shall be evaluated in the
following priority: [Amended 12-20-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-017]
[i] Decreasing the number of proposed lots/dwelling
units or amount of nonresidential development to
reduce amount of groundwater that must be
withdrawn to meet demands.
[ii] Rearranging the development layout to better
utilize available groundwater resources.
[iii] Conduct two or more aquifer tests at discrete
locations within the lot in question. The total
volume of water withdrawn from the aquifer
during the two or more aquifer tests must equal
155. Editor's Note: Appendix V is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 470-15.1 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-15.1
460:628
or exceed the peak-day demand. This last
alternative may be used, with the approval of the
municipality’s consulting hydrogeologist, where
large withdrawals are proposed for areas
underlain by low-yielding aquifer systems. Each
test must be conducted individually, and at no
time should two wells be pumped simultaneously.
[b] If the pumping rate varies by more than 10% of the
average flow rate, the entire test shall be repeated.
[c] If the pump shuts down during the pumping phase, the
entire test must be repeated.
[d] If water levels in the pumping and/or observation
wells exceed the measurement capacity of the devices
used for measuring changes in water levels and
measurements are not recorded with other devices in
accordance with the schedule listed in Appendix I,156
the test must be repeated.
[e] If the pumping data indicate a change in aquifer
transmissivity as a result of fracture dewatering, all
analyses of the potential radius of influence and
impacts to neighbors, streams, and wetlands must be
conducted using the lower value of aquifer
transmissivity. If this lower aquifer transmissivity
indicates that the anticipated demand cannot be
supported by the aquifer beneath the site, the
applicant will need to review and adjust the proposed
demand and/or extent of development as outlined in
Subsection D(5)(b)[3][a] above.
[4] Recovery phase.
[a] For purposes of evaluating water-level recovery, the
recovery phase duration will be equal to the pumping
phase duration. For example, if the pumping phase is
eight hours in duration, water levels eight hours after
the pump has been turned off will be compared to the
prepumping static water level to assess recovery
magnitude and degree of recovery.
[b] If recovery is less than 90% at the end of the recovery
phase, the applicant must adjust the proposed demand
and/or extent of development as provided in
Subsection D(5)(b)[3][a][i] and/or [ii] above.
[Amended 12-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-017]
[5] Neighboring wells.
156. Editor's Note: Appendix I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 470-15.1 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-15.1
460:629
[a] If the drawdown is measured or projected to be more
than one foot at any existing adjacent property well or
along a boundary of the lot in question, the applicant's
hydrogeologist must evaluate long-term potential
impacts to adjacent properties based on the actual
operating condition of wells in that zone or along that
portion of the boundary of the lot in question.
[b] If a drawdown of five feet or more (Note: This may be
adjusted at the recommendation of the municipality's
consulting hydrogeologist taking into account existing
lot sizes adjacent to the lot in question and the lot
sizes/extent of development/amount of demand
proposed) is noted in any existing adjacent property
well, or is projected at any boundary of the lot in
question, then the aquifer will be deemed to have
insufficient transmissivity and capacity to support the
proposed demand and/or extent of development. The
applicant will be required to review and adjust the
proposed demand and/or extent of development and
well locations to ensure that drawdown will not
exceed five feet at any boundary of the lot in question
as outlined in Subsection D(5)(b)[3][a] above.
[6] Impacts to streams and wetlands. If drawdown is
measured or projected to induce leakage from streams or
wetlands such that base flow in these streams will be
directly reduced or wetlands partially or entirely
dewatered, then the proposed demand and/or extent of
development must be reduced to prevent adverse impacts
to stream flow and wetlands.
[7] Additional testing. Any test that must be repeated,
restarted, or reconducted at a reduced demand must
satisfy all the requirements of this section including but
not limited to renotification of all property owners within
500 feet of the lot in question and resubmission of an
aquifer test plan for Board approval prior to
implementation of the test.
[8] Sealing of the observation wells. Pursuant to N.J.S.A.
58:4A, all observation wells installed as part of the aquifer
testing shall be properly abandoned. A certified and
licensed well driller shall abandon the wells in accordance
with the requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:9D-3.1 et seq. The well
abandonment forms shall be completed and submitted to
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
Bureau of Water Allocation (call 609-984-6831 for forms
and information).
E. Water quality evaluation.
§ 470-15.1 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-15.1
460:630
(1) The purpose of the water quality evaluation is to determine that the
groundwater used to supply a proposed use or development does
not contain more than the maximum contaminant levels established
by the NJDEP for drinking water quality. In the event that one or
more constituents do not meet the applicable MCLs, standard
treatment systems need to be readily available.
(2) Determination of water quality shall be in accordance with the
following:
(a) Water quality shall be determined for each pumping well and
on-site observation well as part of this program. Water samples
from a pumping well used for the aquifer pumping test shall be
collected during the pumping phase of that test. Water samples
from the on-site observation wells shall be collected either
three days in advance or three days after the pumping test has
been completed. The samples must be collected in accordance
with the NJDEP Field Sampling Procedures Manual.
(b) At a minimum, the samples shall be analyzed by an NJDEPcertified
laboratory for hardness, gross alpha particle activity,
arsenic, iron, manganese, copper, lead, nitrate, E. Coli
bacteria, and total and fecal coliform bacteria as well as any
other element determined under the Private Well Testing Act,
as may be amended or expanded by the West Milford Township
Board of Health or Passaic County Health Department. The
samples shall also be analyzed for volatile organic compounds
for which the USEPA or NJDEP has determined maximum
contaminant levels using USEPA Method 524.2.
(c) During the pumping test, field measurements of pH,
conductivity/total dissolved solids and temperature shall be
made with calibrated instruments.
(d) If conditions on the lot in question or the history of the lot in
question indicate the potential historic use of materials
containing heavy metals, pesticides, herbicides, or other
volatile or semivolatile organic compounds at or near the lot in
question, these analyses must also be conducted.
(e) Based on past historical operations at the lot in question or at
nearby properties, the Board, in its discretion, may require
additional analyses of the groundwater to assess current and
potential future impacts. The results of the water sample
analyses will be used to assess background (predevelopment)
water quality conditions.
(3) A water quality analysis report shall be completed and included in
the hydrogeologic report submitted with the development
application. The water quality laboratory report shall be submitted
§ 470-15.1 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-15.1
460:631
§ 470-16. Action by Township.
to the Board’s consulting hydrogeologist, with one copy to the
Board. [Amended 12-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-017]
F. Fees.
(1) The fees to the Township of West Milford Planning Board or Board
of Adjustment shall be covered by the development application fees
and escrow requirements set forth at Article VII. Fees to the
Township of West Milford Board of Health and the Passaic County
Health Department shall be as required by those entities.
G. Other requirements for major subdivisions.
(1) If a lot is proposed to connect with a public or community water
system, the applicant shall present proof of permission to connect
with that system.
(2) If a lot or lots will utilize individual wells, the aquifer testing and
hydrogeologic analysis and water quality requirements of this
section shall be met, where applicable. Moreover, 25% of the
proposed wells shall have been constructed in accordance with all
requirements of the local and state Health Department as a
condition of preliminary approval of any major subdivision and/or
before submission of a final major subdivision application, at the
discretion of the Planning Board. The wells shall be constructed on
every fourth lot following the grant of preliminary approval so that
in the event it is found that adequate water supply cannot be
provided to a particular lot, that lot may be merged at the time of
final approval with an adjoining lot that already has a dependable
well. The applicant shall submit a letter from the Passaic County
Health Department stating that all constructed wells meet county
standards.
A. An application for development shall be complete for purposes of
commencing the applicable time period for action by a municipal
agency when so certified by the municipal agency or its authorized
committee or designee. In the event that any agency, committee or
designee does not certify the application to be complete within 45 days
of the date of its submission, the application shall be deemed complete
upon the expiration of the 45 day period for purposes of commencing
the applicable time period unless:
(1) The application lacks information indicated on a checklist adopted
by ordinance and provided to the applicant; and
(2) The municipal agency or its authorized committee or designee has
notified the applicant, in writing, of the deficiencies in the
application within 45 days of submission of the application. The
applicant may request that one or more of the submission
requirements be waived, in which event the agency or its
§ 470-15.1 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-16
460:632
authorized committee shall grant or deny the request within 45
days. Nothing herein shall be construed as diminishing the
applicant's obligation to prove in the application process that he is
entitled to approval of the application. The municipal agency may
subsequently require correction of any information found to be in
error and submission of additional information not specified in this
chapter or any revisions in the accompanying document, as are
reasonably necessary to make an informed decision as to whether
the requirements necessary for approval of the application for
development have been met. The application shall not be deemed
incomplete for lack of any such additional information or any
revisions in the accompanying documents so required by the
municipal agency. [Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030]
B. Any proposed subdivision or development determined by the Board to
be creating, imposing, aggravating, or leading to the possibility of an
adverse effect upon either the subject property or upon any adjacent
properties may be required to be revised to remove such adverse effect
prior to further review, classification, or approval by the Board or,
where the remaining portion of the original tract is of sufficient size to
be subdivided or developed further, the applicant may be required to
submit a sketch of the entire remaining portion of the tract to indicate a
feasible plan whereby the proposed subdivision or development,
together with subsequent subdivisions or developments, may be
submitted that will not create, impose, or aggravate, or lead to any such
adverse effect.
C. Time for decision. The Planning Board shall be deemed to have granted
preliminary approval unless it takes action to grant or deny the
application within the following time periods:
(1) Upon the submission to the Planning Board of a complete
application for a site plan which involves 10 acres of land or less,
and 10 dwelling units or less and/or a subdivision of 10 or fewer
lots, the Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45
days of the date of such submission or within such further time as
may be consented to by the developer.
(2) Upon the submission of a complete application to the Planning
Board for a site plan which involves more than 10 acres, or more
than 10 dwelling units, and/or a subdivision of more than 10 lots,
the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within
95 days of the date of such submission or within such further time
as may be consented to by the developer.
(3) Upon the submission of a complete application for a site plan and/
or subdivision pursuant to § 470-2B, the Planning Board shall grant
or deny preliminary approval within 120 days of the date of such
submission or within such further time as may be consented to by
the developer.
§ 470-16 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-16
460:633
§ 470-17. Effect of preliminary approval.157
D. Submission of revised application. Should the application be
determined by the administrative officer or this Board either to be
incomplete or require substantial revisions, the applicant shall be
notified in writing of the deficiencies therein by the Board or its
designee within 45 days of submission of such application or it shall be
deemed to be properly submitted. After said notification, the applicant
may submit an appropriately revised application to the administrative
officer as in the first instance.
E. Public hearings; notice. All hearings held on applications for
preliminary subdivision approval and preliminary site plan approval
shall require public notice of the hearing. The Board shall set the date,
time and place for the public hearing and shall inform the applicant of
this at least 20 days prior to the date of the hearing, pursuant to the
provisions of § 420-9E. The Board shall include findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon in each decision on any application for
development and shall reduce the decisions to writing. The Board shall
provide the findings and conclusions through a resolution adopted at a
meeting held within the time period provided for action or a
memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held not later than 45
days after the date of the meeting at which the action was taken. The
date of the resolution shall constitute the date of the decision for
purposes of mailings, filings and publications. A copy of the decision
shall be mailed within 10 days of the date of the decision to the
applicant or, if represented, his attorney. A brief notice of the decision
shall be published in the official newspaper of the Township, if there be
one, or in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Such
publication shall be arranged by the applicant.
F. Granting of approval subject to amendment. Should minor revisions or
additions to the plan be deemed necessary, the Board may grant
preliminary approval subject to specified conditions. Should major
revisions to the plan be deemed necessary, the Board shall require that
an amended plan be submitted and proceeded upon as in the case of the
original application for preliminary approval.
G. Rejection of application. If the Board, after consideration and
discussion of the preliminary plat or plan, determines that it is
unacceptable, a notation shall be made by the Chairman of the Board to
that effect on the plat plan and a resolution adopted setting forth the
reasons for such rejection. One copy of the plat or plan and the
resolution shall be returned to the applicant within 10 days of such
determination.
A. Preliminary approval shall confer upon the applicant the following
rights for a three-year period from the date of the preliminary approval:
157. Editor's Note: For current statutory provisions related to effect of preliminary approval,
see N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49.
§ 470-16 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-17
460:634
(1) The general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval
was granted shall not be changed, including but not limited to use
requirements; layout and design standards for streets, curbs and
sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions; and off-tract improvements.
(2) The applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary plat or plan.
(3) The applicant may apply for and the Board may grant extensions on
such preliminary approval for additional periods of at least one
year, but not to exceed a total extension period of two years,
provided that, if the design standards have been revised by
ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
B. In the case of a subdivision of or site plan for an area of 50 acres or
more, the Board may grant the rights referred to above for such period
of time, longer than three years, as shall be determined by the Board to
be reasonable taking into consideration the standards included in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49d.
§ 470-17 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-17
460:635

ARTICLE V
Major Subdivisions and Final Plats
§ 470-18. Procedure for submission.
§ 470-19. Details required for final subdivision plans.
A. Filing an application. A final subdivision application shall be submitted
to the administrative officer or designee within three years after the
date of preliminary approval or any authorized extension thereof.
B. Distribution. At least 10 days prior to the first regularly scheduled
monthly meeting of the Board, the administrative officer or designee
shall distribute the copies of the final plat or final plan and the
application in the following manner:
(1) Township files.
(2) Board Chairperson.
(3) Township Engineer.
(4) Township Planner.
(5) Township Health Department.
(6) Construction Official.
(7) Fire Subcode Officer.
(8) Environmental Commission.
(9) Subdivision Committee Chairman.
(10) Board Attorney.
(11)MUA.
(12) Tax Assessor.
(13) Police Department.
(14) At the direction of the Board, additional copies of the final plat or
plan and the supportive material may be forwarded to other
Township, county or state officials.
A. Procedural requirements. All applications for final subdivision shall
include the following support documents and information:
(1) Thirteen copies of the final subdivision plan.
(2) Application and escrow fees as specified in Chapter 414, Fees,
Land Development (see § 470-46).
(3) Completed final subdivision form.
§ 470-18 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-19
460:637
(4) Completed final subdivision checklist.
(5) Completed checklist waiver request form.
(6) Certificate of ownership if the applicant is not the property owner.
(7) Proof of submission to the County Planning Board.
(8) Affidavit of disclosure for corporations as required by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-48.1.
(9) Health Department approval.
B. Map requirements. All applications for final subdivision shall include
maps and/or exhibits depicting the following information:
(1) All additional details required at the time of preliminary approval
shall be submitted.
(2) The applicant shall submit the following details:
(a) Submit one of the following:
[1] As-built constructions plans; or
[2] Final construction plans and a performance bond covering
the cost of installation for the items of incomplete work; or
[3] The items in both Subsection B(2)(a)[1] and [2] if work is
only partially completed.
(b) The final plat indicating all property lines:
[1] Shown in degree, minutes and seconds.
[2] With dimensions in feet to the nearest two decimal places.
(c) The drainage plan as per Article XV, Stormwater Management,
of this chapter.
(d) Operation and maintenance agreement of the detention facility
in accordance with § 470-82 of the Land Development
Ordinance.
(e) All dimensions of the exterior boundaries of any subdivision
shall be balanced and closed to a precision of one to 10,000
and the dimension of all lot lines to within one to 20,000. All
dimension, angles and bearings shall be tied to at least two
permanent monuments not less than 300 feet apart and all
information shall be indicated on the plat. At least one corner
of the subdivision shall be tied to the U.S.G.S. benchmarks with
data on the plat as to how the bearings were determined.
(f) Phasing plan for improvements, if proposed.
§ 470-19 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-20
460:638
§ 470-20. Action by Township.
A. Time for decision. Upon the submission of a complete application for
final approval, the Board shall grant or deny final approval within 45
days of the date of such submission or within such further time as may
be consented to by the developer. Failure of the Board to act within 45
days or such further time as agreed to by the applicant shall constitute
final approval. In such case, the administrative officer shall certify the
submission date of the application and the failure of the Board to act
within the specified time period, and this certification shall be sufficient
in lieu of the written endorsement of the Board.
B. Approval. If the Board acts favorable on the final submission, the
Chairman and Secretary of the Board, or the Acting Chairman and
Secretary where either or both may be absent, shall affix their
signatures to the plat or plan with a notation that it has been approved.
C. Distribution of approved final plat. After approval of the final plat or
plan by the Board, signed copies of the signed plat or plan shall be
furnished by the Secretary of the Board to each of the following within
10 days from the date of such approval:
(1) Township Clerk.
(2) Township Engineer.
(3) Planning Board or Board of Adjustment.
(4) Township Health Department.
(5) Construction Official.
(6) Tax Assessor.
(7) To the subdivider or developer.
D. Filing with County Clerk. Final approval of a major subdivision shall
expire 95 days from the date of signing of the plats unless within such
period the plat shall have been duly filed by the developer with the
county recording officer. The Planning Board may for good cause shown
extend the period of recording for an additional period not to exceed
190 days from the date of signing of the plat.
E. Rejection of plat. If the Board, after consideration and discussion of the
final submission, determines that it is unacceptable, a notation shall be
made by the Chairman of the Board to that effect on the plat or plan,
and a resolution adopted setting forth the reasons for such rejection.
One copy of the plat or plan and the resolution shall be returned to the
applicant within 10 days of such memorialization.
§ 470-20 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-21
460:639
§ 470-21. Effect of final approval.158
Final approval of a subdivision or site plan shall confer upon the applicant
the following rights for a two-year period from the date of final approval,
provided that in the case of a major subdivision the rights conferred by
this section shall expire if the plat has not been duly recorded pursuant to
§ 470-20D of this chapter:
A. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first
granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer pursuant to
§ 470-17 of this chapter, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not
be changed.
B. If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final
approval, the Board may extend the period of protection for extensions
of one year each, not exceeding three such extensions.
C. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned development of 50
acres or more, conventional subdivision or site plan for 150 acres or
more, or site plan for development of a nonresidential floor area of
200,000 square feet or more, the Board may grant the rights referred to
above for such period of time longer than two years, as shall be
determined by the Board as prescribed in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-52b. In no
case shall more than 10 years be granted from the date of preliminary
approval if construction has not commenced without a rehearing of
preliminary approval.
D. If an applicant fails to complete construction as per the site plan
submitted within a two-year period or within an approved or statutorily
required extension period from the date of final approval, the approval
of said site plan and all variances granted with said site plan shall lapse
and become null and void.
E. Conditional approvals.
(1) Conditions precedent. Whenever any application for development
is approved subject to specified conditions, intended to be fulfilled
before the approval becomes effective, said conditional approval
shall lapse and become null and void unless all specified conditions
are fulfilled within 190 days or within an approved or statutorily
required extension period of the date of conditional approval.
(2) The fulfillment of all conditions precedent shall be reported in
writing to the municipal agency, which may cause such reports to
be verified in an appropriate manner. Only upon fulfillment of all
conditions shall any subdivision map or site plan be assigned or any
required building permit, occupancy permit or zoning permit be
issued.
158. Editor's Note: For current statutory provisions related to effect of final approval of a site
plan or major subdivision, see N.J.S.A. 40:55D-52.
§ 470-21 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-21
460:640
(3) Conditions subsequent. Whenever any application for development
is approved subject to conditions, which by their terms are
incapable of being fulfilled, or are not required to be fulfilled prior
to the final approval of the application, the performance of which
are not guaranteed by bonds or securities of any type, failure to
fulfill any such conditions within 190 days or within an approved or
statutorily required extension period from the date of the final
approval of the application for development shall be grounds for
the issuance of a stop-work order by the enforcing official and the
withholding of any zoning permit, certificate of occupancy or any
other approval until such condition or conditions are fulfilled.
(4) The fulfillment of all conditions shall be reported in writing to the
municipal agency which may cause such reports to be verified in an
appropriate manner. Only upon fulfillment of all conditions shall
any subdivision map or site plan be signed or any required building
permit, occupancy permit, zoning permit or other required
approval be issued.
§ 470-21 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-21
460:641

ARTICLE VI
Variances
§ 470-22. Procedure for submission.
§ 470-23. Map requirements for bulk variances for new homes.
A. Filing an application. All applications for variance relief shall be filed
with the administrative officer or designee.
B. Distribution. At least 10 days prior to the regularly scheduled monthly
meeting of the Board, the administrative officer or designee shall
distribute the copies of the variance map and application in the
following manner:
(1) Township files.
(2) Board Chairman.
(3) Township Engineer.
(4) Township Planner.
(5) Township Health Department.
(6) Construction Official.
(7) Fire Subcode Official (use variance only).
(8) Environmental Commission (use variance only).
(9) Board Attorney.
(10) Police Department (use variance only).
C. Procedural requirements. All applications for variance relief pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c and 40:55D-70d shall include the following
support documents and information:
(1) Thirteen copies of maps.
(2) The application and escrow fees in accordance with Chapter 414,
Fees, Land Development (see § 470-46).
(3) Completed variance application forms.
(4) Completed escrow agreement.
(5) Completed checklist waiver request form.
(6) Health Department approval.
(7) Completed bulk or use variance checklist, as appropriate.
(8) Five copies of the environmental and community impact statement,
where applicable.
§ 470-22 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-23
460:643
A. All applications for bulk variance relief to the Board of Adjustment not
involving any related site plan, subdivision or conditional use proposal
shall include maps and/or exhibits depicting the following information:
(1) Block and lot numbers of subject property.
(2) Dimensions of lot.
(3) Dimensions of existing and proposed structures and buildings.
(4) Location of all existing and proposed structures or buildings on the
property and their setbacks from existing property lines.
(5) Approximate location of all structures or buildings within 200 feet
on all sides as well as the names of the owner.
(6) The plot plan shall be prepared by a licensed land surveyor or
professional engineer as appropriate per N.J.A.C. 13:40-7 et seq.
(7) Acceptable title block containing:
(a) County of Passaic.
(b) Township of West Milford.
(c) Name and address of applicant.
(d) Name, address, signature, seal and license number of the
professional person who prepared the drawings.
(e) Name and address of the owner of the subject property.
(f) Names and addresses of all property owners within 200 feet of
the extreme limits of the tract, as shown on the most recent tax
rolls.
(8) A North arrow.
(9) Scale, both graphic and written.
(10) A key map showing the entire tract and surrounds that equals one
inch equals 1,200 feet, including a North arrow.
(11) Date of original preparation and revisions, if any.
(12) Zoning district boundaries affecting the tract.
(13) Zoning analysis (a chart showing correct bulk requirements, per
ordinance, for the zone and proposed bulk dimensions for the
subject property).
(14) All existing and proposed watercourses, including lakes and ponds.
(15) Location of all wells existing and proposed within 150 feet of
existing and proposed septics.
§ 470-23 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-23
460:644
§ 470-24. Map requirements for bulk variances for additions to
existing homes.
All applications for bulk variances relief to the Board of Adjustment
involving an addition to an existing home shall include maps and/or exhibits
depicting the following information:
(16) Location of any septics on the subject property and on adjoining
properties.
(17) Show any steep grades and rock outcroppings.
(18) Contours to determine the natural drainage of the land. Intervals
shall be:
(a) Up to 10% grade: two feet.
(b) Over 10% grade: five feet.
(19) Floodplains.
(20) Calculations for stormwater drainage.
(21) Any drainage easements, existing or proposed.
(22)Wetlands, as delineated by a recognized expert.
(23) Grading plan when changes in contour are proposed.
(24) Location and width of all existing and proposed utility easements
on the tract and within 200 feet of the tract.
A. Current block and lot numbers of the subject property.
B. Dimensions of the subject property.
C. The location(s) and dimensions of existing and proposed structures.
D. The existing and proposed structures' setback distances to the property
lines.
E. Indicate the distances between buildings on the site.
F. Indicate the location and setback of any structures on adjacent
properties to the subject property.
G. Indicate the locations of septic tank(s), disposal areas and wells on the
subject property.
H. Indicate the distance of the addition to the septic components.
I. Provide a sketch of existing and proposed floor plans.
J. Provide a sketch of the house as it will look with new addition.
§ 470-23 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-25
460:645
§ 470-25. Map requirements for use variances.
All applications for variance relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d shall
include maps and/or exhibits depicting the following information:
A. Block and lot numbers of subject property.
B. Dimensions of lot.
C. Location of all existing and proposed structures or buildings on the
property and their setbacks from existing property lines.
D. Approximate location of all structures or buildings within 200 feet on all
sides as well as the names of the owners.
E. County of Passaic identified in the title block.
F. Township of West Milford identified in the title block.
G. Name and address of applicant and property owner.
H. Name, address, signature, seal and license number of the professional
person who prepared the drawings.
I. A North arrow.
J. Scale, both graphic and written.
K. A key map showing the entire tract and surrounds that equals one inch
equals 1,200 feet, including a North arrow.
L. Date of original preparation and revisions, if any.
M. Zoning district boundaries affecting the tract.
N. Zoning analysis (a chart showing correct bulk requirements, per
ordinance, for the zone and proposed bulk dimensions for the subject
property).
O. All existing and proposed watercourses, including lakes and ponds.
P. Location of all wells within 150 feet of any existing or proposed septic.
Q. Location of any septics on the subject property.
R. Show any cliffs and rock outcroppings.
S. Show proposed parking plan.
T. Show proposed traffic flow on-site.
U. Floodplains.
V. Any existing drainage easements.
W. Wetlands, as delineated by a recognized expert.
§ 470-25 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-25
460:646
X. Schematic grading plan when changes in contour are proposed.
Y. Perc test locations and results.
Z. Location and width of all existing and proposed utility easements on the
tract and within 200 feet of the tract.
§ 470-25 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-25
460:647

ARTICLE VII
Fees
§ 470-26. Schedule. [Amended 10-3-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-35;
10-16-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-39; 5-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-22;
12-11-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-51159]
§ 470-27. Review fee escrow deposits. [Amended 4-6-1994 by Ord.
No. 1994-11; 4-19-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-6; 3-26-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-006]
A. The application charge shall be a flat fee to cover administrative
expenses and shall be paid in one check. The escrow account shall be
established to cover the costs of professional services, including
planning review, inspection and engineering review, and shall be paid in
a separate check.
B. The application charge shall be a flat fee to cover administrative
expenses. The escrow account shall be established to cover the costs of
professional services, including planning review and inspection,
engineering review and inspection, legal, Health Department and other
expenses connected with the proposed development application. Sums
not utilized in the review and inspection process shall be returned to
the applicant. At no time shall the application fee or the initial escrow
fee exceed $10,000. If additional escrow sums are deemed necessary,
the applicant shall be notified of the required additional amount and
shall add such sum to the escrow prior to the hearing of the application.
C. The application charges and escrow charges are set forth in Chapter
414, Fees, Land Development.
A. In addition to the base application fees set forth pursuant to § 470-26,
the applicant shall also pay to the Township of West Milford a review fee
escrow deposit in the amount set forth in Chapter 414, Fees, Land
Development.
B. Deposits received from any developer pursuant to this section shall be
deposited in a banking institution or savings-and-loan association in
New Jersey insured by an agency of the federal government or any
other fund or depository approved for such deposits by the State of New
Jersey.
(1) Deposits under $5,000 received from any developer pursuant to
this section will be placed in one account and monitored by
separate ledger.
(2) Deposits in excess of $5,000 received from any developer pursuant
to this section shall be placed in an account bearing interest at the
minimum rate currently paid by the institution or depository on
159. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 470-26 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-27
460:649
time or savings deposits. The deposits shall be deposited to a
review fee trust account identified with the name of the applicant
and the filing number of the application for development. The
Township shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the name and
address of the institution or depository in which the deposit is
made and the amount of the deposit. The Township shall not refund
an amount of interest paid on a deposit which does not exceed
$100 for the year. If the amount of interest exceeds $100, that
entire amount shall belong to the applicant and shall be refunded
to him by the Township annually or at the time the deposit is
repaid, as the case may be, except that the Township shall retain
for administrative expenses a sum equivalent to no more than
33 1/3% of that entire amount, which shall be in lieu of all other
administrative and custodial expenses.
C. The review fee escrow deposit shall be applied to defray the actual and
reasonable expenses incurred by the Township of West Milford for
professional services in connection with the processing of the
application for development.
(1) An applicant shall be responsible to reimburse the Township for:
(a) All expenses of professional personnel incurred and paid by it
necessary to process an application for development before a
municipal agency, such as, but not by way of limitation:
[1] Charges for reviews by professional personnel of
applications and accompanying documents.
[2] Issuance of reports by professional personnel to the
municipal agency setting forth recommendations resulting
from the review of any documents submitted by the
applicant.
[3] Charges for any telephone conference or meeting
requested or initiated by the applicant, his attorney or any
of his experts.
[4] Review of additional documents submitted by the
applicant and issuance of reports relating thereto.
[5] Review or preparation of easements, developer's
agreements, deeds or the like.
[6] Preparation for and attendance at the board meetings
under certain circumstances in accordance with the
Municipal Land Use Law,160 including special meetings
that were called at the applicant's request.
160. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 470-27 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-27
460:650
§ 470-28. Exemption from application charge.
All charitable, philanthropic, fraternal and religious nonprofit organizations
holding a tax-exempt status under the Federal Internal Revenue Code of
1954 U.S.C. § 501(c) or (d) shall be exempt from any application charge
established under this chapter. The aforementioned organizations shall,
[7] The preparation of a resolution or memorializing
resolution setting forth the findings and conclusions of the
municipal agency with respect to the application.
(b) The cost of expert advice or testimony obtained by the
municipal agency for the purpose of corroborating testimony of
the applicant's experts, provided that the municipal agency
gives prior notice to the applicant of its intention to obtain such
additional expert advice or testimony and affords the applicant
an opportunity to be heard as to the necessity for such
additional advice or testimony and definition of the limitations
of the nature and extent thereof.
(c) All professionals are required to submit their respective
vouchers for the professional services rendered in the
processing of the applications for development within the
statutory time period as provided by the Municipal Land Use
Law.
(d) If the salary, staff support and overhead for a Township
professional are provided by the Township (and not through an
independent contractor), the charge imposed shall be 200% of
the hourly base salary of each Township professional, which
salary is established by ordinance.
(2) If, during the processing of the application, the funds remaining in
the escrow account are depleted below a sum equal to 25% of the
original deposit or $500, whichever is greater, the applicant shall
deposit additional funds to bring the escrow account equal to the
larger of either $500 or 50% of the original deposit before the
application shall continue to be processed by the approving
authority and prior to action on the application. By mutual
agreement, the applicant and the approving authority may agree to
another payment schedule where the size and scope of the
application may warrant it. Upon final disposition of the
application, unused funds in the escrow deposit account shall be
returned to the applicant, pursuant to the procedure set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D53.2. If there should become a delinquency in an
escrow account that goes unpaid and the applicant fails to deposit
the additional funds as required by this section, such failure shall
be considered a violation of this chapter, which payment may be
enforced by the land use administrator or his/her designee by way
of summary action in municipal court. [Amended 6-24-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-010]
§ 470-27 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-28
460:651
however, be required to make all review fee escrow deposits established
under this chapter.
§ 470-28 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-28
460:652
ARTICLE VIII
On-Tract Improvements, Guarantees and Inspections
§ 470-29. Requirement of performance guarantees.
§ 470-30. Performance guarantee.
When a performance guarantee is required under this article:
A. Subdivision approval. Prior to the recording of the final subdivision
plat, the Board shall require the furnishing of a performance guarantee
assuring the installation of all required on-tract improvements on or
before an agreed date as herein provided, unless the satisfactory
completion and performance of all such improvements has been
certified to the Board by the Township Engineer.
B. Site plan approval. No application for final site plan approval shall be
approved by the Board until the satisfactory completion and
performance of all required on-tract improvements have been certified
to the Board by the Township Engineer, unless the owner shall have
filed with the Township a performance guarantee assuring the
installation of such improvements on or before an agreed date and as
hereinafter provided.
C. Zoning permit. No zoning permit pursuant to Article VI, Variances, or
Article XIV, Zone Change Requests, of this chapter shall be issued until
the satisfactory completion and performance of all such required ontract
improvements have been certified to the Board by the Township
Engineer, unless the owner shall have filed with the Township a
performance guarantee assuring the installation of such improvements
on or before an agreed date and as hereinafter provided.
D. In the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities
automatically will own the utilities to be installed, or the improvements
are governed by a performance guarantee to another governmental
agency, no performance guarantee shall be required notwithstanding
the provisions of Subsections A, B, and C of this section.
A. The performance guarantee shall be furnished in favor of the Township
in the amount of the "performance guarantee estimate" as determined
by the Township Engineer pursuant to § 470-32.
B. A letter of credit shall be an acceptable form of performance guarantee
if approved by the Township Attorney pursuant to § 470-35 and only
under the following conditions:
(1) It is revocable for an initial period of at least two years with
automatic one-year renewal unless the bank notifies the Township
in writing by certified mail at least 90 days before the initial date of
expiration or each anniversary of such date that it will not be
renewed;
§ 470-29 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-30
460:653
(2) If the letter of credit is not renewed the Township shall have the
right to immediately draw a draft on sight if the developer's
performance is not satisfactory as of that date, or to draw a draft 30
days after receipt of said notice if, after notification by the
Township that the letter of credit will not be renewed, the
developer fails to submit a satisfactory replacement performance
guarantee; and
(3) The developer agrees to cease and desist all such work upon
receipt of notification from the Township that the letter of credit
will not be renewed until such time as a satisfactory replacement
performance guarantee is submitted; and
(4) The developer shall execute any agreement(s) required by the
Township Attorney confirming the conditions set forth herein prior
to the Township's acceptance of said letter of credit.
C. A performance bond, cash, or a certified check shall be an acceptable
form of performance guarantee. The performance bond, in which the
owner shall be principal, shall be provided by an acceptable surety
company licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey, or in lieu of
the bond, cash or a certified check shall be deposited with the Township
by payment to the Township Treasurer. The Township Treasurer shall
issue a receipt for such cash deposits and shall cause such cash to be
deposited in a bank named by the Township, in the name of the
Township, to be retained as security for completion of all requirements
and then be returned to the owner upon completion of all required work
and expiration of the period of the guarantee, or, in the event of default
on the part of the owner, to be used by the Township to pay the cost and
expense of obtaining completion of all requirements. Every bond,
whether cash or surety, shall contain a clause to the effect that a
determination by the Township Engineer that the principal has
defaulted in the performance of his obligation shall be binding and
conclusive upon the surety and the principal.
D. Ten percent of the amount of the performance guarantee shall be
deposited by the owner in cash with the Township. The remaining 90%
may be in cash, a surety bond, or a letter of credit. In the event of
default, the 10% fund herein mentioned shall be first applied to the
completion of the requirements and the cash or the surety bond shall
thereafter be resorted to, if necessary, for the completion of the
requirements. The surety bond may recite the foregoing provisions.
E. Except as hereafter provided, the required improvements shall be at
least 50% completed as to each category set forth in the performance
guarantee within one year from the date of final approval, or by such
time as 50% of the lots in the section in question have been conveyed, in
any manner, by the applicant, whichever shall first occur. At least 75%
of the remaining required improvements in each category shall be
completed as set forth in the performance guarantee within 18 months
from the date of final approval, or by such time as 75% of the lots in the
§ 470-30 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-30
460:654
§ 470-31. Conditions for acceptance of improvements.
The approval of any application for development by the Township shall in
no way be construed as acceptance of any street or drainage system, or any
other improvement, nor shall such approval obligate the Township in any
way to maintain or exercise jurisdiction over such street or drainage system
or other improvement. No improvement shall be accepted by the Township
Council unless and until all of the following conditions have been met:
section have been conveyed, whichever shall first occur. Such
improvements shall be 100% completed and accepted by the Township
within two years from the date of final approval, or at such time as all
of the lots in the section in question have been conveyed in any manner
by the applicant, whichever shall first occur. It is the intention of the
Township Council that this requirement will provide to those living in
each new section of a subdivision a lot that is as complete as possible
with respect to tract and individual lot improvements.
F. The time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the
performance guarantee has been provided may be extended by the
Township Council by resolution. As a condition or as part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guarantee shall be increased
or reduced as the case may be to an amount not to exceed 120% of the
cost of installation as determined as of the time of the passage of the
resolution.
G. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guarantee, the developer and surety,
if any, shall be liable thereon to the Township for the reasonable cost of
the improvements not completed or corrected and the Township may
either, prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof, complete
such improvements. The Township shall also have all other remedies as
may be lawfully available.
H. Completion of improvements; procedure for release. The release or
partial release of performance guarantees shall be governed by the
procedures set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53. [Amended 3-5-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-11]
A. The Township Engineer has certified in writing that the improvements
are complete and that they comply with the requirements of this Land
Development Ordinance.
B. The final application for development has been approved by the
Planning Board; and
C. If required, pursuant to § 470-34, the owner has filed the required
maintenance guarantee.
D. As-built plans for any development have been provided to the Township
as directed by the Township Engineer.
§ 470-30 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-32
460:655
§ 470-32. Performance guarantee estimate.
When, pursuant to § 470-29, a performance guarantee is required, a
performance guarantee estimate shall be prepared by the Township
Engineer setting forth all requirements as fixed by the Board and the
estimated cost. The Board shall either approve or adjust this performance
guarantee estimate.
§ 470-33. Inspections.
A. All improvements and utility installations shall be inspected during the
time of their installations under the supervision of the Township
Engineer to insure satisfactory completion.
B. In no case shall any paving work, including prime and seal costs, be
done without permission from the Township Engineer. At least two days'
notice shall be given to the Township Engineer prior to any such
construction so that he or a qualified representative may be present at
the time the work is to be done.
C. The Township Engineer shall be notified after each of the following
phases of the work has been completed so that he or a qualified
representative may inspect the work:
(1) Road subgrade.
(2) Curb and gutter forms.
(3) Curbs and gutters.
(4) Road paving.
(5) Sidewalk forms.
(6) Sidewalks.
(7) Drainage pipes and other drainage before back fillings.
(8) Street name sign.
(9) Sanitary sewers and/or septic tanks.
(10) Monuments.
D. Inspection fees.
(1) When an engineering inspection is carried out upon the notification
of the developer pursuant to § 470-30H, the cost of such inspection
shall be the responsibility of the owner.
(a) The owner shall deposit with the Township Treasurer at the
time of notification pursuant to § 470-30G a sum equal to 5% of
the amount of the performance guarantee estimate of the cost
of on-tract improvements to be applied to payment of
inspection costs.
§ 470-32 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-33
460:656
§ 470-34. Requirement of maintenance guarantees.
§ 470-35. Approval of performance and maintenance guarantees by
Township Attorney.
(b) This deposit will be placed in a separate escrow account and
treated in accordance with § 470-27B of this chapter.
(2) The cost of all other reasonable inspection and other professional
expenses shall be the responsibility of the owner and shall be
deducted from the professional fee escrow account of the owner
pursuant to § 470-27 of this chapter.
A. The Board shall require, for the purpose of assuming the maintenance
of contract improvement, the posting of a maintenance guarantee:
(1) As a condition of final site plan approval; or
(2) In the case of subdivision approval applications, before the
recording of final subdivision plats; or
(3) As a condition to the issuance of a zoning permit pursuant to Article
XIV of this chapter.
B. In the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities
automatically will own the utilities installed, or the improvements are
covered by a maintenance guarantee to another governmental agency,
no maintenance guarantee shall be required.
C. The maintenance guarantee shall be in an amount to 15% of the cost of
the improvement. The guarantee shall run for a period of two years.
D. Ten percent of the guarantee shall be cash. The remaining 90% may be
in cash or a letter of credit, or a surety bond. The guarantee shall be
posted upon release of the performance bond by the Township.
A. The subdivider or developer shall present two copies of the
performance guarantee, in an amount equal to the amount of the
approved performance guarantee estimate, for approval as to form and
execution by the Township Attorney. If the performance guarantee is a
letter of credit, the letter of credit shall also be presented for approval.
B. The Township Attorney shall notify the Secretary of the Board prior to
the time such guarantees are required under § 470-29 that the
performance guarantee has been properly executed and can be added
to the agenda.
C. The subdivider or developer shall present two copies of the
maintenance guarantee for approval as to form and execution by the
Township Attorney.
§ 470-33 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-35
460:657
D. The Township Attorney shall notify the Secretary of the Board prior to
the release of the performance guarantee that the maintenance
guarantee has been properly executed and can be added to the agenda.
§ 470-35 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-35
460:658
ARTICLE IX
Off-Tract Improvements, Guarantees and Inspections
§ 470-36. Off-tract improvements defined.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENT — Water, sewer, drainage, and street
improvements not located on the property which is the subject of the
development nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
§ 470-37. Off-tract improvements solely benefiting proposed
development.
§ 470-38. Off-tract improvements benefiting other properties.
A. The Board shall require the applicant as a condition of final approval, at
the applicant's expense, to provide for and construct off-tract
improvements which are directly caused and necessitated by the
proposed development or subdivision and where no other properties
receive a special benefit thereby.
B. The requirements of and procedures for performance and maintenance
guarantees shall be the same as for on-tract improvements set out in
§§ 470-29 through 470-34.
A. Where the need for off-tract improvements is directly caused and
necessitated by the development of the applicant's property, and other
properties will benefit by the improvements, the Planning Board shall
advise the Township Council of the required improvements.
(1) The Township Council shall thereupon determine:
(a) Whether the improvements shall be constructed by the
Township as a general improvement or as a local improvement.
(b) Whether the improvement shall be constructed by the
applicant with a provision for partial reimbursement where the
improvement specially benefits properties other than that of
the applicant.
(2) The Township Council shall advise the Planning Board of its
determination, and the Planning Board with the aid of the Township
Engineer and other relevant officials shall estimate:
(a) The cost of the improvements; and
(b) The amount by which all properties to be serviced thereby,
including that of the applicant, will be specially benefited
therefrom.
§ 470-36 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-38
460:659
(3) If the Township Council determines to construct the improvements
as a general improvement, the applicant shall be liable for an
amount equal to the difference between the estimated cost of the
improvement and the estimated amount by which all properties,
including that of the applicant, will be specially benefited by the
improvement.
(4) If the Township Council determines to construct the improvements
as a local improvement, the applicant shall be liable, in addition to
the amount stated in Subsection A(3), for the estimated amount by
which the applicant's property shall be specially benefited.
(5) If the Township Council determines that the applicant must
construct the improvements, the applicant shall be liable for the
amount stated in Subsection A(3), together with the estimated
amount by which the applicant's property shall be specially
benefited; provided that the applicant shall be reimbursed by the
Township for the amount of any special assessments against
property other than the applicant's when the special assessment
against the other properties are received by the Township.
(6) The Township Council shall adopt such ordinances as are necessary
to legally implement the Council's determination in regard to the
provisions of Subsections A(4) and (5).
B. Deposits and guarantees.
(1) The following determination by the Township Council, the
developer shall be required to provide as a condition for approval, a
deposit or performance guarantee as provided hereafter:
(a) If the improvements are to be constructed pursuant to
Subsection A(5), the applicant shall provide performance and
maintenance guarantees using the same procedures as set out
in §§ 470-29 through 470-34.
(b) If the improvements are to be constructed by the Township as a
general improvement, the applicant shall deposit, in cash, with
the Township Treasurer, the amount of the estimated liability
under Subsection A(3).
(c) If the improvements are to be constructed by the Township as a
local improvement, the applicant shall deposit, in cash, with
the Township Treasurer, the amount of the estimated liability
under Subsection A(4).
(2) All monies paid by a subdivision or developer as a deposit shall be
paid over to the Township Treasurer who shall provide a suitable
depository therefor. Such funds shall be used only for the
improvements for which they are deposited or improvements
serving the same purpose.
§ 470-38 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-38
460:660
§ 470-39. Preservation of right to judicial determination.
Where a developer pays the amount determined as his share under protest,
he shall institute legal action within one year of such payment in order
to preserve the right to a judicial determination as to fairness and
reasonableness of such amount.
(3) Redetermination of assessment upon completion of improvement.
Upon completion of off-tract improvements required pursuant to
this section, the subdivider's or developer's liability hereunder
shall be recalculated in accordance with the actual, as compared
with the estimated, cost of improvements. To the extent that it shall
decrease the amount thereof, the Township shall forthwith refund
the amount of such decrease to the subdivider or developer. In
cases where the improvements are specially assessed against all
benefited properties, recalculation shall be made by the municipal
assessing authority in the course of the special assessment
proceedings. In other cases, it shall be made by the Township
Engineer.
§ 470-38 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-39
460:661

ARTICLE X
Detailed Development Checklists
§ 470-40. Checklists; waivers.161
The following development checklists must be completed and submitted
with the appropriate application(s) for the development. The checklist items
are provided to the applicant as a simplified list of the information which
must be filed in support of an application for development. Where the
applicant feels that a required item is not necessary for an informed
evaluation of his plans, a waiver may be requested from the appropriate
Board by filing a waiver application. If items required in the checklist are
not provided with the application and unless a waiver application is filed
and a waiver granted by the appropriate Board, the application shall be
deemed incomplete.
161. Editor's Note: The checklists are located at the end of this chapter.
§ 470-40 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-40
460:663

ARTICLE XI
Enforcement
§ 470-41. Construction Official and Zoning Officer; duties.
The Construction Official and Zoning Officer of the Township shall
administer and enforce the provisions of this Land Development Ordinance.
No structure shall be erected until a construction permit is obtained from
the Construction Official, and no structure or lot shall be used in violation of
this Land Development Ordinance. It shall be the duty of the Construction
Official to keep a record of all applications and all construction permits
which are either issued or denied, with notations of any conditions involved,
which data shall form a part of the Township public records. A monthly
report of construction permits issued shall be filed with the Tax Assessor.
The Zoning Officer shall inspect the structures and land in the Township
and order the owner in writing to remedy any condition found to exist in
violation of any provision of this Land Development Ordinance.
§ 470-42. Construction permits.
Every application for a construction permit shall be accompanied by three,
or as determined by the Uniform Construction Code, sets of plans drawn
in ink or a blueprint showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot
to be built upon, the exact location, size and height of all existing and
proposed structures, the existing or intended use of each structure, the
number of dwelling units the structure is designed to accommodate, the
number and location of off-street parking spaces and off-street loading areas
and such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as
may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this
Land Development Ordinance as determined by the Township Engineer. A
construction permit shall be granted or denied within 10 days from the
date of a complete application unless additional time is agreed upon in
writing by the applicant. One copy of such plans shall be returned to the
owner when such plans have been approved or denied by the Construction
Official, together with such permit as may be granted. All dimensions shown
on these plans relative to the location and size of the lot to be built upon
shall be based on an actual survey of the lot by a licensed land surveyor
in the State of New Jersey. The lot and the location of the structures
thereon shall be staked out on the grounds before construction is started.
No construction permit shall be issued for any structure until prior site plan,
subdivision and variance approvals, as may be necessary, have been granted
by the appropriate municipal agency or municipal agencies in accordance
with the provisions of this Land Development Ordinance.
§ 470-43. Certificates of occupancy.
A. No person shall use or permit the use of any structure or part thereof,
either occupied by a new use or occupant or hereafter erected, altered,
converted or enlarged wholly or in part, until a certificate of occupancy
has been issued by the Construction Official. The Construction Official
§ 470-41 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-43
460:665
§ 470-44. Zoning permits.
shall issue a certificate of occupancy only when he is satisfied that the
structure or part thereof and the proposed use conform to this Land
Development Ordinance and all other applicable codes and ordinances
of the Township.
B. A certificate of occupancy shall be granted or denied in writing within
10 days from the date that a written notification is filed with the
Construction Official that the erection of the structure is completed,
unless additional time is agreed upon by the applicant in writing.
C. Should the Construction Official decline to issue a certificate of
occupancy, his reason for doing so shall be so stated on two copies of
the application, and one copy shall be returned to the applicant.
D. Upon notice being served of any condition found to exist in violation of
any provision of this Land Development Ordinance with respect to any
land use, the certificate of occupancy for such use shall thereupon,
without further notice, be null and void, and a new certificate of
occupancy shall be required for any further use of such structure or
land.
E. A monthly report of the certificates of occupancy issued shall be filed
with the Tax Assessor. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be
kept in the office of the Construction Official, and copies shall be
furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy
interest in the structure of land affected. The charge for each copy shall
be established by resolution of the Township Council except that there
shall be no charge to a municipal agency.
A. Requirement of a permit.
(1) No person shall commence the construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or building
without first obtaining a zoning permit.
(2) No person shall commence a use, nor change an existing use, of
property without first obtaining a zoning permit.
(3) A person desiring to obtain an official acknowledgement that an
existing building, lot or use meets the requirements of the current
Township Zoning Ordinance (see Chapter 500, Zoning) shall do so
by obtaining a zoning permit.
(4) No zoning permit shall be required where the construction,
reconstruction, conversion, installation or use has been approved
by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment.
(5) A person desiring to obtain a certification pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-68 that a use or structure existed before the adoption of the
ordinance which rendered the use or structure nonconforming may
§ 470-43 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-44
460:666
apply for a zoning permit. A zoning permit under this section
may only be issued if an application is made within one year of
the adoption of the ordinance which made the structure or use
nonconforming. After one year, application must be made to the
Board of Adjustment.
B. Issuance of a permit. The Township Zoning Officer shall issue a zoning
permit where it is determined that:
(1) The structure or use is permitted in the proposed location; or
(2) The structure or use exists as a nonconforming use and/or
structure, or the structure is permitted under § 500-72,
Nonconforming lots, structures and uses, of this Land Development
Ordinance; or
(3) The structure or use is permitted by the terms of a variance.
C. Appeal.
(1) The grant or denial of a zoning permit by the Zoning Officer may be
appealed to the Board of Adjustment by any interested party.
(2) A notice of appeal, specifying the grounds of the appeal, must be
filed within 20 days of the grant or denial of the permit.
(3) The Board of Adjustment shall reverse or affirm the grant or denial
of the permit within 120 days of the filing of the notice of appeal.
The failure of the Board to act within the period shall constitute a
decision favorable to the appellant.
D. Administration. The Construction Official or his designee is hereby
authorized to promulgate any checklists and/or application forms
necessary for the administration of this section.
E. Permit fee. Fees for zoning permits are set forth in Chapter 414, Fees,
Land Development. [Amended 9-21-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-14162]
162. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 470-44 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-44
460:667

ARTICLE XII
Violations and Penalties
§ 470-45. Violations. [Amended 8-7-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-24]
§ 470-46. Penalties.
§ 470-47. Selling land before final subdivision approval.
A. It shall be a violation of the Land Development Ordinance to erect,
construct, reconstruct, alter, move, convert any building or structure in
violation of the provisions of this Land Development Ordinance or in
violation of any action taken by the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment, or the staff, pursuant to § 470-4 of the Land Development
Ordinance.
B. It is a violation of the Land Development Ordinance to use land or any
structure upon the land in violation of, or contrary to, the provisions of
this Land Development Ordinance or any action taken by the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment, or the staff, pursuant to § 470-4 of the
Land Development Ordinance.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Land Development
Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof by any court authorized by law
to hear and determine the matter, be fined such sum not exceeding
$2,000 as a court in its discretion may impose; in addition, as an
alternative to a fine, if the party so convicted be a natural person, such
person may be imprisoned for a term not exceeding 90 days, or be
ordered to perform community service for a period not exceeding 90
days, as the court in its discretion may impose. Each day that such
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. [Amended
12-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-25; 8-23-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-012]
B. The owner of any building or structure, lot or land, or part thereof, and/
or the tenant or occupant of any building or structure, lot or land, or
part thereof, where anything in violation of this Land Development
Ordinance shall be placed or shall exist or be suffered, allowed or
permitted to exist; and any architect, builder, developer, contractor,
agent, person or corporation engaged in connection therewith and who
assists in the commission of any such violations, shall each be guilty of a
separate violation, and upon conviction thereof shall each be liable to
fine, imprisonment, community service, or a combination of three
specified above.
A. If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person, as
owner or agent, transfers or sells or agrees to transfer to sell any land
which forms a part of a subdivision for which Township approval is
required in accordance with the provisions of this Land Development
Ordinance, except pursuant to an agreement expressly conditioned on
final subdivision approval, such person shall be subject to a penalty not
to exceed $1,000, and each lot disposition so made shall be deemed a
§ 470-45 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-47
460:669
separate violation. [Amended 12-7-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-25;
8-23-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-012163]
B. In addition to the foregoing, the Township may institute and maintain a
civil action:
(1) For injunctive relief.
(2) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such
a contract or sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
C. In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be
entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land from which the
subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the subdivider
or his assigns or successors, to secure the return of any deposit made or
purchase price paid, and also a reasonable search fee, survey expense
and title closing expense, if any. Any such action shall be brought within
two years after the date of the recording of the instrument of transfer,
sale or conveyance of such land, or within six years if unrecorded.
163. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 470-47 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-47
460:670
ARTICLE XIII
Affordable Housing
§ 470-48. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide a set of regulations that will
provide for the construction and creation of housing units which will be
affordable to low- and moderate-income individuals and families and create
the administrative mechanisms needed for the execution of the Township's
responsibility to assist in the provision of affordable housing. This article
is consistent with the New Jersey Fair Housing Act164 and the rules and
regulations of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
§ 470-49. Zones. [Amended 6-6-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-17]
The provisions of this article shall apply to development in the R-1/PN Zone,
the SHD/Rental Overlay/R-2 Zone, the Senior Congregate Care Zone, the
R-1/I Zone and for any multifamily development providing over 10 dwelling
units.
§ 470-50. Set asides. [Amended 6-6-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-17]
Each development project meeting the criteria above shall set aside up to
a total of 15% of the total number of dwelling units as affordable housing
except as specified in the Senior Congregate Care and Special Housing
Districts. Such units may be sold or leased to low- and moderate-income
households. Of the total housing units set aside, 50% shall be designated
for low-income households and 50% for moderate-income households as
defined by the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
§ 470-51. Contribution for municipal housing program.165
An applicant may make a request to provide a monetary contribution to the
Township in lieu of the construction of some or all of its affordable housing
obligation. The Planning Board shall determine the extent to which the
developer may contribute cash in lieu of construction and shall determine
the amount of contribution per unit; provided, however, that the Planning
Board, in reaching its determination, will be guided by the following
principles: the cash contribution shall be in such an amount as will create
an equivalent amount of affordable housing as would have been constructed
pursuant to § 470-50 of this article, at the recommendation of the New
Jersey Council on Affordable Housing and the Regional Contributions as
per Region 1. The Planning Board shall also determine it to be in the
general public interest of the Township and specifically in the interest of the
Township Affordable Housing Plan.
§ 470-52. Unit mix.
164. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
165. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 470-48 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-52
460:671
§ 470-53. Unit size.
The following unit sizes shall apply to affordable housing units:
§ 470-54. Phasing.
Within affordable housing developments, low- and moderate-income
housing units shall be built in accordance with the following schedule:
Minimum Percent of Low- and
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
Percent of Market Housing Units
Completed
0% 25%
10% 25%
50% 50%
75% 75%
100% 90%
— 100%
§ 470-55. Affordability.
A. Within each development required to provide affordable housing, the
following requirements must be met of the total number of affordable
units:
(1) A minimum of 35% must be two-bedroom units.
(2) A minimum of 15% must be three-bedroom units.
(3) No more than 10% may be efficiency units.
B. There shall be an equal distribution of efficiencies, one- , two- and
three-bedroom units throughout the project. Affordable housing units
may be built as "flats" or up/down units separated horizontally from
another affordable or market dwelling unit above or below it.
A. Efficiency units: 475 square feet.
B. One bedroom: 600 square feet.
C. Two bedroom: 750 square feet.
D. Three bedroom: 900 square feet.
E. Four bedroom: 1,100 square feet.
A. Affordable units within each project shall, as best as practicable,
provide for the following distribution of prices:
(1) Low:
(a) 5% at 40% through 42.5% of median income.
§ 470-52 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-55
460:672
§ 470-56. Rental units.
A development project within the SHD Zone may provide for affordable
units through rental housing. Such housing shall comply with the standards
promulgated above; however, no less than 20% total units shall be rental
affordable housing under this article up to the required rental units as set
forth in the Township Housing Element.
§ 470-57. Rental housing credit.
Each rental affordable housing unit provided shall receive credit for 1 1/
3 affordable housing units towards the development's total set-aside
obligation.
§ 470-58. Occupancy preference.
For all low- and moderate-income housing units provided in inclusionary
developments, West Milford Township shall establish occupancy such that,
initially, no more than 50% of the units are made available to income-eligible
households that reside in the municipality or work in the municipality and
reside elsewhere.
(b) 15% at 42.6% through 47.5% of median income.
(c) 30% at 47.6% through 50% of median income.
(2) Moderate:
(a) 5% at 50.1% through 57.5% of median income.
(b) 5% at 57.6% through 64.5% of median income.
(c) 5% at 64.6% through 68.5% of median income.
(d) 5% at 68.6% through 72.5% of median income.
(e) 10% at 72.6% through 77.5% of median income.
(f) 20% at 77.6% through 80% of median income.
B. The following criteria shall be considered in determining rents and
sales prices:
(1) Efficiency units shall be affordable to one-person households.
(2) One-bedroom units shall be affordable to two-person households.
(3) Two-bedroom units shall be affordable to three-person households.
(4) Three-bedroom units shall be affordable to five-person households.
(5) Four-bedroom units shall be affordable to seven-person
households.
§ 470-55 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-59
460:673
§ 470-59. Designation of Township Housing Committee.
The Township Council shall designate a Township Housing Committee
(THC) which shall be established in conjunction with this article and shall
designate the Affordable Housing Management Service or some other
authority acceptable to COAH. For the purposes of this article, the Township
Council shall serve as the Housing Committee until the Township designates
an outside agency acceptable to COAH.
§ 470-60. Powers of Township Housing Committee.
A. Powers of Township Housing Committee are as follows:
(1) To adopt procedural rules and regulations governing the
implementation of the Township's affordable housing program.
(2) To identify, with the prior authorization of the governing body,
substandard housing units within the Township and, if necessary, to
conduct a survey, or arrange for a survey to identify such units.
(3) To identify sources of government funding that will assist the
Township in meeting its current and future goals of supplying
affordable housing and to prepare and submit applications to
secure such funding.
(4) To advertise the availability of funds for housing rehabilitation, for
down payment assistance or for such other housing programs as
may be authorized by the governing body, if and when such funds
are available.
(5) To maintain a current record of all deed-restricted affordable
housing units existing in the Township.
(6) To maintain duplicate copies of all reports issued by the Housing
Officer with respect to transfers of ownership and changes in
occupancy for all deed-restricted affordable housing units.
(7) To advise the Township's Planning Board and Zoning Board with
respect to any applications for inclusionary development not
included in the terms of the Township's grant of substantive
certification.
(8) To prepare an annual budget for the Affordable Housing Board
governing its expenditures for the execution of its duties and
functions pursuant to Chapter 500, Zoning. The budget shall be
prepared in accordance with proper municipal accounting
procedures and submitted to the governing body for consideration
as part of the annual budget.
(9) To recommend to the governing body the disbursement of funds
from the Housing Fund, if such funds are available, for
rehabilitation of housing or for such other purposes as may be
authorized by the governing body by ordinance.
§ 470-59 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-60
460:674
§ 470-61. Housing Fund.
(10) To prepare progress reports which may be required by the Council
on Affordable Housing or its regulations.
(11) To prepare a summary report of the Township's Affirmative
Marketing Program as may be required by the Council on
Affordable Housing.
(12) To review and approve the Affirmative Marketing Plan prepared by
the inclusionary developer based on the guidelines set forth in
Chapter 500, Zoning.
(13) To provide direction and assistance to prospective purchasers and
renters of affordable housing units regarding income qualification
procedures and criteria and the availability of affordable housing
units within the Township.
(14) To carry out such additional responsibilities as may be necessary to
fulfill the Township's affordable housing program in accordance
with the resolution of the Council on Affordable Housing awarding
substantive certification.
B. In the absence of the appointment of an Affordable Housing Board, the
governing body shall act in its stead. The governing body, or the
Affordable Housing Board, as the case may be, may designate any or all
of these powers to the Housing Officer(s); provided, however, that
ultimate responsibility for the execution of the Township's affordable
housing program shall remain with the Affordable Housing Board or the
governing body as the case may be.
A. There is hereby created a Housing Fund for the purpose of receiving
governmental and/or private contributions to the Township's affordable
housing program.
B. Collection of contributions to the Housing Fund.
(1) Funds to be deposited in the Housing Fund shall be paid to and
deposited in the Fund by the Township Treasurer.
(2) The Housing Fund shall be the repository for all surplus funds in
the event of foreclosure and upon the removal of affordability deed
restriction covenants, regarding covenants and controls on sales
and rentals, and in the event that a rental surcharge is ever
permitted to be imposed.
(3) The Housing Fund shall be the repository for all governmental
monies to be expended for the provision or rehabilitation of
affordable housing, except where monies are required by the
funding source to be held in a separate account.
C. Disbursements from Housing Fund.
§ 470-60 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-61
460:675
§ 470-62. Housing Officer.
(1) The Affordable Housing Board shall make recommendations to the
governing body for disbursements from the Housing Fund in
accordance with applicable affordable housing program
requirements. No disbursements shall be made from the Housing
Fund until the governing body shall have authorized such
disbursements by ordinance and shall have established appropriate
guidelines and procedures for such disbursements.
(2) Funds may be used to reimburse the Township for salaries and
other expenditures connected with the execution of the Township's
responsibilities to assist in the provision of affordable housing in
accordance with Chapter 500, Zoning.
A. Establishment of position of Housing Officer. There is hereby
established the position of Housing Officer for the Township. The
Housing Officer shall be appointed by the Township Administrator and
may be a full- or part-time Township employee, consultant, an authority
or a governmental or other agency contracted by the Township to
perform the duties and functions of the Housing Officer. [Amended
9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
B. Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed the governing body at the
time of the appointment of the Housing Officer.
C. Powers and duties. It shall be the responsibility of the Housing Officer:
(1) To monitor and approve all resales and rentals of designated
affordable housing units to ensure that purchasers/renters meet
the eligibility requirements for low- and moderate-income
households as defined by the Council on Affordable Housing.
(2) To monitor and approve all resales and rentals of designated
affordable housing units to ensure that the purchase price/rental
level are in compliance with the regulations of the Council on
Affordable Housing.
(3) To adopt policies and procedures to implement all aspects of the
Township's affordable housing program, including but not limited
to:
(a) Establish application procedures for affordable housing units
and maintain a waiting list of prospective purchasers and
renters.
(b) Determine and certify, in recordable form, the eligibility of
prospective purchasers and renters.
(c) Establish selection procedures and criteria for determining
certified eligible households as purchasers or renters.
§ 470-61 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-62
460:676
§ 470-63. Affirmative marketing.
(d) Establish an inventory of affordable housing units and monitor
changes in occupancy and the price and rent of each unit for
the duration of the affordable control time period.
(e) Develop a formula to calculate the maximum permissible
resale price or rental charge for an affordable housing unit and
provide a certification of this calculation to the owner.
(f) Determine whether the cost or value of a home improvement is
eligible for an adjustment in the calculation of the resale price
or rental charge for the unit and establish procedures whereby
the owner can obtain such a determination prior to the time
the home improvement is made.
(g) Verify that documents have been duly recorded and the deeds
and leases of individual affordable housing units reference the
appropriate affordable housing agreement and its covenants,
conditions and restrictions.
(h) Establish procedures for proper notification and recapture of
excess funds in a case of foreclosure and the pursuit of all
remedies in cases of violation or default of the terms of the
affordable housing agreement.
(i) Establish reasonable fees for services with the approval of the
State Treasurer.
(4) To carry out such additional duties as may be authorized by the
governing body and/or required by law.
A. The Township of West Milford has a fair share obligation of 187 low- and
moderate-income housing units. [Amended 6-6-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-17]
B. West Milford Township has undertaken a program to provide for
funding for the rehabilitation of the indigenous need within the
Township.
C. The marketing which has been done consists of the following:
(1) Newspaper articles have appeared in local papers announcing the
availability of funds for housing rehabilitation.
(2) Two public meetings were held at the local target area school.
(3) Display advertisements were placed in area newspapers.
(4) Direct mailings were sent to every residence within the target area.
D. The Township of West Milford has provided for inclusionary housing to
satisfy its obligation. This housing will be marketed in conjunction with
the developer of each project in the following manner:
§ 470-62 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-63
460:677
§ 470-64. Housing preference.
All affordable housing units purchased shall be owner occupied. All rental
units shall be occupied by the initial qualified lessee. Subleasing will not
be permitted and will be subject to the cancellation of the lease agreement
with the lessee. The THC shall have the authority to require such action
through the lessor.
§ 470-65. Affordability control standards.
Deed restrictions or disposition covenants in recordable form, satisfactory
to the Township Attorney, shall restrict fee or leasehold disposition of all set
aside units for a term of 20 years. Restrictions or covenants shall provide
(1) Advertisements in the North Jersey Herald and Suburban Trends,
the official newspapers of the Township.
(2) Notices given to local church groups.
(3) Broadcast unit availability on the cable television local access
channel.
(4) Provide for announcements to be distributed through the Passaic
County Housing Division and the Passaic County Office of Aging.
E. All of the above newspapers are official newspapers of the Township of
West Milford and cover the service area of the Township for housing
rehabilitation. In addition, the availability of such units will be
announced with Passaic County Planning Board, local service
organizations and other appropriate local and area wide groups.
F. The priority for purchase of these units, as well as the priority for rental
units, is set forth in the West Milford Township Affordable Housing
Regulations. It is the intent of West Milford Township to comply with
N.J.A.C. 5.92-15.2.
G. All developers with 25 or more low- and moderate-income housing units
will be required to actively market these units by:
(1) Advertising the availability and eligibility requirements for such
units in local and area wide newspapers, as previously specified.
(2) In conjunction with the Township Housing Officer, announcing the
availability and eligibility requirements of such units to county
agencies, local service organizations, church groups, and other
appropriate organizations.
H. Developers with 25 or less low- and moderate-income units will also be
required to follow the above procedure. The marketing program will
commence at least 90 days before the issuance of either temporary or
permanent certificates of occupancy, and shall continue until all lowand
moderate-income housing units are under contract of sale and/or
lease.
§ 470-63 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-65
460:678
that sale price or rent as inflated by 75% of the consumer price index from
the U.S. Department of Commerce (New York area) plus documented capital
improvements.
§ 470-66. Application procedures.
§ 470-67. Resale and rental controls.
A. Forms. Application forms and procedures for initial or first occupancy
shall be subject to the approval of the THC for its review not later than
120 days in advance of the estimated first occupancy date of any unit
within a project. Applications shall provide information respecting the
applicants' most recent federal income tax return for the immediate
past two annual filing periods, and data as to family size and age, and a
certification as to income from any other source.
B. Review summary report. The developer shall review all applications for
set-aside dwelling units' occupancy in accordance with the standards
and procedures in this article. The developer shall file with the THC a
summary report containing a compilation of data taken from
application forms for all units' occupants and pending and rejecting
applicants, together with the reason for any rejection. Action on all
applications shall, at all times, comply with applicable fair housing law
and practices. The names and addresses of applicants shall not be
divulged in summary reports, provided that the THC may, under
appropriate safeguards so as to avoid public disclosure, require
production of such information. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
THC, in its discretion, shall have the right to disapprove occupancy.
C. Certification. Each developer shall certify to the THC the eligibility of
all applicants for sale and rental units not less than 10 days after
execution of a sales contract or 30 days prior to occupancy. The
certification shall provide information respecting the applicant's
compliance with all applicable affordability control standards, including
a statement that price or rent shall not exceed original or amended
price or rent as annually inflated by 75% of the Consumer Price Index,
plus documented capital improvements. Certifications shall be made in
affidavit form, subject to penalty for perjury, and personally signed by
the developer, or in the case of a corporation, the principal
stockholders, or in the case of partnership, the general or principal
partner. Association certification shall be made by the president or
chairman of the Board of Trustees. Rental occupants shall be
periodically recertified, provided that all certifications shall lapse
within the period of three years.
A. Sales.
(1) The developer shall submit a plan for resale or rental controls to
ensure that the units remain affordable to low- and moderateincome
households for at least 20 years. Where a low- or moderateincome
unit remains unsold for a period of six months, the
§ 470-65 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-67
460:679
§ 470-68. Maintenance of units.
developer, upon certification or validation that an active marketing
program has been undertaken, shall be at liberty to rent such unit
for a period not to exceed one year, and thereupon the resale
limitations in this article shall automatically reapply. The purchaser
of a unit shall be entitled to resell the unit for:
(a) The original sales price plus the original sales price multiplied
by 75% of the percentage increase in the Consumer Price
Index (New York area) between the date of purchase and the
date of resale.
(b) Reimbursement of documented monetary outlays for
reasonable improvements.
(c) Any reasonable cost incurred in selling the unit.
(2) The low-income units upon resale may be sold only to low-income
persons, and the moderate-income units may be sold to low- or
moderate-income purchasers. If, however, no low-income
purchaser is found within six months, the low-income unit may be
sold to a moderate-income purchaser. If no moderate-income
purchaser is found for a moderate-income unit within six months,
the unit may be sold to any purchaser. Regardless of the income of
the purchaser, the resale controls shall remain in effect for
subsequent resales.
B. Rentals. Where units are offered as rental units, they shall continue to
be offered as rental units for 20 years. After 20 years, they may be
rented or sold at fair market value.
C. Condominiums. Owners of affordable condominiums may add amenities
or improvements to such units; however, the effect of these
improvements may not increase the resale price of the unit beyond
amounts which are considered by the THC to be affordable to lower
income purchasers. Owners of affordable condominiums shall obtain
approval from the THC prior to installing improvements to their units.
In the event that such amenities or improvements are installed,
however, the resale price of affordable condominiums shall
nevertheless be restricted by the THC in accordance with the foregoing
standards. If no moderate-income purchaser is found for a moderateincome
unit within six months, the unit may be sold to any purchaser.
A. Association. Owners of affordable condominiums shall maintain them in
accordance with the standards of the market condominiums within the
development. Failure to do so shall permit the association to do so at
the cost and expense of the owner of the affordable condominium, and
the association shall have a lien on the unit for the recovery of all sums
expended for such purpose as provided for in the declaration of
covenants and restrictions.
§ 470-67 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-68
460:680
§ 470-69. Mandatory development fees. [Added 12-18-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-44; amended 5-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-023]
B. Association fees. Other than the sums described in the immediately
preceding sentence, any and all assessments by the association upon
any affordable condominium shall be limited to 40% of the assessment
being levied by the association upon market condominiums.
Commencing upon the date upon which the provisions of this plan
expire or terminate as to affordable condominiums, an affordable
condominium shall be assessed and shall pay assessments in the same
manner as a market unit. At no time shall the association levy an
assessment upon an affordable condominium for an association expense
for which market condominiums are not also being assessed, except as
may be provided in the affordable housing plan.
C. Plan alterations. Neither the developer, the owner, the association, nor
the agency shall amend or alter the provisions to this section or plan
without first obtaining the approval of both the THC and the Planning
Board of the Township of West Milford. Any such approved amendments
or modifications of this plan shall be in writing and shall contain proof
of Planning Board approval and shall not be effective unless and until
recorded with the Passaic County Register.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the mandatory development fee is to provide
funding for the Township's Housing Element and Fair Share Plan
approved by the Township Council of the Township of West Milford.
B. Residential development fees - Amount: Prior to the issuance of a
building permit, all developers of residential subdivisions or site plans
of two or more units shall incur a mandatory development fee equal to
1% of the equalized assessed valuation for each residential unit
constructed. This mandatory fee shall be calculated as follows: 1% x
equalized assessed valuation x number of units.
C. Nonresidential development fees - Amount: Prior to the issuance of a
building permit, all nonresidential developers shall incur a mandatory
development fee equal to 2 1/2% of the total equalized assessed
valuation of the nonresidential development; provided, however, no
development fee shall be required where the total equalized assessed
value of the development is less than $15,000 as established by the Tax
Assessor. The mandatory fee shall be calculated as follows: 2 1/2% x
total equalized assessed value. [Amended 10-8-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-048]
D. Timing of payments.
(1) Fifty percent of the total mandatory development fee owed to West
Milford Township, whether for residential or nonresidential
development, shall be paid prior to the issuance of any building
permit required in connection with the development and shall be
calculated as follows:
§ 470-68 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-69
460:681
(a) For residential developments, the fifty-percent payment
required prior to the issuance of any building permit shall be
calculated using an estimated equalized valuation of each
residential unit as determined by the West Milford Township
Tax Assessor.
(b) For nonresidential developments, the fifty-percent payment
required prior to the issuance of any building permit shall be
calculated using an estimated total equalized assessed
valuation of the nonresidential development as determined by
the West Milford Township Tax Assessor.
(2) The remaining portion of the development fee shall be paid prior to
the issuance of any certificate of occupancy for any development or
any part thereof, whether residential or nonresidential, and shall
be calculated using the actual assessed valuation of the
development as determined by the West Milford Township Tax
Assessor.
(3) Because the initial payment required prior to the issuance of a
building permit is calculated using an estimated assessed valuation
based on estimates for construction costs, the following
adjustments are permitted to compensate for differences between
the estimated assessed valuation and the actual assessed valuation:
(a) If the estimated assessed valuation used to calculate the initial
fifty-percent payment was overestimated or underestimated,
causing the actual assessed valuation to be less than or greater
than the estimated assessed valuation used to calculate the
initial fifty-percent payment, the developer's certificate of
occupancy payment shall be equal to the difference between
the actual assessed valuation and the initial fifty-percent
payment as determined by the West Milford Township Tax
Assessor.
E. Exemption, eligible exactions and ineligible exactions.
(1) Developments with on-site low- and moderate-income housing units
as defined and accepted by the Council on Affordable Housing and
credited towards the Township's Mount Laurel obligation are
exempt from development fees.
(2) Low- and moderate-income dwelling units as defined and accepted
by the Council on Affordable Housing and credited towards the
Township's Mount Laurel obligation shall be exempt from paying
development fees.
(3) Development that expands an existing structure shall pay a
development fee. The development fee shall be calculated based on
the increase in the equalized assessed value of the improved
structure.
§ 470-69 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-69
460:682
§ 470-69.1. Municipal Housing Liaison. [Added 8-6-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-037]
(4) Developers of houses of worship and other not-for-profit
institutions, including the Fire Department, rescue and first aid
squads and the Board of Education, shall be exempt from paying a
development fee.
(5) Developments that have received preliminary or final approval
prior to the imposition of a municipal development fee shall be
exempt from development fees unless the developer seeks a
substantial change in the approval.
F. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
(1) All mandatory development fees collected pursuant to this section
shall be deposited in the interest-bearing escrow account entitled
the "Affordable Housing Trust Fund: Mandatory Fee Account."
(2) If the court determines that West Milford Township's spending is
not in conformance with COAH's rules on development fees, the
court is authorized to direct the manner in which all development
fees collected pursuant to this section shall be expended.
G. Use of funds.
(1) Money deposited in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund may be
used for any activity approved for addressing the Township's lowand
moderate-income housing obligation. Such activities may
include, but are not limited to, housing rehabilitation; new
construction; development of accessory apartments; regional
contribution agreements; the purchase of land for low- and
moderate-income housing; extensions and/or improvements of
roads and infrastructure to low- and moderate-income housing
sites; assistance designed to render units to be more affordable to
low- and moderate-income people; and administrative costs
necessary to implement the Township's housing element. The
expenditure of all money shall conform to the approved spending
plan.
(2) No more than 20% of the revenues collected from development fees
each year, exclusive of the fees used to fund an RCA, shall be
expended on administration, including, but not limited to, salaries
and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees necessary
to develop or implement a new construction program, a housing
element and fair share plan, and/or an affirmative marketing
program.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to create the administrative
mechanisms needed for the execution of West Milford Township's
responsibility to assist in the provision of affordable housing pursuant
to the Fair Housing Act of 1985.166
§ 470-69 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-69.1
460:683
B. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering
the affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing
program for West Milford Township to ensure that the restricted units
under administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as
applicable, only to low- and moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the
governing body with the responsibility for oversight and administration
of the affordable housing program for West Milford Township.
C. Establishment of Municipal Housing Liaison position and
compensation; powers and duties.
(1) Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is
hereby established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison for
West Milford Township.
(2) Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing
(COAH), the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the
governing body and may be a full- or part-time municipal employee.
(3) The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight
and administration of the affordable housing program for West
Milford Township, including the following responsibilities, which
may not be contracted out:
(a) Serving as West Milford Township's primary point of contact
for all inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents, and interested households;
(b) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in West Milford
Township's fair share plan;
(c) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as
required by COAH;
(d) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable;
(e) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
(f) If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or
all of the restricted units in West Milford Township as
described in Subsection C(6) below.
(4) Subject to approval by COAH, West Milford Township may contract
with or authorize a consultant, authority, government or any
166. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
§ 470-69.1 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-69.1
460:684
agency charged by the governing body, which entity shall have the
responsibility of administering the affordable housing program of
West Milford Township. If West Milford Township contracts with
another entity to administer all or any part of the affordable
housing program, including the affordability controls and
affirmative marketing plan, the Municipal Housing Liaison shall
supervise the contracting administrative agent.
(5) Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the governing body
at the time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
(6) Administrative powers and duties assigned to the Municipal
Housing Liaison.
(a) Affirmative marketing:
[1] Conducting an outreach process to ensure affirmative
marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with
the affirmative marketing plan of West Milford Township
and the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
[2] Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low- and moderate-income applicants on
subjects such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage
qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/
tenant law.
(b) Household certification:
[1] Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
[2] Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient
documentation of gross income and assets upon which to
base a determination of income eligibility for a low- or
moderate-income unit;
[3] Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
[4] Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as
applicable, of either the ownership or rental certificates
set forth in Appendixes J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et
seq.;
[5] Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible
applicant households living in the housing region and
eligible applicant households with members working in the
housing region where the units are located; and
§ 470-69.1 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-69.1
460:685
[6] Employing the random selection process as provided in the
affirmative marketing plan of West Milford Township when
referring households for certification to affordable units.
(c) Affordability controls:
[1] Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
[2] Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for
its control period, including the recorded deed with
restrictions, recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
[3] Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and
properly filed with the appropriate county's Register of
Deeds or County Clerk's office after the termination of the
affordability controls for each restricted unit;
[4] Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
[5] Ensuring the issuance of Continuing Certificates of
Occupancy or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.10.
(d) Resale and rental:
[1] Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of
restricted units for resale or rental; and
[2] Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or rerental.
(e) Processing requests from unit owners:
[1] Reviewing and approving requests from owners of
restricted units who wish to take out home equity loans or
refinance during the term of their ownership;
[2] Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling
price, such authorizations to be limited to those
improvements resulting in additional bedrooms or
bathrooms and the cost of central air-conditioning
systems; and
§ 470-69.1 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-69.1
460:686
[3] Processing requests and making determinations on
requests by owners of restricted units for hardship
waivers.
(f) Enforcement:
[1] Securing annually lists of all affordable housing units for
which tax bills are mailed to absentee owners and
notifying all such owners that they must either move back
to their unit or sell it;
[2] Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted
units, at the earliest point of contact in the processing of
the project or development, written acknowldgment of the
requirement that no restricted unit can be offered, or in
any other way committed, to any person, other than a
household duly certified to the unit by the administrative
agent;
[3] The posting annually in all rental properties, including
two-family homes, of a notice as to the maximum
permitted rent, together with the telephone number of the
administrative agent where complaints of excess rent can
be made;
[4] Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable
dwelling units, reminding them of the notices and
requirements outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4:
[5] Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent
payments to the municipality's Affordable Housing Trust
Fund or other appropriate municipal fund approved by the
DCA;
[6] Establishing a rent-to-equity program;
[7] Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as
approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for
administering such affordability controls; and
[8] Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
(g) The administrative agent shall have authority to take all
actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its
responsibilities hereunder.
§ 470-69.1 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-69.1
460:687

ARTICLE XIV
Zone Change Requests
§ 470-70. Procedure for submission.
§ 470-71. Details required for zone change requests.
A. Filing an application. All applications for zone change requests shall be
filed with the administrative officer or designee. The administrative
officer shall thereupon notify the Township Council and Planning Board,
in writing, of the zone change request.
B. Distribution. At least 10 days prior to the regularly scheduled monthly
meeting of the Board, the administrative officer or designee shall
distribute the copies of the zone change request and the application in
the following manner:
(1) Township Clerk.
(2) Planning Board Chairperson.
(3) Township Engineer.
(4) Township Construction Official.
(5) Planning Director.
(6) Planning Board Attorney.
(7) Township file.
C. At the direction of the Planning Board, additional copies of the
application with or without the accompanying materials may be
forwarded to other Township, county or state officials.
A. Procedural requirements. All applications for zone change requests
shall include the following support documents and information:
(1) The completed application form.
(2) Thirteen copies of the maps.
(3) The fees and escrow in accordance with Article VII, Fees.
(4) Escrow agreement form.
(5) Zone change request checklist.
B. Support documents. All applications for a change of zone shall be on a
form prescribed by the administrative officer or designee containing
the following information:
(1) Property descriptions, including address, tax block(s), lot(s),
acreage, dimensions and access.
§ 470-70 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-71
460:689
(2) Property use, including present zone and use, proposed zone and
use and zone and use of adjacent property within 200 feet of the
subject property.
(3) Identification of the owner(s) and authorized agent, if any,
including address and telephone number for each.
(4) A statement of the change requested and the reasons therefor,
including how the proposed zone would benefit the community as a
whole. This statement shall indicate the purpose and scope of the
proposed zone change request. The applicant shall enumerate the
benefits to the public which will result from the proposed change
and describe the suitability of the site for the permitted uses in the
proposed zone. The compatibility or incompatibility of the proposed
zone shall be described in relation to the following:
(a) Township Master Plan, especially the land use and open space
elements and the Natural Resource Inventory.
(b) Master plans of adjacent municipalities.
(c) Passaic County Master Plan.
(d) County, regional and state planning guides.
(e) Other pertinent planning documents.
(f) The goals and purposes of the Municipal Land Use Law.167
C. Map requirements. All applications for a zone change request shall
include maps and/or exhibits depicting the following information:
(1) Block and lot numbers of subject property.
(2) Dimensions of subject property.
(3) Zoning district boundaries affecting the subject property and all
property within 200 feet of all sides of the subject property.
(4) Location of existing property lines, streets, buildings, driveways,
watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts, drainpipes and any
natural features such as wetlands and treed areas, both within the
subject property and 100 feet of its boundary.
(5) Key map with North arrow, showing the subject property in its
relation to the surrounding area at a scale of one inch equals not
less than 1,200 feet.
(6) Topography as per USGS series.
167. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 470-71 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-71
460:690
§ 470-72. Hearing.
(7) The plan shall be drawn by the appropriate professional, per
N.J.A.C. 13:40-7 et seq., and shall include signature, seal and
license number of the professional(s) who prepared the drawing.
A. Upon receipt of the reports from the entities set forth in § 470-71, the
Planning Board shall render a decision on the zone change request, and
thereupon forward its recommendation to the Township Council. The
Planning Board shall take action within 45 days after submission of a
complete application or within such further time as may be consented
to by the applicant.
B. Upon receipt by the Township Council of the recommendation of the
Planning Board, the Township Council shall schedule a public hearing
on the zone change request.
C. The developer shall provide notice of the hearing to the owners of all
real property shown on the current tax maps of the Township within
200 feet in all directions of the property which is the subject of such
hearing.
§ 470-71 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-72
460:691

ARTICLE XV
Stormwater Management
[Amended 5-24-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-003]
§ 470-73. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural BMPs (best management
practices). Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive site
design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on
the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source control plans
should be developed based upon physical site conditions and the origin,
nature, and the anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants.
Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to achieve
the established performance standards for water quality, quantity, and
groundwater recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for major
development, as defined in § 470-74.
C. Applicability.
(1) This article shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This article shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Township of West Milford.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this article are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This article
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
that, where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different
§ 470-73 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-73
460:693
§ 470-74. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common usage
and to give this article its most reasonable application. The definitions
below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center as designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, "development"
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
B.
§ 470-73 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-74
460:694
means any activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed by the
County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural Development
Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not exempted by
the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body
or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council in consultation and conjunction with the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and well head protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. "Disturbance" for the purpose of this
rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement
of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, West Milford Township, or political subdivision of this state
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as
amended (42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
§ 470-74 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-74
460:695
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
§ 470-74 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-74
460:696
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
§ 470-75. Design and performance standards for stormwater
management measures.
§ 470-76. Stormwater management requirements for major
development.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
A. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality standards in
§ 470-76. To the maximum extent practicable, these standards shall be
met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies
into the design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these
standards, structural stormwater management measures necessary to
meet these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
B. The standards in this article apply only to new major development and
are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water
quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain
groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new major
development to the extent that alternative design and performance
standards are applicable under a regional stormwater management
plan or Water Quality Management Plan adopted in accordance with
Department rules.
§ 470-74 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-76
460:697
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 470-82.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
13:1B-15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or
Clemmys muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of Subsections F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsections F and G may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates, through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Subsections F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of Subsections F and G, existing structures currently in use, such
as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
Subsections F and G that were not achievable on-site.
§ 470-76 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-76
460:698
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsections F
and G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth at Subsection E into the design.
The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental, or
safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified in Subsection E(2) below into the
design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the
strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from preconstruction
to post construction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance, including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy Subsection E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
§ 470-76 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-76
460:699
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under Subsection E(2)(i)[2] above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
For exemptions to this standard see Subsection E(3)(c) below.
(a) Grates.
[1] Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a
storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
[a] The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
[b] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square
inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inch across the
smallest dimension.
[2] Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains.
[3] Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads
(including bridges), driveways, parking areas, bikeways,
plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open channels, and
stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater
than two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
§ 470-76 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-76
460:700
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection G(1) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in Subsection G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Subsections F and
G shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate County Clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 470-79, or found on the Department's
website at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
§ 470-76 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-76
460:701
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 470-77, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual preconstruction
groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from pre-construction to post-construction for the
two-year storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area or to
projects subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading.
"High pollutant loading areas" are areas in industrial
and commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan; and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
§ 470-76 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-76
460:702
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 470-77, complete one of the
following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction
runoff hydrographs for the two- , ten- and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
pre-construction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the preconstruction
condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two- , ten- and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the two- , ten- and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the pre-construction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the post-construction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to postconstruction
stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
§ 470-76 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-76
460:703
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection F(1)(c)[1], [2] and
[3] above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of "major development" at § 470-74 shall be submitted to
the appropriate Soil Conservation District for review and approval
in accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in
stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being
proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS
does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated
under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New
Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a
NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water quality design
storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality
calculations shall take into account the distribution of rain from the
water quality design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation
of the volume of runoff may take into account the implementation
of nonstructural and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
§ 470-76 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-76
460:704
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 470-79 or found on the Department's
website at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other
sources of technical guidance are listed in § 470-79. Total
suspended solids reduction shall be calculated based on the
removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative removal
rates and methods of calculating removal rates may be used if the
design engineer provides documentation demonstrating the
capability of these alternative rates and methods to the review
agency. A copy of any approved alternative rate or method of
calculating the removal rate shall be provided to the Department at
the following address: Division of Watershed Management, New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, PO Box 418
Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
80% TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the
following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (A X B)/100
Where:
R = Total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs, and
A = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first
BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP
§ 470-76 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-76
460:705
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90%
Extended detention basin 40% - 60%
Infiltration structure 80%
Manufactured treatment device See § 470-78C
Sand filter 80%
Vegetative filter strip 60% - 80%
Wet pond 50% - 90%
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the 80% TSS
removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff
from the subareas converge on site in which case the removal rate
can be demonstrated through a calculation using a weighted
average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Subsections F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 470-79.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
§ 470-76 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-76
460:706
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession is provided.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable. In no case shall the remaining special water
resource protection area be reduced to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the top of bank of the
waterway or center line of the waterway where the bank is
undefined. All encroachments proposed under this
subsection shall be subject to review and approval by the
Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance
with the requirements of the above standards may be placed
within the special water resource protection area, provided
that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
§ 470-76 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-76
460:707
§ 470-77. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a 95% TSS post-construction removal
rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value
and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in Subsection G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall
a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
Special Water Resource Protection Area to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
§ 470-76 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-77
460:708
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4, Hydrology, and
Technical Release 55, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the pre-construction
condition of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Subsection A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at Subsection A(1)(b). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing
condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design
engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the
site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover has
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the
time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the
presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the
land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover (if the land
use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and
conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing pre-construction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, that may reduce pre-construction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55, Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
§ 470-77 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-77
460:709
§ 470-78. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method for
Evaluating Groundwater Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427 Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 470-80B.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 470-80.
§ 470-77 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-78
460:710
§ 470-79. Sources for technical guidance.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 470-76 of this article.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 470-76 of this article, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsections A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625; (609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306; and
(3) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
§ 470-78 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-79
460:711
§ 470-80. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625; (609)
292-5540.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per feet
square.
(3) For purposes of this Subsection B(3), "escape provisions" means
the permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other
features that provide easily accessible means of egress from
stormwater management basins. Stormwater management basins
shall include escape provisions as follows:
§ 470-79 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-80
460:712
§ 470-81. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
Subsection C, a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in
width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be
located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface.
See Subsection D for an illustration of safety ledges in a
stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards.
(1) A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by
the appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, county or
Department) that the variance or exemption will not constitute a
threat to public safety.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this article, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
plan at Subsection C below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this article.
(3) The applicant shall submit the same number of copies of the
materials listed in the checklist for site development stormwater
plans in accordance with Subsection C of this section as is required
for submission of an application to the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
§ 470-80 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-81
460:713
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth
in this article.
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet
or greater, showing two-foot-contour intervals. The map as
appropriate may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing
and distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of §§ 470-75
through 470-78 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of
controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
§ 470-81 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-81
460:714
§ 470-82. Maintenance and repair.
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the pre-development and post-development conditions for
the design storms specified in § 470-76 of this article.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 470-82.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this article may, in
consultation with the Municipal Engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Subsections C(1) through (6) of this section
when it can be demonstrated that the information requested is
impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant
to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
A. Applicability.
(1) Projects subject to review as in § 470-73C of this article shall
comply with the requirements of Subsections B and C of this
section.
B. General maintenance.
§ 470-81 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-82
460:715
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Subsection B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon
§ 470-82 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-82
460:716
§ 470-83. Violations and penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this Article XV shall
be subject to the following penalties: a fine in an amount not to exceed
$2,000 for each occurrence or instance. Each day shall be considered an
occurrence. Each day thereafter shall be considered a subsequent violation.
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required by Subsections B(6) and (7)
above.
(9) The requirements of Subsections B(3) and (4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal
Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 470-82 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-83
460:717

ARTICLE XVI
Golf Courses
§ 470-84. Special provisions for golf courses.
The development review procedures for golf courses shall be in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter 470 of the Land Development Ordinance,
except as otherwise required in this section.
A. Irrigation with reclaimed water. When applicable, unless the applicant
can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Board with the
advice of the Environmental Commission that irrigation with reclaimed
water from highly treated domestic wastewater is not environmentally
sound for the particular site for which an application has been
submitted, golf course irrigation shall be by means of reclaimed
wastewater. The applicant shall submit the plans, technical reports and
studies, and testimony necessary to set forth:
(1) Compliance with N.J.A.C. 7:9-6, groundwater quality standards.
(2) Method of storage of reclaimed irrigation water prior to use in the
irrigation system.
(3) Hydrological study which shall include as a minimum:
(a) Groundwater levels.
(b) Soil characteristics.
(c) Hydrologic characteristics of soil system, including
permeability.
(d) Hydrologic conductivity and transmissivity.
(e) Soil analysis for nutrient content and other parameters.
(f) Groundwater quality.
(4) A quantitatively structured environmental and health risk
assessment to ensure the proposed system will present no risk to
residents or their water supply and that the irrigating water will
comply with all pertinent regulatory criteria.
(5) Permit process.
(a) No final approval will be granted to the golf course, nor will
any work be permitted other than as specifically permitted
herein, until such time as the applicant secures a New Jersey
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Discharge to
Groundwater (NJPDES-DGW) permit and a State II Treatment
Works Approval (TWA) from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJDEP).
§ 470-84 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-84
460:719
(b) No aspect of the golf course can be utilized for play until such
time as a Stage III Treatment Works Approval (TWA) is granted
by the NJDEP.
(6) When applicable, a temporary, approved water source shall be
provided until such time as the mixed use components of the
development are constructed and/or a sufficient wastewater supply
is available for irrigation with reclaimed wastewater.
(7) A well interference study shall be conducted of peripheral wells
within a one-thousand-foot radius of the well.
(8) The Township may contract for expert services to review and report
as required herein. Said fees shall be charged against the
applicant's escrow fee as established in §§ 470-26 and 470-27.
B. Irrigation system design. The applicant shall provide descriptions of the
type of irrigation system proposed, detailing the number of sprinkler
heads, the spacing of the sprinkler heads, the gallons per minute and
the pressure at which the system will operate, the method to determine
the need for irrigation and the timing of the irrigation, the method of
determining evapotranspiration and its influence upon the operation of
the irrigation system and the method of determining rainfall and wind
speed and its impact upon operation of the irrigation system.
C. Groundwater monitoring program. The applicant shall submit a
groundwater monitoring plan, including at a minimum the location of
strategically located monitoring wells to monitor groundwater quality
and assess pre- and post-development characteristics, and a program
schedule/parameter list for monitoring these wells. The results of the
monitoring wells will be reviewed for compliance with acceptable
standards by the Township Health Department and Environmental
Commission.
D. Integrated pest management. The applicant shall provide details
concerning management of pest species, including the method by which
an integrated pest management (IPM) program will be implemented,
with a description of the tactics that will be utilized to prevent pests, to
monitor the need and use of pesticides on a curative basis, the use of
fertigation, and the schedule of application of this program and
irrigation of the course.
E. Application submission. It is understood that a golf course design must
be based upon existing site characteristics, and that, in order for the
applicant to engage in meaningful dialogue with the Township, on-site
studies are necessary to evaluate soils, topography, hydrology, geology,
vegetation and other site qualities that should be considered in the
design of a golf course. Therefore, the application submission process
may be altered to facilitate these studies specifically identified as
follows:
§ 470-84 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-84
460:720
(1) The applicant shall schedule a concept meeting with the Planning
Board and Environmental Commission representatives to discuss
the plan concept. Six copies of the concept plan shall be submitted
to the Planning Department no less than 15 days before said
scheduled meeting. The concept plan shall indicate the following:
(a) Survey of entire tract with that portion to be occupied by the
golf course clearly delineated.
(b) Existing topography at two-foot contours of the golf course
area.
(c) Conceptual layout of golf course, including proposed building
locations.
(d) The location and extent of clearing necessary to perform the
engineering stake-out for the purposes of obtaining sitespecific
information for the preparation of preliminary plans.
This stake-out shall be flagged in the field for on-site inspection
purposes.
(e) Upon Planning and Engineering staff concurrence on
Subsection E(1)(a) through (d), the applicant shall adhere
strictly to the clearing plan, clearing only those areas so
designated for the purposes of preparing a preliminary plan
and application for submission to the Planning Board as set
forth in the Land Development Ordinance of the Township.
(2) Special conditions applicable to final approval.
(a) A plan submitted for final approval of a golf course shall be
deemed to be in substantial compliance with the plan
previously given preliminary approval, provided that any
modifications by the applicant of the plan as tentatively
approved does not vary the intensity of use of more than 5%;
involve a reduction of the area set aside for common open
space or the substantial relocation of such area; or increase
building coverage or land disturbance by more than 5%.
(b) The final plans submitted for the installation of the irrigation
system and grading shall be considered final for the purposes
of commencing construction. Any deviation from the approved
grading plan shall be approved by the Township Engineer
before the deviation is initiated in the field. At any point where,
in the opinion of the Township Engineer, a proposed deviation
will significantly impact the approved drainage plan, said
proposed revision shall be scheduled for Planning Board
approval.
(c) Upon completion of the installation of the irrigation system and
the grading of the golf course, six copies of as-built plans shall
§ 470-84 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-84
460:721
be submitted to the Planning and Building Department for
distribution.
(d) Commencing upon the year of seeding or sodding, the
applicant shall submit to the Township Health Department on
an annual basis an accurate, quantitative listing of all
fertilizers and pest control chemicals applied to the golf
course. This listing shall include the common and trade names
of the materials, the total amount of chemical applied during
the subject year, the proportion of active chemical per unit
weight or volume of the material, and the time(s) and
method(s) of application.
§ 470-84 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-84
460:722
ARTICLE XVII
Preliminary Site Plans
§ 470-85. Procedure for submission.
§ 470-86. Details required for preliminary site plans.
A. Filing an application. All applications for preliminary site plan shall be
filed with the administrative officer or designee.
B. Distribution. At least 10 days prior to the regularly scheduled monthly
meeting of the Board, the administrative officer or designee shall
distribute copies of the preliminary plan and application in the
following manner:
(1) Township files.
(2) Planning Board or Board of Adjustment Chairperson.
(3) Township Engineer.
(4) Township Planner.
(5) Township Health Department.
(6) Construction Official.
(7) Fire Subcode Officer.
(8) Site Plan Committee Chairman.
(9) Environmental Commission.
(10) Board Attorney.
(11)MUA.
(12) Police Department.
(13) At the direction of the Board, additional copies of the preliminary
plat or plan and the supportive materials may be forwarded to
other Township, county or state officials.
C. Filing of combined applications. Please refer to § 470-87C.
D. Water supply and water quality requirements. For those applications for
nonresidential uses that will result in total groundwater withdrawals
greater than 800 gallons per day, the applicant must comply with the
requirements of § 470-15.1 of the West Milford Township Land
Development Ordinance. [Added 11-7-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-029]
A. Procedural requirements. All applications for preliminary site plan shall
include the following support documents and information:
(1) Thirteen map copies folded and collated.
§ 470-85 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-86
460:723
(2) Health Department approval.
(3) Completed preliminary site plan checklist.
(4) Site plan application form.
(5) Completed checklist waiver request form.
(6) An environmental and community impact statement (see § 470-15,
Environmental and community impact statement).
(7) Application and escrow fees as specified in Article VII, Fees, of this
chapter.
(8) Affidavit of ownership if the applicant is not the owner of the
property in question.
(9) Completed escrow agreement.
(10) Affidavit of disclosure for corporations.
(11) Proof of submission to the County Planning Board.
B. Map requirements. All applications for preliminary site plan shall
include maps and/or exhibits depicting the following information:
(1) All preliminary plans shall be prepared by a licensed professional
as set out in N.J.A.C. 13:40-7 et seq.
(2) Key map. A key map showing the entire tract and its relation to the
surrounding areas at a scale of one inch equals not less than 1,200
feet. The key map shall include a North arrow.
(3) Identification information:
(a) Title block:
[1] Name of development, municipality and county.
[2] Name and address of applicant or developer.
[3] Name and address of the owner or owners of record and
the names and addresses of all property owners within 200
feet of the extreme limits of the tract as shown on the most
recent tax rolls available in the Township Tax Assessor's
office.
[4] Acreage of tract to nearest 1/10 of an acre.
[5] Date of preparation and subsequent revisions.
[6] Zoning analysis.
(b) Scale, both written and graphic, and North arrow.
§ 470-86 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-86
460:724
(c) All property and structures within 200 feet of the extreme
limits of the tract.
(d) Existing block and lot numbers.
(e) Zoning district boundaries affecting the tract.
(4) Cross sections of watercourses and/or drainage swales at an
approximate scale showing the extent of floodplain, top of bank,
normal water levels and bottom elevations at any point where a
watercourse crosses a boundary of the tract.
(5) The location and extent of drainage and conservation easements
and stream encroachment lines.
(6) The location, extent and water level elevation of all existing or
proposed lakes or ponds within and adjacent to the tract.
(7) Contours; intervals shall be:
(a) Up to 10% grade: two feet.
(b) Over 10% grade: five feet.
(8) Existing structures. Locations of all existing structures showing
existing front, rear and side yard setback distances, and an
indication of whether the existing structures and uses will be
retained or removed.
(9) Proposed structures. Size, height and location of all proposed
buildings, structures and signs with setbacks indicated.
(10) Outdoor lighting. The proposed location, direction of illumination,
power, type and architectural style of proposed outdoor lighting.
(11) Landscaping. Landscaping plan, including the proposed screening,
buffering, types, quantity, size and location of all vegetation. The
scientific and common names of all vegetation shall be used. Plans
are to be drawn by a certified landscape architect, an architect, an
engineer, land surveyor, or professional planner as provided for by
state law.
(12)Off-street parking. The location and design of any off-street parking
areas or loading area showing size and location of bays, aisles and
barriers.
(13) Traffic patterns. Conformity with state, county or West Milford
access management codes must be shown where applicable.
(14) Storm drainage. The application shall include plans and
computations for any storm drainage systems, including the
following:
§ 470-86 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-86
460:725
(a) All existing or proposed storm sewer lines within or adjacent to
the tract showing size and profile of the lines, direction of flow
and the location of each catch basin, inlet, manhole, culvert
and headwall.
(b) The location and extent of any proposed dry wells,
groundwater recharge basins, retention basins or other water
or soil conservation devices.
(c) Stormwater quality for on-site and off-site effects shall be
addressed on each application.
[1] Stormwater calculations.
[2] Drywell/retention/recharge measures.
[3] Proposed phasing.
[4] Management report.
(d) Stormwater quantity measures.
[1] Flood erosion controls.
[2] Stormwater calculations.
[3] Project phasing.
[4] Outlet controls.
[5] Facilities map.
(15) Existing utilities. The location of existing structures such as water
and sewer mains, gas transmission lines and high tension power
lines on the tract.
(16) Cross sections and grade details. Plans, cross sections, center line
profiles, tentative grades and details of all proposed driveways and
existing streets abutting the tract.
(17) Sign details.
(18) Indication of total impervious coverage.
(19) Limit of disturbance lines showing areas to be disturbed by grading
and construction.
(20) Location of existing and proposed wells and septic systems on the
property.
(21) Location of existing wells and septic systems within 100 feet of the
property.
(22) Floor plans of proposed buildings.
§ 470-86 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-86
460:726
(23) All natural features in accordance with § 500-71, Natural features,
of this Land Development Ordinance.
(24) Finished grade elevation where changes in contour are proposed.
(25) Proposed building elevations.
(26) Loading zone location and details.
(27) Driveway locations, including ingress and egress.
(28) Soil erosion and sediment control plan.
(29) Location and results of percolation tests.
(30) Sight triangles and curbline radii.
(31) Indicate location and ownership of easements on the tract and
within 200 feet of the tract.
(32) Property line dimensions in feet.
(33) Property lines shown in degrees, minutes and seconds.
(34) Indicate total building square footage.
(35) Traffic study on applications of 50,000 square feet or more of gross
floor area.
§ 470-86 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-86
460:727

ARTICLE XVIII
Final Site Plans
§ 470-87. Procedure for submission.
A. Filing an application. A final plat or final plan shall be submitted to the
administrative officer or designee within three years after the date of
preliminary approval or any authorized extension thereof.
B. Distribution. At least 10 days prior to the regularly scheduled monthly
meeting of the Board, the administrative officer shall distribute the
copies of the final plat or final plan and the appropriate application in
the following manner:
(1) Township files.
(2) Board Chairman.
(3) Township Engineer.
(4) Township Planner.
(5) Township Health Department.
(6) Construction Official.
(7) Fire Subcode Officer.
(8) Environmental Commission.
(9) Site Plan Committee Chairman.
(10) Board Attorney.
(11)MUA.
(12) Police Department.
(13) At the direction of the Board, additional copies of the final plat or
plan and the supportive materials may be forwarded to other
Township, county or state officials.
C. Filing of combined applications. The submission of the final site plan
shall be for the purposes of approving an as-built plan of the
preliminary site plan approval previously granted. However, nothing set
forth in this article shall prevent any developer from submitting
preliminary and final site plan applications simultaneously, provided
that all requirements for the submission of each application separately
have been met. The municipal agency shall then determine if it wishes
to process the applications simultaneously.
D. Water supply and water quality requirements. For those applications for
nonresidential uses that will result in total groundwater withdrawals
greater than 800 gallons per day, the applicant must comply with the
§ 470-87 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-87
460:729
§ 470-88. Details required for final site plans.
§ 470-89. Action by Township.
requirements of § 470-15.1 of the West Milford Township Land
Development Ordinance. [Added 11-7-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-029]
A. Procedural requirements. All applications for final site plan shall
include the following support documents and information:
(1) Thirteen copies of the final plan.
(2) Application and escrow fees as specified in § 470-26.
(3) Completed final site plan form.
(4) Completed final site plan checklist.
(5) Completed checklist waiver request form.
(6) Certificate of ownership if the applicant is not the property owner.
(7) Proof of submission to the County Planning Board.
(8) Affidavit of disclosure for corporations as required by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-48.1.
(9) Health Department approval.
B. Map requirements. All applications for final site plan shall include maps
and/or exhibits depicting the following information:
(1) All details stipulated in § 470-86 of this chapter.
(2) All additional details required at the time of preliminary approval
shall be submitted.
(3) Submit final construction plans and a performance bond covering
the cost of installation for the items of incomplete work.
(4) Final site plan showing all utilities and site improvements as
required in § 470-86 of this chapter.
(5) The drainage plan as per Article XV, Stormwater Management, of
this chapter.
(6) Sign details.
(7) Phasing plan for improvements, if proposed.
(8) Compliance with preliminary site plan resolution of approval.
(9) Operation and maintenance agreement of the detention facility in
accordance with § 470-82 of this chapter.
§ 470-87 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-89
460:730
A. Time of decision. Upon the submission of a complete application for
final approval, the Board shall grant or deny final approval within 45
days of the date of such submission or within such further time as may
be consented to by the developer. Failure of the Board to act within 45
days or such further time as agreed to by the applicant shall constitute
final approval. In such case, the administrative officer shall certify the
submission date of the application and the failure of the Board to act
within the specified time period, and this certification shall be sufficient
in lieu of the written endorsement of the Board.
B. Approval. If the Board acts favorably on the final submission, the
Chairman and Secretary of the Board, or the Acting Chairman and
Secretary where either or both may be absent, shall affix their
signatures to the plat or plan with a notation that it has been approved.
C. Distribution of approved final plat. After approval of the final plat or
plan by the Board, signed copies of the signed plat or plan shall be
furnished by the Secretary of the Board to each of the following within
10 days from the date of such approval:
(1) Township Clerk (resolution of approval only).
(2) Township Engineer.
(3) Planning Board or Board of Adjustment file.
(4) Construction Official.
(5) Tax Assessor.
(6) The subdivider or developer.
D. Rejection of plat. If the Board, after consideration and discussion of the
final submission, determines that it is unacceptable, a notation shall be
made by the Chairman of the Board to that effect on the plat or plan,
and a resolution adopted setting forth the reasons for such rejection.
One copy of the plat or plan and the resolution shall be returned to the
applicant within 10 days of such memorialization.
§ 470-89 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-89
460:731

ARTICLE XIX
Minor Site Plans
[Added 5-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-22]
§ 470-90. Procedure for submission.
§ 470-91. Details required for minor site plans.
No plan shall be classified as a minor site plan unless drawn by the
appropriate professional per N.J.A.C. 13:40-7 et seq. If possible, the entire
tract shall be shown on one sheet, and such plat shall show or include the
following information:
A. Filing an application. All applications for minor site plans shall be filed
with the administrative officer or designee.
B. Distribution. At least 10 days prior to the regularly scheduled monthly
meeting of the Board for which an application is scheduled, the
administrative officer or designee shall distribute copies of the minor
site plan and the application in the following manner:
(1) Township files.
(2) Board Chairman.
(3) Township Engineer.
(4) Township Planner.
(5) Township Health Department.
(6) Construction Official.
(7) Fire Subcode Officer.
(8) Board Attorney.
(9) MUA.
(10) Tax Assessor.
(11) Police Department.
(12) At the direction of the Board, additional copies of the maps and
application may be forwarded to other Township, county or state
officials.
A. Procedural requirements. All applications for minor site plans shall
include the following support documents and information:
(1) Twenty-six map copies folded and collated.
(2) Escrow agreement form.
(3) Minor site plan application form.
§ 470-90 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-91
460:733
(4) Application and escrow fees as specified in Article VII, Fees, of this
chapter.
(5) Completed minor site plan checklist.
(6) Affidavit of disclosure for corporations as required by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-48.1.
(7) Proof of submission to the County Planning Board.
(8) Signed and sealed certification by the design professional that the
built project conforms to the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:21, New
Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards.
B. Map requirements. All applications for minor site plans shall include
maps and/or exhibits depicting the following information:
(1) Plans shall be submitted on sheets that are no larger than 36 inches
by 24 inches.
(2) The title block shall contain the title "Minor Site Plan"; the
notations of "Township of West Milford" and "County of Passaic";
block and lot number(s), name of firm, name of professional(s)
preparing the plans, certificate of authorization number (reference
N.J.S.A. 45:8-56) and date of original plan preparation and any
revisions and be the title block at the bottom right-hand corner of
the first page and shall not be sideways.
(3) Page numbering shall have the nomenclature "page x of y" and
shall incorporate all plans submitted for review, whether by one
professional or more than one professional.
(4) Plan components drawn by the appropriate professional(s) per
N.J.A.C. 13:40-7 et seq.
(5) Details of any proposed changes to traffic signs, entrance/exit
signs, directional signs, etc.
(6) Name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of record of subject
property.
(7) North arrow giving reference meridian.
(8) Key map, with North arrow, at a scale of one inch equals 1,200 feet.
(9) Each subject block and lot, numbered in conformity with the
municipal tax map.
(10) Zoning district boundaries affecting the tract.
(11) Zoning analysis for which the criteria to be included are: lot area,
lot frontage, lot width, each side yard, front yard, rear yard,
existing and proposed building coverage, impervious coverage,
proposed building height, accessory building distance to side line,
§ 470-91 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-91
460:734
accessory building distance to rear line, accessory building
distance to other buildings on site, buffers and the parking
analysis.
(12) Building elevations (architectural renderings) and floor plans of the
building and the changes/additions proposed.
(13) Total existing and proposed building square footage.
(14) Location of proposed structures with size, height and offsets to
property lines indicated.
(15) Location of existing wells and septics on the property.
(16) Height(s) of any proposed retaining walls, with highest height
given for the front yard, side yard and rear yard.
(17) Fence detail for proposed fence(s), to include colors and materials.
(18) Height(s) of proposed fences, with highest height given for front
yard, side yard, and rear yard.
(19) Scale, both written and graphic.
(20) Soil erosion and sediment control plan.
(21) Property line dimensions in feet; and degrees, minutes, and
seconds.
(22) Limit of disturbance lines showing areas to be disturbed by grading
and construction.
(23) For proposed walls greater than four feet in height, provide
engineer's sealed certification and calculations.
(24) Stream encroachment lines.
(25) Contour lines; intervals shall be:
(a) Up to 10% grade: two feet.
(b) Over 10% grade: five feet.
(26) The location of the floodplains.
(27) Easement information to include the locations of all existing
easements on the tract.
(28) Proposed outdoor lighting plan with lighting fixture detail, isolux
lines and light mounting height indicated.
(29) Existing and proposed dumpster location and pad detail.
(30) Existing and proposed off-street parking plans and driveway
locations.
§ 470-91 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-91
460:735
§ 470-92. Action by Township.
(31) Existing and proposed loading zone location and details.
(32) Plans, cross sections, center line profiles, tentative grades and
details of all proposed driveways.
(33) For all rights-of-way abutting the property in question, show edge
of pavement for entire length of frontage and indicate the
ownership.
(34) Existing and proposed sight triangle locations at proposed
driveway/street intersections.
(35) Existing and proposed sight distance profiles for driveway/street
intersections.
(36) Proposed curbline radii.
(37) Plans and calculations for any storm drainage and proposed dry
wells.
(38) Finished grade elevation where changes in contour are proposed.
A. An application for minor site plan shall be complete for purposes of
commencing the applicable time period for action by a municipal
agency when so certified by the municipal agency or its authorized
committee or designee. In the event that the agency, committee or
designee does not certify the application to be complete within 45 days
of the date of its submission, the application shall be deemed complete
upon the expiration of the forty-five-day period for purposes of
commencing the applicable time period unless:
(1) The application lacks information indicated on a checklist adopted
by ordinance and provided to the applicant; and
(2) The municipal agency or its authorized committee or designee has
notified the applicant, in writing, of the deficiencies in the
application within 45 days of submission of the application. The
applicant may request that one or more of the submission
requirements be waived, in which event the agency or its
authorized committee shall grant or deny the request within 45
days. Nothing herein shall be construed as diminishing the
applicant's obligation to prove in the application process that he is
entitled to approval of the application. The municipal agency may
subsequently require correction of any information found to be in
error and submission of additional information not specified in this
article or any revisions in the accompanying document, as are
reasonably necessary to make an informed decision as to whether
the requirements necessary for approval of the application for
development have been met. The application shall not be deemed
incomplete for lack of any such additional information or any
§ 470-91 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-92
460:736
revisions in the accompanying documents so required by the
municipal agency.168
B. Any proposed development determined by the Board to be creating,
imposing, aggravating, or leading to the possibility of an adverse effect
upon either the subject property or upon any adjacent properties may
be required to be revised to remove such adverse effect prior to further
review, classification, or approval by the Board; or, where the remaining
portion of the original tract is of sufficient size to be subdivided or
developed further, the applicant may be required to submit a sketch of
the entire remaining portion of the tract to indicate a feasible plan
whereby the proposed subdivision or development, together with
subsequent subdivisions or developments, may be submitted that will
not create, impose, or aggravate or lead to any such adverse effect.
C. The Board shall act on the proposed plat within 45 days of submission of
a complete application to the administrative officer or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the
Board to act within the prescribed time period shall constitute minor
site plan approval. If approved, all prints of the plat shall be signed by
the Chairman and Secretary of the Board, or the Acting Chairman or
Secretary where either or both may be absent, and returned to the
developer within one week thereof. In the event the same is
disapproved by the Board, the Secretary of the Board shall notify the
developer of such disapproval and reasons therefor.
168. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 470-92 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-92
460:737

ARTICLE XX
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
[Added 12-11-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-51]
§ 470-93. Procedure for submission.
A. Filing an application. Applications for preliminary and final site plan
approval of a wireless telecommunications facility shall be filed
simultaneously, and all applications for preliminary and final site plan
approval of a wireless telecommunications facility shall be filed with the
administrative officer or designee.
B. Distribution. At least 10 days prior to the regularly scheduled monthly
meeting of the Board for which an application is scheduled, the
administrative officer or designee shall distribute copies of the wireless
telecommunications facility site plan and the application in the
following manner:
(1) Township files.
(2) Board Chairman.
(3) Township Engineer.
(4) Board Engineer.
(5) Township Planner.
(6) Township Health Department.
(7) Construction Official.
(8) Fire Subcode Officer.
(9) Environmental Commission.
(10) Subdivision Committee Chairman.
(11) Board Attorney.
(12)MUA.
(13) Tax Assessor.
(14) Police Department.
(15) Landscape architect consultant.
(16)Radio frequency consultant.
(17) At the direction of the Board, additional copies of the maps and
application may be forwarded to other Township, county or state
officials.
§ 470-93 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-94
460:739
§ 470-94. Details required for preliminary and final site plans for
wireless telecommunications facilities in all commercial zones.
A. Procedural requirements. All applications for preliminary and final site
plan approval for wireless telecommunications facilities in commercial
zones shall include the following support documents and information:
(1) Preliminary and final site plan for wireless telecommunications
facilities application form.
(2) Application and escrow fees as specified in Article VII, Fees, of this
chapter.
(3) Escrow agreement form.
(4) Completed preliminary and final site plan for wireless
telecommunications facilities checklist.
(5) Checklist waiver form.
(6) Six sets of site plans. Twenty additional sets of plans will be
requested after the application is deemed complete by the
administrative officer.
(7) Affidavit of disclosure for corporations as required by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-48.1.
(8) An environmental and community impact statement as may be
required in accordance with § 470-15, Environmental and
community impact statement, of this chapter.
(9) Proof of submission to the County Planning Board.
(10) Affidavit of ownership, if the applicant is not the owner of the
property in question.
(11) Health Department review.
(12) Fifteen sets of a photoanalysis of the wireless telecommunications
facility and surroundings to show how the camouflaged facility will
blend with its surroundings.
(13) An engineer's certification that a digital file of the plan on a
3.5-inch floppy or standard compact disc media of the proposed
project in digital exchange format (DXF) or AutoCad (DWG) format
will be submitted upon plan approval.
B. Map requirements. All applications for preliminary and final site plan
shall include maps and/or exhibits depicting the following information:
(1) Plans shall be submitted on sheets that are no larger than 36 inches
by 24 inches.
§ 470-94 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-94
460:740
(2) The title "Preliminary and Final Site Plan" in the title block, which
shall be at the bottom right-hand corner of the first page and shall
not be sideways.
(3) Page numbering shall have the nomenclature "page x of y" and
shall incorporate all plans submitted for review.
(4) If the site plan is too large to fit on one page and the preparer of the
plans uses match sheets, then there shall be an overall plan
showing the entire project on one sheet at a smaller scale.
(5) Clarity shall be used in the presentation of the information.
(6) "County of Passaic" and "Township of West Milford" in the title
block.
(7) Date of original plan preparation and any revisions.
(8) Name and address of developer/applicant.
(9) Name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of record of subject
property.
(10) Names and addresses of all property owners within 200 feet of the
extreme limits of the tract. If the wireless telecommunications
facility is proposed in a right-of-way, then provide the names and
addresses of all property owners within 200 feet of the proposed
pole location.
(11) Acreage of tract to nearest 1/10 of an acre.
(12) North arrow giving reference meridian.
(13)Key map, with North arrow, at a scale of one inch equals 1,200 feet.
(14) Each subject block and lot, numbered in conformity with the
municipal tax map.
(15) Zoning district boundaries affecting the tract and adjoining
properties within 200 feet.
(16) Zoning analysis (a chart showing zone's bulk requirements and
proposed bulk dimensions for the project).
(17) Indicate whether any and all existing structures/features that are
shown on the property survey are to be removed.
(18) Landscaping plan to be drawn by a certified landscape architect, an
architect, engineer, land surveyor, or professional planner in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:40-7 et seq.
(19) Proposed elevations (renderings) of the proposed wireless
telecommunications facility, showing camouflage type.
§ 470-94 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-94
460:741
(20) Natural features in accordance with § 500-71, Natural features, of
the Land Development Ordinance.
(21) Location of proposed structures with size, height and offsets to
property lines indicated.
(22) Location of existing well on the property.
(23) Location of existing septic system on the property.
(24) Locations of all existing structures, public and private rights-ofway,
public utilities and drainage structures within 200 feet of the
property in question. If the wireless telecommunications facility is
proposed in a right-of-way, then provide the locations of all existing
structures within 200 feet of the proposed pole location.
(25) Locations of all properties, with current tax block and lot
designations indicated, within 200 feet of the property in question.
If the wireless telecommunications facility is proposed in a right-ofway,
then provide the locations of all properties, with current tax
block and lot designations indicated, within 200 feet of the
proposed pole location.
(26) The location and height(s) of proposed retaining walls.
(27) Fence detail for proposed fence(s), to include colors and materials.
(28)Name of firm, professional(s) preparing the plans, and certificate of
authorization number in the title block. Plan components are to be
drawn by the appropriate professional(s) per N.J.A.C. 13:40-7 et
seq.
(29) Plan and profile of the access drive with two-foot contours.
(30)Written and graphic scales.
(31) Soil erosion and sediment control plan.
(32) Property line dimensions in feet, degrees, minutes, and seconds.
(33) Proposed grading of all areas to be disturbed.
(34) Proposed utility plan.
(35) Limit of disturbance lines showing areas to be disturbed by grading
and construction.
(36) For proposed walls greater than four feet in height, provide
engineer's sealed certification and calculations.
(37) Indication of any and all tree removal.
(38) The locations of the wetlands and transition areas or a note stating
that none exist.
§ 470-94 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-94
460:742
§ 470-95. Details required for preliminary and final site plans for
wireless telecommunications facilities in the R-1, R-1/I, R-2, R-3,
R-4, LR, R-1/PN, SCC and OR Zones.
(39) The location of the floodplains or a note stating that none exist.
(40) Outdoor lighting plan.
(41) For all rights-of-way abutting the property in question, show edge
of pavement for entire length of frontage and indicate the
ownership.
(42) Existing drainage patterns and any changes proposed to the
drainage on site and off site.
A. Procedural requirements. All applications for preliminary and final site
plan approval for wireless telecommunications facilities in residential
and Office Research Zones shall include the following support
documents and information:
(1) Preliminary and final site plan for wireless telecommunications
facilities application form.
(2) Application and escrow fees as specified in Article VII, Fees, of this
chapter.
(3) Escrow agreement form.
(4) Completed preliminary and final site plan for wireless
telecommunications facilities checklist.
(5) Checklist waiver form.
(6) Six sets of site plans. Twenty additional sets of plans will be
requested after the application is deemed complete by the
administrative officer.
(7) Affidavit of disclosure for corporations as required by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-48.1.
(8) An environmental and community impact statement as may be
required in accordance with § 470-15, Environmental and
community impact statement, of this chapter.
(9) Proof of submission to the County Planning Board.
(10) Affidavit of ownership, if the applicant is not the owner of the
property in question.
(11) Health Department review.
(12) Fifteen sets of a photoanalysis of the wireless telecommunications
facility and surroundings to show how the camouflaged facility will
blend with its surroundings.
§ 470-94 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-95
460:743
(13) An engineer's certification that a digital file of the plan on a
3.5-inch floppy or standard compact disc media of the proposed
project in digital exchange format (DXF) or AutoCad (DWG) format
will be submitted upon plan approval.
B. Map requirements. All applications for preliminary and final site plan
shall include maps and/or exhibits depicting the following information:
(1) Plans shall be submitted on sheets that are no larger than 36 inches
by 24 inches.
(2) The title "Preliminary and Final Site Plan" in the title block, which
shall be at the bottom right-hand corner of the first page and shall
not be sideways.
(3) Page numbering shall have the nomenclature "page x of y" and
shall incorporate all plans submitted for review.
(4) If the site plan is too large to fit on one page and the preparer of the
plans uses match sheets, then there shall be an overall plan
showing the entire project on one sheet at a smaller scale.
(5) Clarity shall be used in the presentation of the information.
(6) "County of Passaic" and "Township of West Milford" in title block.
(7) Date of original plan preparation and any revisions.
(8) Name and address of developer/applicant.
(9) Name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of record of subject
property.
(10) Names and addresses of all property owners within 200 feet of the
extreme limits of the tract. If the wireless telecommunications
facility is proposed in a right-of-way, then provide the names and
addresses of all property owners within 200 feet of the proposed
pole location.
(11) Acreage of tract to nearest 1/10 of an acre.
(12) North arrow giving reference meridian.
(13)Key map, with North arrow, at a scale of one inch equals 1,200 feet.
(14) Each subject block and lot, numbered in conformity with the
municipal tax map.
(15) Zoning district boundaries affecting the tract and adjoining
properties within 200 feet.
(16) Zoning analysis (a chart showing zone's bulk requirements and
proposed bulk dimensions for the project).
§ 470-95 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-95
460:744
(17) Indicate whether any and all existing structures/features that are
shown on the property survey are to be removed.
(18) Landscaping plan to be drawn by a certified landscape architect, an
architect, engineer, land surveyor, or professional planner in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:40-7 et seq.
(19) A plan view diagram, prepared in accordance with the "Plan View
Diagram" depicted in §§ 500-12 and 500-38 of the Land
Development Ordinance, drawn at a scale not less than one inch
equals 30 feet showing:
(a) The monopole location.
(b) A radius of 250 feet around the monopole.
(c) Profile lines A through G.
(d) Location of all trees in excess of six inches in diameter within
the two-hundred-fifty-foot radius.
(20) Seven tables, prepared in accordance with "Table A, Tree Heights
by Profile Line," depicted in §§ 500-12 and 500-38 of the Land
Development Ordinance, providing the following information:
(a) Species of all trees along and within 10 feet each side of the
profile lines.
(b) Heights of all trees along and within 10 feet each side of the
profile lines.
(c) Anticipated heights of all trees at maturity.
(d) Average tree heights and average anticipated tree heights for
each of the seven profile lines.
(21) Completion of Table B, prepared in accordance with "Table B,
Average Tree Height," depicted in §§ 500-12 and 500-38 of the
Land Development Ordinance, to determine the maximum height of
the proposed tower.
(22) Proposed elevations (renderings) of the proposed wireless
telecommunications facility, showing camouflage type.
(23) Natural features in accordance with § 500-71, Natural features, of
the Land Development Ordinance.
(24) Location of proposed structures with size, height and offsets to
property lines indicated.
(25) Indicate on the site plan a two-hundred-fifty-foot radius
surrounding the monopole.
(26) Location of existing well on the property.
§ 470-95 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-95
460:745
(27) Location of existing septic system on the property.
(28) Locations of all existing structures, public and private rights-ofway,
public utilities and drainage structures within 200 feet of the
property in question. If the wireless telecommunications facility is
proposed in a right-of-way, then provide the locations of all existing
structures within 200 feet of the proposed pole location.
(29) Locations of all properties, with current tax block and lot
designations indicated, within 200 feet of the property in question.
If the wireless telecommunications facility is proposed in a right-ofway,
then provide the locations of all properties, with current tax
block and lot designations indicated, within 200 feet of the
proposed pole location.
(30) The location and height(s) of proposed retaining walls.
(31) Fence detail for proposed fence(s), to include colors and materials.
(32)Name of firm, professional(s) preparing the plans, and certificate of
authorization number in the title block. Plan components are to be
drawn by the appropriate professional(s) per N.J.A.C. 13:40-7 et
seq.
(33) Plan and profile of the access drive with two-foot contours.
(34) Five-foot or better contour lines for the entire property in question
except the two-hundred-fifty-foot radius area surrounding the
proposed pole location.
(35) Two-foot contour lines for the two-hundred-fifty-foot radius area
surrounding the proposed pole location.
(36)Written and graphic scales.
(37) Soil erosion and sediment control plan.
(38) Property line dimensions in feet, degrees, minutes, and seconds.
(39) Proposed grading of all areas to be disturbed.
(40) Proposed utility plan.
(41) Limit of disturbance lines showing areas to be disturbed by grading
and construction.
(42) For proposed walls greater than four feet in height, provide
engineer's sealed certification and calculations.
(43) Indication of any and all tree removal.
(44) The locations of the wetlands and transition areas or a note stating
that none exist.
(45) The location of the floodplains or a note stating that none exist.
§ 470-95 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-95
460:746
(46) Outdoor lighting plan.
(47) For all rights-of-way abutting the property in question, show edge
of pavement for entire length of frontage and indicate the
ownership.
(48) Existing drainage patterns and any changes proposed to the
drainage on site and off site.
§ 470-95 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-95
460:747

ARTICLE XXI
Highlands Compliance Requirements
[Added 9-18-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-019]
§ 470-96. Applicability.
This article shall apply to any application for development involving lands
located within (or partially within) the Township Highlands Area that seeks
approval of a site plan, subdivision, or change in use, where approval of
such application would:
§ 470-97. Administrative completeness.
No application for development included in § 470-96 shall be deemed
complete or considered for review by the Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment until and unless the applicant has obtained and provided a
copy of:
A. Result in the ultimate disturbance of one acre or more of land;
B. Produce a cumulative impervious surface area of 1/4 acre or more;
C. In the case of residential development, create three or more dwelling
units; or
D. Introduce or expand on any of the following land uses/facilities:
(1) Landfills;
(2) Permanent storage or disposal of hazardous wastes, industrial or
municipal sludge or radioactive materials, including solid waste
landfills;
(3) Collection and transfer facilities for hazardous wastes, solid wastes
that contain hazardous materials, and radioactive materials;
(4) Industrial treatment facility lagoons; or
(5) Any major or minor potential contaminant source (as identified in
Appendix A and Appendix B of this article, respectively169) on lands
located within 200 feet of the wellhead of any public community
well or public noncommunity well, as these are defined herein.
A. A consistency determination from the Highlands Council indicating that
the application is consistent with the Highlands Regional Master Plan;
or
B. A consistency determination from the Highlands Council indicating that
the application is not consistent with the Highlands Regional Master
Plan, accompanied by a certification, as detailed in § 470-98 below.
169. Editor's Note: Appendix A and Appendix B are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 470-96 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-98
460:749
§ 470-98. Findings of inconsistency.
Where a Highlands Council consistency determination indicates that an
application for development is inconsistent with the Highlands Regional
Master Plan, no such application shall be deemed complete or considered
for review by the applicable Land Use Board, until or unless the applicant
has obtained from the professional(s) responsible for preparation of the
applicant's plans a certification indicating that to the best of the knowledge
and abilities of such professional(s), the application has, since review by the
Highlands Council, been revised to achieve consistency with the Highlands
Regional Master Plan, and specifically describing the revisions made to
achieve such consistency.
§ 470-99. Checklist waiver.
The Township may issue a waiver from the provisions of this article where
it can be established by the applicant and can be verified by the designated
representative(s) of the Township that:
§ 470-100. Highlands Council call-up review.
All municipal waivers or findings of application completeness issued
pursuant to this article shall be issued in writing, inclusive of a statement
indicating the rationale for the determination. All such determinations shall
be subject to Highlands Council call-up review and shall include conditions
requiring same consistent with this section. The municipality shall, within
five calendar days of issuance of all such determinations, provide a copy of
the decision to the applicant and to the Highlands Council. The Highlands
Council call-up review period shall expire 15 calendar days following its
receipt of same. Upon determining to exercise this authority for call-up
review, the Highlands Council shall transmit notice to the applicant and
the municipality. Absent any such notification from the Highlands Council
within that time frame, the application shall be considered complete, with
the date of the waiver or finding of application completeness to be as of the
date of first issuance by the municipality.
A. The activity, improvement or development proposed by the subject
application for development has not yet been formally determined to be
exempt from the Highlands Act (See § 470-103 below.), but eligibility
for an exemption has been sufficiently established by the applicant; or
B. The activity, improvement or development proposed in the application
for development will neither encroach upon a Highlands resource or
Highlands Resource Area, nor be of detrimental impact to any
Highlands resource or Highlands Resource Area as these are identified
and delineated in the Highlands Regional Master Plan. The applicant's
professional(s) responsible for preparation of the applicant's plan shall
establish compliance of the above through a formal certification
specifically addressing the Highlands resources and Resource Areas
and related policies and objectives as identified in Chapter 4 of the
Highlands Regional Master Plan.
§ 470-98 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-101
460:750
§ 470-101. Notice requirements.
The provisions of this section shall apply in addition to all requirements
concerning public notice for applications for development as provided
under the MLUL and required pursuant to the underlying municipal land
use ordinances.
§ 470-102. Highlands Council approval.
A. Notice to Highlands Council of application. The applicant for any
application for development shall provide notice to the Highlands
Council at least 10 days prior to the date on which the application is
scheduled for consideration by the local Board. A copy of the complete
application shall accompany such notice regarding any application for
development involving the potential disturbance of two acres or more,
or a cumulative increase in impervious coverage of one acre or more.
The applicant shall provide copies of any subsequent revisions to such
applications to the Highlands Council at the same time these are
provided to the reviewing Board. If such plans or plats have been
prepared in digital form, they shall be provided to the Highlands
Council in a digital format that meets Highlands Council standards for
such submissions.
B. Notice of decision required. The reviewing Board shall provide a
certified copy of the fully executed resolution memorializing its final
decision regarding any application for development to the Highlands
Council within 10 days of its adoption. This provision shall apply in all
cases, whether the Board approves the application for development,
denies it, or approves it with conditions.
A. All Board decisions pertaining to applications for development
involving the ultimate disturbance of two acres or more of land or a
cumulative increase in impervious surface by one acre or more are
subject to call-up and subsequent review by the Highlands Council in
accordance with procedural requirements and time frames established
pursuant to the Highlands Act. The Highlands Council may, on notice to
the applicant within 15 calendar days of receipt of the memorializing
resolution of the reviewing Board, review and require a public hearing
on the application. In that case, subsequent to the hearing, the
Highlands Council may approve the application for development, deny
it, or issue an approval with conditions.
B. The following conditions of approval shall be attached to any
application for development approved pursuant to the MLUL which
involves lands within or partially within the Highlands Preservation
Area.
(1) No land disturbance. No land disturbance approved in connection
with an application for development involving the ultimate
disturbance of two acres or more of land or a cumulative increase
§ 470-101 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-102
460:751
§ 470-103. Exclusions; exemptions.
in impervious surface by one acre or more shall occur until and
unless either:
(a) The Highlands Council call-up period has expired without
issuance of a notice seeking review of the application by the
Highlands Council; or
(b) The Highlands Council has issued notice, and has reviewed the
approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:20-17a(1), and has
determined not to deny or modify the approval.
(2) Amendments. In the event that Highlands Council review of an
approved application for development pursuant to this section
results in a finding that the plans must be modified, the applicant
shall amend the application accordingly and submit the amended
application to the reviewing Board for approval. Such submissions
shall include the written findings and notice of decision of the
Highlands Council, and any subsequent approval by the Land Use
Board shall incorporate any conditions imposed by the Highlands
Council.
(3) Approvals conditioned on state approvals. All approvals shall be
subject to the approval of any and all state agencies or other
authorities having jurisdiction over any aspect or aspects of the
approved application for development.
(4) As-built surveys required. Prior to issuance of any final certificate
of occupancy or approval, or to the release of any performance
bonding held in relation to the approved application for
development, the applicant shall provide an "as-built" survey
depicting the final site conditions.
(5) Submission of final plans/plats to Highlands Council. The applicant
shall provide a copy of any final site plan or subdivision plat to the
Highlands Council. If such plans or plats have been prepared in
digital form, they shall be provided to the Highlands Council in a
digital format that meets Highlands Council standards for such
submissions in lieu of copies printed on paper.
A. Exclusions. The following specific improvements and related
applications shall be excluded from the provisions of this article:
(1) The reconstruction, within the same footprint, of any building or
other structure lawfully existing as of the effective date of this
article, in the event of its destruction or partial destruction by fire,
storm, natural disaster, or any other unintended circumstance.
(2) Any improvement or alteration to a building or other structure
lawfully existing as of the effective date of this article, where such
improvement or alteration is necessary for compliance with the
§ 470-102 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-103
460:752
§ 470-104. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Highlands Compliance Requirements article, the
following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the
meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this article clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context,
words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the
provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act, or otherwise
provides accessibility to the disabled.
(3) Any agricultural or horticultural use or development that would not
result in either:
(a) An increase, since the date of enactment of the Highlands Act
(August 10, 2004), either individually or cumulatively, of new
agricultural impervious cover of greater than 3% to the total
land area of a farm management unit. Solar panels shall not be
included in any calculation of agricultural impervious cover (all
terms as defined in § 470-104 below); or
(b) Construction of three or more residential dwelling units
(including accessory dwelling units) served by individual onsite
septic systems.
B. Exemptions. Any activity, improvement or development project listed
and demonstrated to constitute a Highlands Act exemption shall be
exempt from the provisions of this article. Formal demonstration of a
Highlands Act exemption for an application for development involving
lands located (or partially located) in the Preservation Area shall
consist of one of the following:
(1) State agency determination. State agency determinations shall
consist of a Highlands applicability determination (HAD) issued by
the NJDEP indicating that the proposal qualifies as a Highlands Act
exemption.
(2) Municipal determination. Pursuant to Township Ordinance No.
2013-018, entitled "Highlands Preservation Area Exemption
Standards" effective as of October 8, 2013,170 for any application
under this article involving Highlands Act Exemption Nos. 1, 2, 4,
5, 6, 7, and 8, the applicant may request and shall be deemed to
have satisfied the evidentiary requirement by obtaining a municipal
exemption determination issued by the municipal exemption
designee, provided such determination indicates that the proposal
qualifies as a Highlands Act exemption. The applicant may rely
upon the findings of a municipal exemption determination to the
same extent and with the same protections as would apply in the
case of an HAD issued by the NJDEP.
170. Editor's Note: See Ch. 500, Zoning, § 500-162 et seq.
§ 470-103 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-104
460:753
plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory
and not merely directory.
AGRICULTURAL IMPERVIOUS COVER — Agricultural or horticultural
buildings, structures or facilities, with or without flooring, residential
buildings and paved areas, but not meaning temporary coverings.
AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT — Construction
for the purposes of supporting common farm site activities, including, but
not limited to, the production, harvesting, storage, grading, packaging,
processing, and the wholesale and retail marketing of crops, plants,
animals, and other related commodities and the use and application of
techniques and methods of soil preparation and management, fertilization,
weed, disease, and pest control, disposal of farm waste, irrigation, drainage
and water management, and grazing.
AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL USE — The use of land for common
farm site activities, including, but not limited to, the production, harvesting,
storage, grading, packaging, processing, and the wholesale and retail
marketing of crops, plants, animals, and other related commodities and
the use and application of techniques and methods of soil preparation and
management, fertilization, weed, disease, and pest control, disposal of farm
waste, irrigation, drainage and water management, and grazing.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance, or direction of the issuance of a permits pursuant to Section 25 or
Section 27 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (C. 40:55D-34 or C. 40:55D-36).171
DISTURBANCE — The placement of impervious surface, the exposure or
movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
DISTURBANCE, ULTIMATE — The total existing or proposed area of
disturbance of a lot, parcel, or other legally designated (or otherwise legally
recognized) tract or subdivision of land, for the purpose of, and in
connection with, any human activity, property improvement, or
development, including the surface area of all buildings and structures,
all impervious surfaces, and all associated land disturbances such as
excavated, filled, and graded areas, and all lawn and landscape areas.
Ultimate disturbance shall not include areas of prior land disturbance which
at the time of evaluation: a) contain no known man-made structures
(whether above or below the surface of the ground) other than such features
as old stone rows or farm field fencing; and b) consist of exposed rock
outcroppings, or areas which, through exposure to natural processes (such
as weathering, erosion, siltation, deposition, fire, flood, growth of trees
or other vegetation) are no longer impervious or visually obvious, or
171. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
§ 470-104 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-104
460:754
ecologically restored areas which will henceforth be preserved as natural
areas under conservation restrictions.
FARM MANAGEMENT UNIT — A parcel or parcels of land, whether
contiguous or noncontiguous, together with agricultural or horticultural
buildings, structures and facilities, producing agricultural or horticultural
products, and operated as a single enterprise.
HIGHLANDS ACT — The Highlands Water Protection and Planning Act, P.L.
2004, c. 120, as amended, codified in part at N.J.S.A. 13:20-1 et seq.
HIGHLANDS APPLICABILITY DETERMINATION — The determination
made by the NJDEP of whether a project proposed for the Preservation
Area is a major Highlands development, whether any such major Highlands
development is exempt from the Highlands Act, and whether the project is
consistent with the applicable Area-Wide Water Quality Management Plan.
HIGHLANDS AREA — That portion of the municipality for which the land
use planning and regulation are in conformance with, or are intended or
proposed to be in conformance with, the Highlands Regional Master Plan,
specifically the Highlands Preservation Area.
HIGHLANDS COUNCIL — The New Jersey Highlands Water Protection and
Planning Council.
HIGHLANDS REGION — All that area within the boundaries of the
municipalities listed in Subsection a of Section 7 of the Highlands Act.172
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any structure, surface, or improvement that
reduces or prevents absorption of stormwater into land, including, but
not limited to, porous paving, paver blocks, gravel, crushed stone, decks,
patios, elevated structures, and other similar structures, surfaces, or
improvements.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE, CUMULATIVE — The total area of all existing or
proposed impervious surfaces situated or proposed to be situated within the
boundary lines of a lot, parcel, or other legally recognized subdivision of
land, expressed either as a measure of land area such as acreage or square
feet, or as a percentage of the total lot or parcel area.
MAJOR POTENTIAL CONTAMINANT SOURCES (PCS) — Land uses and
activities determined by the Highlands Council to pose a major risk of
groundwater contamination (See Appendix A.173).
MINOR POTENTIAL CONTAMINANT SOURCES (PCS) — Land uses and
activities determined by the Highlands Council to pose a minor risk of
groundwater contamination (See Appendix B.174).
MUNICIPAL LAND USE LAW (MLUL) — The New Jersey Municipal Land
Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
NJDEP — New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
172. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:20-7a.
173. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
174. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 470-104 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-104
460:755
NJDEP PRESERVATION AREA RULES — The regulations established by the
NJDEP to implement requirements of the Highlands Act, titled "Highlands
Water Protection and Planning Act Rules," and codified at N.J.A.C. 7:38-1.1
et seq.
PLAN CONFORMANCE — The process by which a municipality revises the
Master Plan, development regulations and other regulations related to the
development and use of land to conform them with the goals, requirements,
and provisions of the Regional Master Plan in accordance with the
Highlands Plan Conformance Guidelines.
PRESERVATION AREA — That portion of the Highlands Region so
designated by Subsection b of Section 7 of the Highlands Act.175
PUBLIC COMMUNITY WELL — A well that provides water to a public water
system serving at least 15 service connections used by year-round residents
or regularly serving at least twenty-five-year-round residents.
PUBLIC NONCOMMUNITY WELL — A well that is not a public community
well and that provides water to a public water system regularly serving at
least 25 individuals for at least 60 days in any given calendar year.
REGIONAL MASTER PLAN — The Highlands Regional Master Plan or any
revision thereof adopted by the Highlands Council pursuant to N.J.S.A.
13:20-8.
SOLAR PANEL — An elevated panel or plate, or a canopy or array thereof,
that captures and converts solar radiation to produce power, and includes
flat plate, focusing solar collectors, or photovoltaic solar cells, and excludes
the base or foundation of the panel, plate, canopy, or array (as defined by
the Highlands Act, N.J.S.A. 13:20-1 et seq., as amended.)
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above, or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
175. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:20-7b.
§ 470-104 WEST MILFORD CODE § 470-104
460:756
Chapter 500
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 110.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 158.
Garage sales — See Ch. 174.
Junkyards — See Ch. 195.
Noise — See Ch. 226.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 332.
Tree removal — See Ch. 371.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 420.
Subdivision of land and site plan review — See
Ch. 470.
§ 470-104 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 470-104
460:757

ARTICLE I
Zone Districts and Map
§ 500-1. Zoning districts established.
For the purpose of this chapter, the Township of West Milford is hereby
divided into districts as follows:
R-1/PN Multifamily Residential
R-1 and R-1/I [Amended 6-6-2001
by Ord. No. 2001-17]
Higher Density Residential
R-2 Moderate Density Residential
R-3 Low Density Residential
R-4 Very Low Density Residential
LR Lakeside Residential
LC Lake Commercial
SHD/R-2 Rental Overlay/R-2 Special Housing
District/Residential
RPLS [Added 11-13-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-44]
Residential and Professional/Limited
Service
NC Neighborhood Commercial
HC Highway Commercial
CC Community Commercial
VC Village Commercial
OR Office Research
OT [Added 2-10-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-1]
Office Transition Zone
SED Special Economic District
LMI Limited Manufacturing and
Industrial
SCC Senior Congregate Care Zone
AHZ Airport Hazard Zone
HNCP [Added 12-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-030]
Historic New City Preservation Zone
§ 500-2. Zoning Map. [Amended 6-16-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-4;
12-15-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-018]
The GIS Parcel Layer Map, with amendments through December 15, 2010,
shall be the Zoning Map of the Township of West Milford.176
176. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 500-1 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-3
460:759
§ 500-3. Interpretation of boundaries.
Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow street center lines,
railroad rights-of-way, streams and lot or property lines as they exist on
lots of record at the time of enactment of this chapter unless otherwise
indicated by dimensions on the Zoning Map. Any dimensions shown shall be
in feet and measured horizontally and, when measured from a street, shall
be measured from the street right-of-way line even if the center line of that
street is used for the location of a zoning district line. The exact location of
any disputed zoning district boundary line shall be determined by the Board
of Adjustment. The zoning standards, controls and designations shall apply
to every structure, lot and use within each district, and the district lines
shall extend vertically in both directions from ground level.
§ 500-4. Division of a lot in single ownership.
Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot other than by following
a stream or street, any use permitted in either district may be extended not
more than 20 feet into the adjacent district. A use permitted in the zoning
district so extended shall thereafter be a permitted use in the extended
area. A zoning district line, however, shall be altered only once by utilizing
this section of this chapter, after which the lot use shall be governed by
the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located after the zoning
district boundary line adjustment. Ingress and egress across a commercial
or industrial zone for the purpose of access to a residential zone shall be
permitted.
§ 500-3 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-4
460:760
ARTICLE II
District Regulations
[Amended 12-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-21]
§ 500-5. Conformance required.
No building shall hereafter be used, erected, altered, converted, enlarged,
added to, moved or reduced, wholly or in part, nor shall any land be
designed, used or physically altered for any purpose or in any manner
except in conformance with this chapter. Where a lot is formed from part
of a lot already occupied by a building, such subdivision shall be affected
in such a manner as not to impair any of the requirements of this chapter
with respect to the existing building and all yard and other open space
in connection therewith and so that all resulting lots have adequate
dimensions consistent with the requirements of the zoning district in which
they are located and so that all lots have frontage on a street.
§ 500-5 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-5
460:761

ARTICLE III
Residential Districts
§ 500-6. Applicability.
The regulations and restrictions set forth in this article shall apply to the
following residential districts:
SHD/R-2 — Rental Overlay/R-2 Special
Housing District Residential
R-1/PN — Multifamily Residential
R-1 and R-1/I [Amended
6-6-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-17]
— High Density Residential
R-2 — Moderate Density Residential
R-3 — Low Density Single-Family
Residential
R-4 — Very Low Density Residential
LR — Lakeside Residential
SCC — Senior Congregate Care
AHZ — Airport Hazard Zone
§ 500-7. Purpose of residential districts.
A. The purpose of the R-1/PN, R-1, R-1/I, R-2, and R-3 Districts shall be to
accommodate the new residential growth expected in the Township
with reasonable predictability regarding overall population growth in
order to anticipate future public facilities and services. Residential
clusters may be permitted in specific areas within the R-2, R-3, and R-4
Zones in order to accommodate pressures for growth while fostering
properly coordinated open spaces, recreational areas, floodplains,
wooded tracts and optimum street networks within the utilitarian
rationale of an overall development design. Residential communities
shall also be encouraged utilizing the provisions to provide community
sewer and water facilities in conformance with Township regulations.
[Amended 6-6-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-17]
B. The R-4 District recognizes the existing physical constraints of the
rugged topography and the limitations that the soil and geologic
conditions present for adequate drainage and filtration of septic
effluent. Limited development on large lots is the objective considering
the practical unavailability of sewers and central water facilities, the
remoteness from improved road access and the desire to continue the
rural character of development still prevailing in these areas of the
Township. Residential clustering shall be permitted in this zone to
conserve open space and environmentally sensitive land areas and
provide reasonable lot sizes consistent with planning principles.
§ 500-6 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-7
460:763
§ 500-8. Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings.
Principal permitted uses shall be as follows:
C. The R-3 and R-4 Zones further provide for appropriate outdoor
recreation activities and tourism opportunities in compatibility with the
environment and rural character of the Township. [Added 12-17-1997
by Ord. No. 1997-21]
D. The Lakeside Residential (LR) District is created to develop meaningful
and appropriate residential standards in the lake communities of the
Township. The intent is to respect the existing development patterns of
the lake communities, but to encourage an upgrading in lot sizes. This
approach addresses the Township studies, which suggest future water
and sewer problems in these areas if current development trends are
continued. Advanced technologies, including alternate design, septic
systems, and low flow water devices, as approved by the Township
Departments of Planning and Building and Health are to be
encouraged.
E. The purpose of the Special Housing District/Rental Overlay/Residential
Zone (SHD Rental Overlay/R-2) is to encourage the construction of
moderately priced or least cost housing. This district had previously
been comprised of the mobile home zone. The intent of the Planning
Board is to provide for housing which meets the spirit of the mobile
home zone, but which is more conventional in nature and is more
responsive to the natural constraints of the land.
F. Within residential zones, provision is made for the reasonable
opportunity to locate wireless telecommunications facilities for the
purpose of providing state-of-the-art communication services to the
residents of the Township and the general public, while requiring
standards sufficient to assure the existing rural character of the
Township and the residents themselves are not adversely impacted by
the siting of these facilities. The Township encourages innovative
designs to enable integration of wireless telecommunications facilities
into the Township's natural and built environment in strict accordance
with the provisions listed herein. [Added 12-11-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-51]
A. Farms.
B. Single-family detached dwelling units.177
C. Residential cluster development in the R-2, R-3 and R-4 Districts.
D. Residential communities which provide central sewer and water
facilities in the R-1, R-1/I, R-2 and R-3 Districts, and located within the
177. Editor's Note: Former Subsection 18-3.3C, Public playgrounds, conservation areas, parks
and public uses, which previously followed this subsection, was repealed 12-17-1997 by
Ord. No. 1997-21.
§ 500-7 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-8
460:764
§ 500-9. Accessory uses permitted.
service areas of the Wastewater Management Plan. [Amended by
6-6-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-17]
E. Multifamily residential dwelling units in the R-1/PN District.
F. Public utilities designed to serve the immediate community in which it
is being proposed. This shall include water tanks and systems and
sewerage plants.178
G. Community residences for the developmentally disabled and
community shelters for victims of domestic violence, as defined in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1.
H. Equestrian centers in the R-3 and R-4 Zones.
I. Shooting ranges in R-4 Zone. [Added 12-17-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-21]
J. Bed-and-breakfast. [Added 1-21-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-1]
K. Wireless telecommunications facilities. [Added 12-11-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-51]
A. Swimming pools in accordance with §§ 500-68 and 500-86. [Amended
12-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-21]
B. Accessory structures and uses in accordance with § 500-12, Area and
yard requirements, and § 500-66, Accessory buildings, of the Land
Development Ordinance. For fence requirements around tennis courts,
refer to § 500-68, Fences, walls and sight triangles. [Amended
12-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-21]
C. Boats and trailers and campers to be parked or stored and located in
the rear or side yards when possible. Their dimensions shall not be
counted in determining total building coverage, and they shall not be
used for temporary or permanent living quarters while situated on a lot.
D. Off-street parking and private garages.
E. Signs, see Article XIV.
F. Home occupations.
G. Home professional offices.
H. Bed-and-breakfasts. [Added 1-21-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-1]
I. Residential agriculture.
178. Editor's Note: Former Subsection 18-3.3H, Private active and passive recreational
facilities in the R-3 and R-4 Zone Districts, which previously followed this subsection, was
repealed 12-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-21.
§ 500-8 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-9
460:765
§ 500-10. Conditional uses.
§ 500-11. Maximum building height.
No building shall exceed 35 feet in height and 2 1/2 stories with the
exception of houses constructed on a minimum of three acres, which shall
not exceed 40 feet in height.
§ 500-12. Area and yard requirements.
J. Accessory apartments, except in LR and PN Zones in accordance with
§ 500-19B of this chapter.
K. Fences and walls. (See § 500-68.)
A. Houses of worship in accordance with the provisions of § 500-94 of this
chapter.
B. Schools in accordance with the provisions of § 500-95 of this chapter.
C. Public utilities and essential services of a general nature not specifically
designed to serve only the immediate neighborhood in which they are
located, in accordance with § 500-96 of this chapter. [Amended
7-1-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-12; 12-11-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-51]
D. Community buildings/clubhouses in the LR district only, in accordance
with the provisions of § 500-102.
E. Senior citizens' housing in R-2 District only, in accordance with the
provisions of § 500-105. [Added 5-1-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-13]
F. Conditional recreational uses in the R-3 and R-4 Zones. Where parking
provisions are established, the condition solely addresses the number of
spaces, not the improvements to the parking area design standards as
regulated by § 500-75 of the Land Development Ordinance. [Added
12-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-21]
(1) Golf courses: § 500-106.
(2) Outdoor performing arts centers: § 500-107.
(3) Indoor/outdoor tennis courts or other similar court/racquet games:
§ 500-108.
(4) Campgrounds: § 500-109.
(5) Paintball facilities: § 500-110.
(6) Swimming facilities: § 500-111.
(7) Summer stock theaters: § 500-112.
(8) Day camps: § 500-113.
§ 500-9 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-12
460:766
A. Individual sewerage and water facilities.
Detached Dwellings
Minimum
Requirements R-4 R-3 R-2 R-1
Principal
building
Lot area
(acres)
4 3 2 1
Lot frontage
(feet)
300 250 200 150
Lot width
(feet)
300 250 200 150
Lot depth
(feet)
275 250 225 200
Side yard,
each (feet)
60 50 40 30
Front yard
(feet)
125 100 75 50
Rear yard
(feet)
125 100 75 50
Accessory
building
Minimum
distance to:
Side line
(feet)
50 50 30 15
Rear line
(feet)
50 50 30 15
Other
buildings
(feet)
20 20 20 20
Maximum
building
coverage
Principal
building
10% 10% 10% 10%
Accessory
building,
maximum
square feet
1,500 1,500 1,500 800
§ 500-12 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-12
460:767
B. With central sewerage and water facilities and located within a
wastewater management service area. [Amended 6-6-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-17]
Detached Dwellings
Minimum
Requirements R-3 R-2 R-1 R-1/I
Principal building
Lot area (square feet) 25,000 20,000 15,000 15,000
Lot frontage (feet) 140 125 110 110
Lot width (feet) 140 125 110 110
Lot depth (feet) 175 150 125 125
Side yard, each (feet) 40 30 25 25
Front yard (feet) 50 40 35 35
Rear yard (feet) 70 60 45 45
Accessory building
Minimum distance to:
Side line (feet) 15 10 10 10
Rear line (feet) 15 10 10 10
Other building (feet) 20 15 15 15
Maximum building
coverage
Principal building 10% 10% 10% 10%
Accessory building,
maximum square feet
750 600 450 450
C. Residential cluster (individual sewer and water).
Minimum Requirements R-4 R-3 R-2
Principal building
Lot area (acres) 2 1.5 1
Lot frontage (feet) 200 175 150
Lot width (feet) 200 175 150
Lot depth (feet) 225 200 200
Side yard, each (feet) 40 35 30
Front yard (feet) 75 65 50
Rear yard (feet) 75 65 50
Accessory building
Minimum distance to:
Side line (feet) 30 20 15
§ 500-12 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-12
460:768
Minimum Requirements R-4 R-3 R-2
Rear line (feet) 30 20 15
Other building (feet) 20 15 15
Maximum building coverage
Principal building 10% 10% 10%
Accessory building, maximum
square feet
1,500 1,500 1,500
D. Lakeside Residential District.
Minimum Requirements LR
Principal building
Lot area (square feet) 20,000
Lot frontage (feet) 120
Lot width (feet) 120
Lot depth (feet) 150
Side yard, each (feet) 30
Front yard (feet) 40
Rear yard (feet) 60
Accessory building
Minimum distance to:
Side line (feet) 10
Rear line (feet) 10
Other building (feet) 15
Maximum building coverage
Principal building 10%
Accessory building 3%
E. Wireless telecommunications facilities subject to the following: [Added
12-11-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-51]
(1) Area and height requirements.
(a) Minimum lot area: 25 acres.
(b) Minimum front yard setback (setbacks are taken from the
outer limits of fencing around the compound): as required by
zone.
(c) Minimum rear yard setback (setbacks are taken from the outer
limits of fencing around the compound): 300 feet.
(d) Minimum side yard setback (setbacks are taken from the outer
limits of fencing around the compound): 300 feet.
§ 500-12 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-12
460:769
(e) Maximum height: not to exceed 10 feet above the identified
average of the tree height determined in the following manner:
§ 500-12 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-12
460:770
Explanations for Diagram and Tables
The Plan View Diagram depicts the two-hundred-fifty-foot
radius with seven profile lines distanced from each other as
shown. Within this radius, all trees with a diameter of six
inches or greater are to be located and the location depicted
on the Plan View Diagram. All trees surveyed that fall along
and within 10 feet of each side of the profile lines are then to
have their tree height surveyed and recorded on Table A.
Table A is a compilation of the surveyed tree heights and
tree species as identified along the profiles in the Plan View
Diagram. The information will be exhibited by the applicant
on seven separate tables (Tables A1 through A7), one for each
profile line.
Table B is the final compilation of the average tree heights and
average anticipated tree heights for each of the seven profile
lines (as calculated in Tables A1 through A7) to determine
the maximum height of the proposed wireless
telecommunications facility.
The monopole and antennas shall be designed as a tree in
appearance to include branches and appropriate painting or,
if located in an open field area, the design shall be a barn silo
not to exceed 50 feet in height with the equipment housed
within a barn structure design.
(2) Property owned or leased by the Township of West Milford, any
Township Fire Company or First Aid Squad or the Township
Municipal Utilities Authority shall be exempt from the twenty-fiveacre
minimum lot size requirement subject to the following
standards:
(a) Minimum lot area: 1.75 acres.
(b) Antennas shall either be affixed to the building within such
structural appurtenances as a bell tower, cupola, spire or
affixed to a flat roof with a mansard screen, or if a monopole is
proposed, it shall be designed as a flagpole or a tree, to be
determined by the Planning Board.
(c) Minimum front yard setback (setbacks are taken from the
outer limits of fencing around the compound): 50 feet or the
height of the structure, whichever is greater.
(d) Minimum rear yard setback (setbacks are taken from the outer
limits of fencing around the compound): 50 feet or the height of
the structure, whichever is greater.
(e) Minimum side yard setback (setbacks are taken from the outer
limits of fencing around the compound): 50 feet or the height of
the structure, whichever is greater.
§ 500-12 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-12
460:771
§ 500-13. Sewer and water facilities. [Amended 9-17-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-007]
Where zoning standards for sewer and water facilities are utilized, those
facilities must be provided by the applicant. The systems shall be designed
in accordance with the West Milford Township Municipal Utilities Authority
(MUA) and the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
requirements, including the Township's Wastewater Management Plan, and
located in a designated service area. Such facilities shall be dedicated to
the MUA for ownership and operation within an agreed-upon period of
time. If public sewer facilities are provided, but it is determined by the
Planning Board that it is impractical to provide public water facilities, the
applicant may nonetheless utilize the reduced area and yard requirements
of § 500-12B, provided that the applicant complies with the requirements
of § 470-15.1, Water supply and water quality requirements, with respect to
individual wells to serve the subdivision lots.
§ 500-14. Cluster single-family development.
(f) Maximum height of structure: 90 feet.
(3) Maximum height of the compound security fence shall be six feet.
(4) Antennas may be affixed to existing telephone poles, utility
stanchions, or streetlights either within public rights-of-way or on
properties identified in Subsection E(2), and not extending more
than five feet above the existing height of the pole or stanchion.
The support equipment is subject to:
(a) Placement on the pole; or
(b) Placement at the base within the right-of-way; or
(c) Placement underground.
(5) Collocation is permitted on monopoles or lattice towers that were
approved by the Planning Board or Zoning Board prior to the
enactment of this Subsection E; however, the height of the support
structure shall not be extended.
(6) Driveways are subject to the requirements set forth in the
Engineering Department's Site Improvement Checklist.
(7) All electrical connections, wires and conduit from the antenna
structures to the ground structures shall be installed underground.
(8) In the event such wireless telecommunications facilities are
abandoned or not operated for the use as approved for a period of
six months, the same shall be removed, at the option of the
Township, at the sole expense of the property owner.
A. Cluster single-family residential development may be utilized in the
R-2, R-3 and R-4 Zones. The overall density shall be determined by
§ 500-12 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-14
460:772
§ 500-15. Minimum tract size requirements.
The following minimum tract size shall be required for the use of specific
zoning standards:
§ 500-16. Minimum off-street parking.
§ 500-17. Additional standards.
See Article IX, General Provisions and Design Standards, for additional
standards.
§ 500-18. Planned neighborhoods. [Amended 4-6-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-11; 11-2-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-35]
utilizing the standard lot size requirements of the zone. The appropriate
number of lots may then be reduced in size to the cluster residential
standards.
B. The balance of the tract not being utilized for building area under the
cluster residential standards shall be preserved as open space. This
open space may be held in private ownership, or may require open
space easements, rights-of-way, etc. If maintained in private ownership,
appropriate deed restrictions and maintenance arrangements shall be
established by the applicant. It shall be the Planning Board's
determination as to the disposition of the open space areas.
A. Community sewer and water development: 50 acres.
B. Cluster residential development: 20 acres.
A. Dwelling units shall provide two spaces per dwelling unit which may
include garage spaces.
B. Home occupations shall provide one space per 200 square feet of gross
floor area or fraction thereof devoted to the home occupation, subject to
administrative approval of Planning Director, Township Engineer, and
Construction Official.
C. Home professional offices shall provide one space per 150 square feet
of gross floor area or fraction thereof devoted to the professional home
office, subject to administrative approval of Planning Director,
Township Engineer, and Construction Official.
D. See § 500-73 for additional standards.
A. Permitted. Planned neighborhoods are permitted in areas where
indicated on the Zoning Map under the R-1/PN designation.
B. Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings:
§ 500-14 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-18
460:773
(1) Detached dwelling units, two-family dwelling units, townhouse
dwelling units, zero lot line development, duplex, triplex and
quadraplex housing units.
(2) Uses permitted in the NC Zone with the exception of service
stations and bars and taverns as individual uses in accordance with
the standards specified for such uses in Article IV, Commercial
Districts, provided no more than 2% of the tract area is devoted to
such uses.
(3) Public playgrounds, conservation areas, parks and public purpose
uses.
(4) Wireless telecommunications facilities subject to the following:
[Added 12-11-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-51]
(a) Area and height requirements.
[1] Minimum lot area: 25 acres.
[2] Minimum setback to any perimeter property line (setbacks
are taken from the outer limits of fencing around the
compound): 300 feet.
[3] Minimum setback to any building occupied or intended for
occupancy as a residential use (setbacks are taken from
the outer limits of fencing around the compound): 100
feet.
[4] Maximum height: not to exceed 10 feet above the
identified average of the tree height determined in the
following manner:
§ 500-18 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-18
460:774
§ 500-18 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-18
460:775
Explanations for Diagram and Tables
The Plan View Diagram depicts the two-hundred-fifty-foot
radius with seven profile lines distanced from each other
as shown. Within this radius, all trees with a diameter of
six inches or greater are to be located and the location
depicted on the Plan View Diagram. All trees surveyed
that fall along and within 10 feet of each side of the
profile lines are then to have their tree height surveyed
and recorded on Table A.
Table A is a compilation of the surveyed tree heights and
tree species as identified along the profiles in the Plan
View Diagram. The information will be exhibited by the
applicant on seven separate tables (Tables A1 through
A7), one for each profile line.
Table B is the final compilation of the average tree heights
and average anticipated tree heights for each of the seven
profile lines (as calculated in Tables A1 through A7) to
determine the maximum height of the proposed wireless
telecommunications facility.
The monopole and antennas shall be designed as a tree in
appearance to include branches and appropriate painting
or, if located in an open field area, the design shall be
a barn silo not to exceed 50 feet in height with the
equipment housed within a barn structure design.
(b) Property owned or leased by the Township of West Milford, any
Township Fire Company or First Aid Squad or the Township
Municipal Utilities Authority shall be exempt from the twentyfive-
acre minimum lot size requirement subject to the following
standards:
[1] Minimum lot area: 1.75 acres.
[2] Antennas shall either be affixed to the building within such
structural appurtenances as a bell tower, cupola, spire or
affixed to a flat roof with a mansard screen, or if a
monopole is proposed, it shall be designed as a flagpole or
a tree, to be determined by the Planning Board.
[3] Minimum front yard setback (setbacks are taken from the
outer limits of fencing around the compound): 50 feet or
the height of the structure, whichever is greater.
[4] Minimum rear yard setback (setbacks are taken from the
outer limits of fencing around the compound): 50 feet or
the height of the structure, whichever is greater.
§ 500-18 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-18
460:776
[5] Minimum side yard setback (setbacks are taken from the
outer limits of fencing around the compound): 50 feet or
the height of the structure, whichever is greater.
[6] Maximum height of structure: 90 feet.
(c) Maximum height of the compound security fence shall be six
feet.
(d) Antennas may be affixed to existing telephone poles, utility
stanchions, or streetlights either within public rights-of-way or
on properties identified in Subsection B(4)(b), and not
extending more than five feet above the existing height of the
pole or stanchion. The support equipment is subject to:
[1] Placement on the pole; or
[2] Placement at the base within the right-of-way; or
[3] Placement underground.
(e) Collocation is permitted on monopoles or lattice towers that
were approved by the Planning Board or Zoning Board prior to
the enactment of this Subsection B(4); however, the height of
the support structure shall not be extended.
(f) Driveways are subject to the requirements set forth in the
Engineering Department's Site Improvement Checklist.
(g) All electrical connections, wires and conduit from the antenna
structures to the ground structures shall be installed
underground.
(h) In the event such wireless telecommunications facilities are
abandoned or not operated for the use as approved for a period
of six months, the same shall be removed, at the option of the
Township, at the sole expense of the property owner.
C. Accessory uses permitted.
(1) Private residential swimming pools; see § 500-86 for standards.
(2) Off-street parking and private garages.
(3) Signs, see Article XIV, Signs.
(4) Temporary construction trailers and one sign not exceeding 100
square feet, advertising the prime contractor, subcontractors,
architect, financing institution and similar data for the period of
construction beginning with the issuance of a construction permit
and concluding with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or
one year, whichever is less, provided such trailer and sign are on
the site where construction is taking place and is set back at least
15 feet from all street and lot lines.
§ 500-18 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-18
460:777
(5) Recreational facilities.
(6) Community centers.
(7) Fences and walls (see § 500-68).
(8) Maintenance and utility buildings in connection with maintenance
of the common open space.
D. General requirements.
(1) Minimum tract size. The minimum tract size in which the
provisions of this section can be applied shall be 50 acres.
(2) Maximum residential density. Planned neighborhoods shall be
developed at a gross density of not more than four dwelling units
per acre excluding any acreage devoted to the optional
neighborhood commercial uses.
(3) Utilities. The development proposed under this provision shall
provide central sewer and water facilities for the facility which
shall be approved by the West Milford Township Municipal Utilities
Authority and the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection and which shall conform to the Township's Wastewater
Management Plan. Electric utilities shall be placed underground.
(4) Maximum building height. No building shall exceed 35 feet in
height or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is less.
(5) Buffers. The minimum buffer along a public roadway shall be 100
feet. The minimum buffer area along the perimeter side and rear
property lines of the site shall be 100 feet.
(6) Natural features. The natural features and critical areas provisions
of this chapter shall apply to all planned neighborhood
developments. See § 500-71.
E. Bulk requirements.
(1) For multifamily units:
Zero Lot Line
Dwellings
Single-Family
Dwellings
Principal buildings
Lot area (square feet) 5,000 10,000
Lot frontage (feet) 50 75
Lot width (feet) 50 75
Lot depth (feet) 90 100
Side yard (feet)
One side 30 15
§ 500-18 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-18
460:778
Zero Lot Line
Dwellings
Single-Family
Dwellings
Other side 0 15
Front yard (feet) 20 25
Rear yard (feet) 25 30
Duplex Triplex
Quadraplex
Townhouse
Minimum distance
between buildings
(feet)
50 50 50 50
Front yard setback
(feet)
20 20 20 20
Zero Lot Line
Dwellings
Single-Family
Dwellings
Accessory building
Minimum distance to:
Side line (feet) 10 15
Rear line (feet) 10 15
Other building (feet) 10 15
Maximum building
coverage
Principal building 20% 15%
Accessory building 7%
350 feet
5%
500 feet
(2) No townhouse dwelling unit shall be less than 16 feet wide. No
building shall be longer than 160 feet in length.
(3) Townhouses may be constructed over each other only for those
units required in the development of affordable housing in
accordance with Chapter 470, Article XIII, Affordable Housing. No
more than one unit shall be placed over another.
F. All planned developments shall comply with the provisions of Chapter
470, Article XIII, Affordable Housing, or comply with any other
provisions seeking to provide low- and moderate-income housing.
G. Minimum off-street parking and loading.
(1) Dwelling units shall each provide three parking spaces per unit,
two of which may be located in garage units.
§ 500-18 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-18
460:779
(2) One space per unit shall be provided in off-street parking facilities
(not including individual unit driveways), which shall be located in
close proximity to the units they are intended to serve. These
spaces may be eight feet by 18 feet, and their attendant aisle
widths may be reduced by 10% of the requirements in § 500-74.
(3) Community commercial uses shall provide parking spaces as
provided in § 500-33 and loading areas as provided in § 500-32.
(4) See Article IX, General Provisions and Design Standards, for
additional standards.
H. Open space requirements.
(1) Open space land required. Land area equal to a minimum of 20% of
the tract of land proposed for residential development shall not be
included in lots and shall be set aside for conservation, open space,
floodplain, school sites, recreation and park areas. Such land shall
be optimally related to the overall plan and design of the
development and improved to best suit the purpose for which it is
intended. Land utilized for street rights-of-way shall not be
included as part of the above 20%. Land to be devoted to public
purposes may be offered to the Township or may be owned and
maintained by a resident association. Any lands intended to be
offered to the Township for public purposes shall be so declared
prior to preliminary approval. All lands not offered to and/or not
accepted by the Township shall be owned and maintained by a
resident association.
(2) Requirements. Any lands offered to the Township shall meet the
following requirements:
(a) The minimum size of each parcel offered to the Township shall
be two acres.
(b) Lands offered for recreational purposes shall be improved by
the developer, including equipment, walkways and
landscaping, in order to qualify the lands for acceptance by the
Township.
(c) Any lands offered to the Township shall be subject to review by
the Planning Board which, in its review and evaluation of the
suitability of such land, shall be guided by the Master Plan of
the Township, by the ability to assemble and relate such lands
to an overall plan and by the accessibility and potential utility
of such lands. The Planning Board may request an opinion from
other public agencies or individuals as to the advisability of the
Township's accepting any lands to be offered to the Township.
The Planning Board shall make its recommendation to the
Township Council which shall determine whether or not to
accept the land offered.
§ 500-18 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-18
460:780
(d) Every parcel of land offered to and accepted by the Township
Council shall be conveyed to the Township by deed at the time
final plan approval is granted by the Township Planning Board.
The deed shall contain such restrictions as may reasonably be
required by the Planning Board to effectuate the provisions of
Subsection H(2)(b) of this section, hereinabove pertaining to
the use of such areas.
I. Resident associations. A resident association, established for the
purpose of owning and maintaining common lands and facilities,
including conservation, open space, floodplain, recreation and park
areas, shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43 and the following
provisions:
(1) Membership in any created resident association by all property
owners shall be mandatory. Such required membership in any
created resident association and the responsibilities upon the
members shall be in writing between the association and the
individual in the form of a covenant, with each member agreeing to
his liability for his pro rata share of the association's costs,
providing that the Township shall be a party beneficiary to such
covenant entitled to enforce its provisions. The terms and
conditions of such covenant shall be reviewed by both the Township
Attorney and the Planning Board Attorney prior to final approval.
(2) Executed deeds shall be tendered to the Township simultaneously
with the granting of final approval stating that the prescribed uses
of the lands in the common ownership shall be absolute and not
subject to reversion for possible development in the future.
(3) The resident association shall be responsible for liability insurance,
municipal taxes, maintenance of that land and infrastructure
related to that development, and any facilities that may be erected
on any land deeded to the resident association and shall hold the
Township harmless from any liability, but not limited to stormwater,
roads and related infrastructure and facilities.
(4) Any assessment levied by the resident association may become a
lien on the private properties in the development. The duly created
resident association shall be allowed to adjust the assessment to
meet changing needs, and any deeded lands may be sold, donated
or in any other way conveyed to the Township for public purposes
only.
(5) The resident association initially created by the developer shall
clearly describe in its bylaws the rights and obligations of any
homeowner and tenant in the planned development, along with the
covenant and model deeds and the articles of incorporation of the
association, prior to the granting of final approval by the Township.
(6) Part of the development proposals submitted to and approved by
the Township shall be provisions to insure that control of the
§ 500-18 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-18
460:781
§ 500-19. Accessory apartments.
resident association will be transferred to the individual lot owners
in the development based on a percentage of the dwelling units
sold and/or occupied, together with assurances in the bylaws that
the resident association shall have the maintenance responsibilities
for all lands to which they hold title.
(7) The Construction Official of the Township shall administer the
resident association's provisions of this section in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43.
J. Lands to be set aside simultaneously with final approval. Should the
proposed development consist of a number of stages, the Planning
Board may require that acreage proportionate in size to the stage being
considered for final approval be set aside simultaneously with the
granting of final approval for that particular stage, even though these
lands may be located in different sections of the overall development.
K. Architectural theme. There shall be a cohesive design of units within
any townhouse development such that each dwelling unit is compatibly
designed in relation to all other units, however, is distinct as a result of
such design features as width, yard setbacks, roof design, color,
exterior materials and other materials, singularly or in combination.
L. Phasing.
(1) Where the development is intended to be phased over a number of
years, prior to the granting of preliminary approval for the entire
planned development, there shall be an explanation, including
appropriate maps, indicating the location, number and type of units
to be constructed in each phase and the priority of each phase.
Each development phase shall indicate its relationship to the
circulation and utilities systems completed up to that point in order
to assure their adequacy to serve the total development.
(2) Preliminary approval shall be granted for the complete planned
development proposal before final approval shall be granted for
any phase.
(3) Each development phase shall maintain a proportional balance of
residential uses and nonresidential uses, recreational facilities and
open space to serve the residents. For all development phases
subsequent to the first phase, no building permits may be issued for
construction of units in any such phase until construction of
preceding phases is substantially completed. "Substantially
completed" shall be taken to mean that, as a minimum, all exterior
finish, paving, utilities, fine grading, seeding and landscaping shall
have been completed.
A. Purpose. The purposes of the accessory apartment provision includes:
§ 500-18 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-19
460:782
(1) Provide a housing type which is affordable to the young and elderly
within an established residential setting.
(2) Relieve tax and financial burden of taxpayers on larger parcels of
land and, particularly, to assist the elderly to remain in the
residential neighborhoods.
(3) Limit sprawl-type development by allowing density increases
within certain residential districts.
(4) Maximize the utilization of existing resources through use of
existing water and sewer facilities with potential expansion of
public facilities.
(5) Provide an alternative form of housing in the community.
B. General requirements.
(1) Lot size and zones. The minimum lot size in which an accessory
apartment is permitted shall be one acre. Accessory apartments
shall be permitted in all single-family zones with the exception of
the Lakeside Residential and planned neighborhood zones.
(2) Apartment size. Each accessory apartment shall be a minimum of
300 square feet. The maximum apartment size shall be either 30%
of the existing dwelling or 600 square feet, whichever is smaller.
(3) Ownership. Each dwelling requesting to construct an accessory
apartment shall be owner occupied. Each applicant shall verify to
the satisfaction of the Planning Board that he/she does in fact own
the property and does occupy it as the primary residence. Summer
occupancy does not constitute owner occupancy within the context
of this provision. Further, only one accessory apartment shall be
permitted per single-family lot.
(4) Occupancy. Maximum occupancy of the apartment shall be
restricted to:
(a) Studio: two persons.
(b) One bedroom: three persons.
(5) Unit access. Separate access to the accessory apartment shall be
provided either through an exterior entrance or through an internal
hall or entrance way within the structure. If outside access on the
first floor is provided, access must be on the side or the rear of the
building.
(6) Parking. A minimum of two parking spaces for each dwelling unit
shall be provided. Parking shall be placed so that it does not
interfere with access to and from the property. No parking shall be
permitted in the driveway of the property within 20 feet of the
street line, and an on-site turnaround area is required.
§ 500-19 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-19
460:783
§ 500-20. Home occupations.179
(7) Utilities. Each accessory apartment shall meet all Township and
state health codes for the supply of water and sewer facilities. The
applicant shall have the utilities approved for water yield and
septic capacity prior to the approval of any accessory apartment
and all necessary building requirements and permits.
(8) Apartment location. No accessory apartment shall be permitted in
cellars as defined by the Land Development Ordinance. Apartments
are permitted in basements, provided that light, ventilation, and
windows can be provided on three sides of the building, and direct
outside access is provided.
(9) Appearance. No exterior changes shall be made which detract from
or visually alter the character of the residential zone or
neighborhood. There will be no separate utility meters for the
accessory units. Accessory apartments must be located in the
primary dwelling unit and shall be constructed so that the
accessory unit is not a visual nuisance to the surrounding
residential properties in the determination of the Planning Board.
(10) Eligibility. Lots in the residential zone with an existing apartment
are not eligible under this section. Residential lots within
commercial or industrial zones are not eligible under this section.
(11) The applicants will submit a site plan for an administrative review.
If a unanimous decision cannot be reached, the applicant can
appeal to the Planning Board for a decision. All units will require
notification to the Tax Assessor prior to issuance of certificate of
occupancy.
A. Not more than one person in addition to members of the family residing
on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation.
B. The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the principal
building or an accessory building.
C. The use of a home occupation shall be clearly incidental and
subordinate to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. The
home occupation use shall be limited to not more than 25% of the gross
floor area of the principal building, not including the cellar, or 400
square feet, whichever is smaller.
D. No commercial vehicle used in connection with the home occupation
shall be visible from the public right-of-way.
E. No goods, chattels, materials, supplies or items of any kind shall be
delivered either to or from the premises in connection with a home
179. Editor's Note: See § 500-16, Minimum off-street parking, for parking requirements
applicable to home occupations.
§ 500-19 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-20
460:784
§ 500-21. Home professional offices.180
occupation except in passenger automobiles or vans with a maximum
length of 20 feet.
F. No traffic or parking shall be generated in excess of three automobiles
exclusive of those parking spaces required of the residence by this
chapter. The parking shall be maintained on site with a suitable
turnaround provided.
G. There shall be created no dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise
objectionable fire, explosive or other hazard; noise or vibration, smoke,
dust, odor, or other form of air pollution; heat, cold or dampness;
electromagnetic or other disturbance; glare; liquid or solid refuse or
other wastes; or other objectionable substance, condition or element.
All performance standards specified in Article IX, General Provisions
and Design Standards, of this chapter shall apply.
H. No devices or substances or machines shall be utilized which may cause
interference with or disruption of residential electronic equipment or
that may adversely affect the surrounding residential environment
through electronic disturbance.
A. Not more than two persons in addition to members of the family
residing on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation.
B. The home office shall be conducted entirely within the principal
building or an accessory building.
C. The use of a home office shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to
the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. The home office use
shall be limited to not more than 50% of the gross floor area of the
principal building, not including the cellar, or 800 square feet,
whichever is smaller.
D. No commercial vehicle used in connection with the home occupation
shall be visible from the public right-of-way.
E. No goods, chattels, materials, supplies or items of any kind shall be
delivered either to or from the premises in connection with a home
occupation except in passenger automobiles or vans with a maximum
length of 20 feet.
F. No traffic or parking shall be generated in excess of three automobiles
exclusive of those parking spaces required of the residence by chapter.
The parking shall be maintained on site with a suitable turnaround
provided.
G. There shall be created no dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise
objectionable fire, explosive or other hazard; noise or vibration; smoke,
180. Editor's Note: See § 500-16, Minimum off-street parking, for parking requirements
applicable to home professional offices.
§ 500-20 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-21
460:785
§ 500-22. Airport hazard zone.
§ 500-23. Special Housing District Rental Overlay/Residential.
dust, odor, or other form of air pollution; heat, cold or dampness;
electromagnetic or other disturbance; glare; liquid or solid refuse or
other wastes; or other objectionable substance, condition or element.
All performance standards specified in Article IX, General Provisions
and Design Standards, of this chapter shall apply.
H. No devices or substances or machines shall be utilized which may cause
interference with or disruption of residential electronic equipment or
that may adversely affect the surrounding residential environment
through electronic disturbance.
A. The standards for the control of airport and aeronautical hazards and
for land use within the airport hazard zone shall be as set out in N.J.A.C.
16:62 et seq. except as modified herein. These standards shall become
part of the master plan of development. A copy of N.J.A.C. 16:62 et seq.
is annexed hereto and made a part hereof, by reference.
B. Permitted land uses. The following land uses are permitted within the
airport hazard zone:
(1) Residential single-family dwelling units which are situated on a lot
at least four acres in size, provided that all dwellings are physically
located outside of the clear zone as defined by N.J.A.C. 16:62-3.5.
(2) Open space.
(3) Agriculture.
(4) Airports.
C. Additional standards for residential development.
(1) The standards set out in Article III, Residential Districts, shall apply
to residential development within the airport hazard zone except
where in conflict with N.J.A.C. 16:62 et seq., in which case the
standards set out in N.J.A.C. 16:62 et seq. shall apply.
(2) Area and yard requirements. The area and yard requirements for
residential development within the airport hazard zone shall be as
set out in § 500-12 for the R-4 Zone.
A. Permitted. Special housing developments/residential are permitted in
areas where indicated on the Zoning Map under the SHD Rental
Overlay/R-2 designation.
B. Permitted uses.
§ 500-21 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-23
460:786
(1) Townhouse dwelling units, patio homes, duplexes, triplexes,
quadraplexes, zero lot line housing and alternative housing designs
in accordance with Planning Board review.
(2) Public playgrounds, conservation areas, parks and public purposes
uses.
(3) Single-family residential uses, subject to the R-2 zoning criteria.
(4) Bed-and-breakfasts. [Added 1-21-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-1]
C. Area and yard requirements.
(1) For townhouses and multiplexes:
(a) No townhouse dwelling unit shall be less than 16 feet wide. No
building shall be longer than 160 feet in length.
(b) Building coverage shall not exceed 20% of the tract area.
(c) Accessory uses permitted.
[1] Private residential swimming pools; see § 500-86 for
standards.
[2] Off-street parking and private garages.
[3] Signs. (See Article XIV, Signs.)
[4] Temporary construction trailers and one sign not
exceeding 100 square feet, advertising the prime
contractor, subcontractors, architect, financing institution
and similar data for the period of construction beginning
with the issuance of a construction permit and concluding
with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or one year,
whichever is less, provided such trailer and sign are on the
site where construction is taking place and is set back at
least 15 feet from all street and lot lines.
[5] Fences and walls. (See § 500-68.)
(2) Minimum yard areas shall be measured horizontally in feet and
shall be measured away from the front, side and rear of each
building. The total minimum distance between buildings shall be
the sum of the two abutting yard areas. The minimum yards shall
be 40 feet for front yards, the height of each building for side yards
and 50 feet for rear yards. No building, as measured radially from
any corners, shall be closer to any other building corner than the
combined distances of the side yard requirements for each
building. The combined distance of two side yards shall exclude any
driveway or vehicular access, such driveway or vehicular access
width being in addition to the combined side yard width. In
addition, no building shall be located closer than 25 feet to the
proposed right-of-way line of any public street.
§ 500-23 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-23
460:787
(3) For patio homes, and zero lot line housing, and duplex:
(a) Principal building.
Patio Zero Lot Duplex
Lot area
(square feet)
5,000 5,000 6,000
Lot frontage
(feet)
50 50 60
Lot width
(feet)
50 50 60
Lot depth
(feet)
90 90 90
Side yard,
each (feet)
10 0 to 20 10
Front yard
(feet)
20 20 15
Rear yard
(feet)
25 25 15
(b) Accessory building.
Patio Zero Lot Duplex
Minimum
distance to side
line (feet)
10 10 5
Minimum
distance to rear
line (feet)
10 10 5
Minimum
distance to other
building (feet)
10 10 5
Maximum
building coverage
Principal
building
25% 25% 30%
Accessory
building
8% 8% 5%
(c) Accessory uses permitted.
[1] Private residential swimming pools; see § 500-86 for
standards.
[2] Off-street parking and private garages.
[3] Signs; see Article XIV, Signs.
§ 500-23 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-23
460:788
[4] Temporary construction trailers and one sign not
exceeding 100 square feet, advertising the prime
contractor, subcontractors, architect, financing institution
and similar data for the period of construction beginning
with the issuance of a construction permit and concluding
with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or one year,
whichever is less, provided such trailer and sign are on the
site where construction is taking place and is set back at
least 15 feet from all street and lot lines.
(4) For single family:
(a) Principal building.
[1] Lot area: two acres.
[2] Lot frontage: 200 feet.
[3] Lot width: 200 feet.
[4] Lot depth: 225 feet.
[5] Side yard, each: 30 feet.
[6] Front yard: 75 feet.
[7] Rear yard: 75 feet.
(b) Accessory building.
[1] Minimum distance to:
[a] Side line: 30 feet.
[b] Rear line: 30 feet.
[c] Other buildings: 20 feet.
(c) Accessory uses permitted.
[1] Private residential swimming pools; see § 500-86 for
standards.
[2] Private residential toolsheds not to exceed 10 feet in
height and 150 square feet in area.
[3] Boats and trailers and campers to be parked or stored and
located in the rear or side yards when possible. Their
dimensions shall not be counted in determining total
building coverage, and they shall not be used for
temporary or permanent living quarters while situated on
a lot.
[4] Off-street parking and private garages.
[5] Signs; see Article XIV, Signs.
§ 500-23 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-23
460:789
[6] Home occupations.
[7] Home professional offices.
[8] Residential agriculture.
[9] Accessory apartments.
D. General requirements.
(1) Minimum acreage. The minimum tract acreage in this zoning
district shall be 20 acres for an SHD/R-2 development.
(2) Maximum density: six dwelling units per acre.
(3) Low- and moderate-income family set aside. A minimum of 20% of
the total number of dwelling units proposed for the development
under this zone shall be set aside for low- and moderate-income
housing. The specific structure of the set aside shall conform with
the affordable housing section of this Land Development
Ordinance.181
(4) Balance of units (not set aside for low- and moderate-income
households) may be priced at levels consistent with conventional
market rate units or housing in the area and shall not otherwise be
considered exclusive or luxury.
(5) Community water service is required, either on site or brought in
from off site.
(6) Community wastewater treatment and disposal is required on site
or to an existing treatment facility with adequate capacity. Final
discharge in either case is preferred to be subsurface in nature and
subject to West Milford Township Municipal Utilities Authority and
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection approval.
(7) Unique and creative housing approaches shall be considered in
conjunction with the development within this zone. The design of
special housing district projects shall, however, conform to the
requirements set forth herein.
(8) Natural features. The natural features provisions of this chapter, as
described in § 500-71, apply to this zone.
(9) Water and sewerage shall be constructed to meet the West Milford
Township Municipal Utility Authority's criteria for public
acceptance as well as the requirements of New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection and the adopted Wastewater
Management Plan.
181. Editor's Note: See Ch. 470, Art. XIII, Affordable Housing.
§ 500-23 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-23
460:790
(10) The Planning Board shall have the option to recommend that the
internal road system be public roads if it will foster the objectives
of the zone.
(11) Maximum building height. No building shall exceed 35 feet in
height or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is less.
(12) Buffers. The minimum buffer along a public roadway shall be 100
feet. The minimum buffer area along the side and rear property
lines shall be 50 feet.
(13) Rental units. An overlay zone is established providing low- and
moderate-income rental housing units at a gross density of eight
rental units per acre at a 15% set-aside for low- and moderateincome
units. The maximum number of rental units permitted
under this provision is 54 units.
E. Minimum off-street parking and loading. Dwelling units shall each
provide two parking spaces per unit. Fifty percent of the required
spaces may be eight feet by 18 feet, and their attendant aisle widths
may be reduced by 10%. Bed-and-breakfasts shall provide one space
per guest room in addition to the required two spaces for the
permanent residence. [Amended by 1-21-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-1]
F. Open space requirements. Open space land required. Land area equal
to a minimum of 20% of the tract of land proposed for residential
development shall not be included in lots and shall be set aside for
conservation, open space, recreation and park areas. Such land shall be
optimally related to the overall plan and design of the development and
improved to best suit the purpose for which it is intended. Land utilized
for street rights-of-way shall not be included as part of the above 20%.
Land to be devoted to public purposes may be offered to the Township
or may be owned and maintained by a resident association. Any lands
intended to be offered to the Township for public purposes shall be so
declared prior to preliminary approval. All lands not offered to and/or
not accepted by the Township shall be owned and maintained by a
resident association. Streets within the development may be dedicated
to the Township as determined by the Planning Board.
G. Resident associations. A resident association, established for the
purpose of owning and maintaining common lands and facilities,
including conservation, open space, recreation and park areas, shall be
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43 and the following provisions:
(1) Membership in any created resident association by all property
owners shall be mandatory. Such required membership in any
created resident association and the responsibilities upon the
members shall be in writing between the association and the
individual in the form of a covenant, with each member agreeing to
his liability for his pro rata share of the association's costs,
providing that the Township shall be a party beneficiary to such
§ 500-23 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-23
460:791
covenant entitled to enforce its provisions. The terms and
conditions of such covenants shall be reviewed by both the
Township Attorney and the Planning Board Attorney prior to final
approval.
(2) Executed deeds shall be tendered to the Township simultaneously
with the granting of final approval stating that the prescribed uses
of the lands in the common ownership shall be absolute and not
subject to reversion for possible development in the future.
(3) The resident association shall be responsible for liability insurance,
municipal taxes, maintenance of land and any facilities that may be
erected on any land deeded to the resident association and shall
hold the Township harmless from any liability.
(4) Any assessment levied by the resident association may become a
lien on the private properties in the development. The duly created
resident association shall be allowed to adjust the assessment to
meet changing needs and any deeded lands may be sold, donated
or in any other way conveyed to the Township for public purposes
only.
(5) The resident association initially created by the developer shall
clearly describe in its bylaws the rights and obligations of any
homeowner and tenant in the planned development, along with the
covenant and model deeds and the articles of incorporation of the
association, prior to the granting of final approval by the Township.
(6) Part of the development proposals submitted to and approved by
the Township shall include provisions to insure that control of the
resident association will be transferred to the individual lot owners
in the development based on a percentage of the dwelling units
sold and/or occupied, together with assurances in the by laws that
the resident association shall have the maintenance responsibilities
for all lands to which it holds title.
(7) The Construction Official of the Township shall administer the
resident association's provisions of this chapter in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43.
§ 500-23 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-23
460:792
ARTICLE IV
Commercial Districts
§ 500-24. Applicability. [Amended 11-13-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-44182]
The regulations set forth in this article shall apply to the NC Neighborhood
Commercial, CC Community Commercial, LC Lake Commercial, VC Village
Commercial, HC Highway Commercial Districts, RPLS Residential and
Professional/Limited Service Districts and the OT Office Transition Zone.
§ 500-25. Purpose.
A. The purpose of the NC and CC Districts is to provide areas throughout
the Township where retail and service businesses may be located
primarily for the convenience of the Township residents.
B. The design standards are intended to permit single or multiple principal
buildings and uses on a lot for retail and office complexes. In all
circumstances, the site planning and building designs shall be
completed in a compatible manner with an overall plan for the
development of all lands so zoned in order to coordinate traffic flow,
parking needs, building orientation, landscaping, drainage, and similar
factors which have a relationship to development, whether
implemented cumulatively over a period of years or in one major
development program. [Amended 7-1-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-12;
12-11-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-51]
C. The purpose of the LC District is to provide needed services to the
community which are integrally associated with and promote the
recreational potential of the Township's lakes. It is the purpose of this
district to permit uses which will stimulate recreational interest in the
lakes yet prohibit uses which will detract from the area.
D. The purpose of the VC District is to provide commercial uses and
services in the center portion of the Township in which the design
elements of the district will be coordinated through site design. These
elements include the location of buildings within proximity to the street,
coordinated parking facilities, a uniform street and architectural
landscape design throughout the Town center corridor. The VC District
is intended to encourage pedestrian movement and congregation.
E. The purpose of the HC District is to provide areas in the Township
where highway-related commercial activities may be located in addition
to retail and service uses.
F. The purpose of the RPLS District is to provide for a transition area for a
residential area that has developed historically with professional and
limited service uses. [Added 11-13-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-44]
182. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 500-24 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-25
460:793
§ 500-26. Principal permitted uses on the land and in the buildings.
G. The purpose of the OT District is to provide an office district in a less
intensive transition zone between the more intensive commercial zones
and residential zones. The standards are intended to allow for
nonresidential development that has residential character by
establishing such criteria as residential setbacks, controlled access
points and the merging of adjoining parking lots in the side and rear
yards to preserve front yard landscaped areas. [Added 2-10-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-1]
H. Within these commercial zones, provision is made for the reasonable
opportunity to locate wireless telecommunications facilities for the
purpose of providing state-of-the-art communications services to the
residents of the Township and the general public, while requiring
standards sufficient to assure the existing rural character and the
design characteristics of the Township and the residents themselves are
not adversely impacted by the siting of these facilities. The Township
encourages innovative designs to enable integrating of wireless
telecommunications facilities into the Township's natural and built
environment in strict accordance with the provisions listed herein.
[Added 12-11-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-51]
A. Principal permitted uses in the NC and VC Zones shall be as follows:
(1) Retail sale of goods and services, serving primarily the residents of
the surrounding neighborhoods, or Township residents in the case
of the Village Commercial Zone as individual uses.
(2) Restaurants, excluding drive-ins, bars, taverns as individual uses.
(3) Professional offices.
(4) Banks and financial institutions, excluding drive-ins.
(5) Residential dwelling units above commercial uses.
(6) Existing single-family residential uses.
(7) Child-care centers.
(8) In the VC Zone only: community residences for the developmentally
disabled and community shelters for victims of domestic violence
and homeless/battered women.
(9) Bed-and-breakfasts. [Added 1-21-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-1]
B. Permitted uses in the CC Zone shall be as follows:
(1) All uses permitted in the NC Zone.
(2) Major food stores, department stores.
(3) Child-care centers.
§ 500-25 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-26
460:794
(4) Hotels and motels. [Added 1-21-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-1]
C. Permitted uses in the LC Zone shall be as follows:
(1) Retail sale of goods and services limited to craft and specialty
shops such as art galleries, antique shops, bakery shops, book and
stationery stores, delicatessens, craft stores, wearing apparel
shops, florist shops and boating and specialty sporting goods stores
in keeping with the commercial and recreation development
permitted in the LC District.
(2) Restaurants, bars, taverns and nightclubs as individual uses,
except that there shall be no drive-in business.
(3) Professional offices, banks and financial institutions, excluding
drive-ins.
(4) Theaters and bowling alleys.
(5) Active recreational facilities, but limited to those activities and
facilities oriented towards health and physical fitness such as
tennis or racquet ball facilities and health clubs.
(6) Marinas. The marina may include boat sales, dealerships and the
sale of related sporting goods, as well as ancillary uses such as
restaurants, taverns and boat repair facilities.
(7) Child-care centers.
(8) Bed-and-breakfasts. [Added 1-21-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-1]
(9) Hotels and motels. [Added 1-21-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-1]
D. Permitted uses in the HC Zone shall be as follows:
(1) All uses permitted in the NC Zone with the exception of residential
dwellings of any kind.
(2) Banks and financial institutions, excluding drive-ins.
(3) Furniture stores, theaters.
(4) Garden centers engaged in the retail sales of living plant material
and related garden equipment.
(5) Child-care centers.
(6) Bed-and-breakfasts. [Added 1-21-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-1]
(7) Hotels and motels.183 [Added 1-21-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-1]
183. Editor's Note: Former Section 18-4.2D8, Wireless telecommunications facilities, added
7-1-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-12, which previously followed this subsection, was repealed
12-11-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-51.
§ 500-26 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-26
460:795
E. Principal permitted uses in the RPLS Zone shall be as follows: [Added
11-13-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-44]
(1) Residential dwelling units in accordance with the R-1 Zones.
(2) Retail sales of goods and services limited to the craft and specialty
shops, such as art galleries, antique shops, craft stores and florist
shops.
(3) Professional offices, including physicians, dentists, accountants,
attorneys, and other recognized professions by the State of New
Jersey.
(4) Business and personal service offices, including real estate,
insurance, tax preparation, and similar uses.
(5) Child-care centers.
(6) Community residences for the developmentally disabled and
community shelters for victims of domestic violence and homeless/
battered women.
(7) Bed-and-breakfasts.
(8) Garden centers.
(9) Services including or similar to hairdressers, barber shops, taxi
and limousine services.
F. Wireless telecommunications facilities in the NC, VC, CC, LC and HC
Zones, provided that the subject property or properties are improved
with a principally permitted use, subject to the following: [Added
12-11-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-51]
(1) Proposed antennas shall comply with the following criteria, as
applicable:
(a) Antennas being placed on public streetlights, telephone poles
and utility stanchions, the height of the antennas shall not
exceed five feet above the existing pole or stanchion. The
support equipment is subject to:
[1] Placement on the pole; or
[2] Placement at the base within the right-of-way; or
[3] Placement underground.
(b) Monopoles or lattice towers that were approved by the
Planning Board or Zoning Board prior to the enactment of this
Subsection F, but not extending the height of the support
structure.
(c) Wireless telecommunications facilities disguised within new or
existing church steeples, freestanding clock towers,
§ 500-26 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-26
460:796
freestanding flagpoles or decorative light stanchions, as
follows:
[1] The height of the structure shall not exceed 60 feet.
[2] Freestanding flagpoles, freestanding clock towers and
decorative light stanchions shall maintain the accessory
building setbacks as specified in § 500-28 and shall
maintain a minimum front yard setback of 10 feet.
[3] Freestanding flagpoles, freestanding clock towers and
decorative light stanchions shall not impede vehicular or
pedestrian traffic nor cause sight distance impediments
for vehicles entering or exiting a site.
(d) Roof structures, provided that no aspect of the wireless
telecommunications facility is visible from ground level when
viewed from street frontage.
(2) Equipment shelters to service antennas not located on telephone
poles or streetlights shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from all
property lines and shall be camouflaged in a structure that is
architecturally complementary to the antenna camouflage and the
surrounding buildings, or may be located on the roof, provided that
no aspect of the wireless telecommunications facility is visible from
ground level when viewed from street frontage.
(3) All facilities shall be suitably secured in accordance with § 500-68,
Fences, walls and sight triangles, of this chapter.
(4) Landscaping as screening shall be provided around the security
fencing.
(5) All electrical connections, wires and conduit from the antenna
structures to the ground structures shall be installed underground.
(6) In the event such wireless telecommunications facilities are
abandoned or not operated for the use as approved for a period of
six months, the same shall be removed, at the option of the
Township, at the sole expense of the property owner.
G. Permitted uses in the OT Zone shall be as follows: [Added 2-10-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-1]
(1) Doctor, dentist, insurance, real estate, engineer, architect, planner,
lawyer and similar offices and nonretail uses that are low traffic
generators.
(2) Physical therapist, chiropractor, optometrist, acupuncturist.
(3) Single-family homes.
(4) Residential dwelling units above permitted, nonresidential uses set
forth in Subsections G(1) and (2) herein.
§ 500-26 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-26
460:797
§ 500-27. Accessory uses permitted.
(5) Bed-and-breakfasts.
A. Off-street parking.
B. Signs. (See Article XIV, Signs.)
C. Garages, storage buildings and toolsheds.
D. Outside storage areas for vehicles in the HC District, but only as
provided for in § 500-29C. The number of vehicles permitted shall be
outlined in site plan approval.
E. Temporary construction trailers and one sign not exceeding 100 square
feet, advertising the prime contractor, subcontractor, architect,
financing institution and similar data for the period of construction,
beginning with the issuance of a construction permit and concluding
with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for one year, whichever
is less, provided the trailer and sign are on the site where construction
is taking place and are set back at least 15 feet from all street and lot
lines.
F. Accessory apartments in the NC, VC, LC, RPLS and CC Zones, as
provided for in § 500-31. [Amended 11-13-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-44]
G. Fences and walls. (See § 500-68.)
H. Accessory uses in the OT Zone shall be as follows: [Added 2-10-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-1]
(1) Home occupations in accordance with § 500-9F.
(2) Home professional offices in accordance with § 500-9G.
(3) Off-street parking and loading, which shall be located to the side
and rear of the structure and not within the required buffer areas.
Access drive(s) are permitted within the front yard setback and
buffer areas. Access drive(s) are permitted in the side yard setback
and buffer areas, provided that the purpose of the encroachment is
to provide for shared parking between adjoining properties.
(4) Accessory structures.
(5) Signs in accordance with Article XIV.
(6) Fences and walls in accordance with § 500-68.
(7) Swimming pools in accordance with §§ 500-68 and 500-86.
(8) Residential agriculture.
(9) Site lighting.
§ 500-26 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-28
460:798
§ 500-28. Area and yard requirements. [Amended 11-13-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-44]
A. Area and yard requirements for the NC, LC, CC, HC, VC and RPLS
Zones are as follows:
Zone
NC
LC, CC,
HC VC RPLS
Principal buildings
Lot area (acre) 1/2 1 1/2 1
Lot frontage (feet) 100 150 100 150
Lot width (feet) 100 150 100 150
Lot depth (feet) 100 150 — 150
Side yard, each (feet) 15 25 15 15
Front yard (feet) 35 50 10-20 50
Rear yard (feet) 35 50 50 50
FAR (applies to retail
uses only)
0.26 0.26 — 0.15
Accessory buildings
Distance to side line
(feet)
15 25 15 15
Distance to rear line
(feet)
15 15 20 20
Distance to other
building (feet)
15 20 10 20
Maximum combined
building coverage of
principal and accessory
buildings (nonretail uses)
25% 25% 50% 25%
Total maximum impervious
area coverage (retail uses)
66% 66% 85% 66%
Total impervious area
coverage (nonretail uses)
60% 60% 85% 66%
B. Area and yard requirements for the OT Zone are as follows: [Added
2-10-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-1]
OT Zone
Principal buildings
Minimum lot area 1 acre
Minimum lot width 150 feet
Minimum front yard 50 feet
§ 500-28 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-28
460:799
§ 500-29. General requirements.
OT Zone
Minimum side yard 30 feet
Minimum rear yard 50 feet
Maximum building height 2 stories, not exceeding 35 feet
Maximum lot coverage 50%
Accessory buildings
Minimum side yard 15 feet
Minimum rear yard 35 feet
Maximum height 20 feet
A. Maximum building height. No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
B. Buffers areas.
(1) At least the first 20 feet adjacent to any street line and 10 feet
adjacent to any side or rear lot line shall not be used for parking
and shall be planted and maintained as lawn area, ground cover, or
landscaped with suitable plant material.
(2) For any lot over five acres in size, the first 50 feet adjacent to any
street and rear lot lines and 20 feet adjacent to any side lot line
shall not be used for parking and shall be landscaped as per
Subsection B(1) above.
(3) A minimum buffer area of 35 feet in width shall be provided along
any common property line with a residential district or residential
use for commercial properties five acres or smaller and 50 feet for
commercial properties over five acres.184
C. No merchandise, products, equipment or similar material or objects
shall be displayed or stored outdoors, except that vehicle repair
garages and body shops in the HC District may have an outdoor storage
area for vehicles awaiting repair, provided such outdoor storage area
shall not exceed 20% of the lot area and is located in the rear yard only,
and shall be enclosed by a fence, wall, plant material, or combination
thereof in order to provide a visual barrier between the storage area
and any street, residential zoning district, or existing residential use.
The outdoor storage of boats and boat trailers in the LC Zone shall be
permitted as a conditional use as provided for in § 500-103 of this
chapter.
D. In the VC Zone, no building shall be located farther than 20 feet from
the front property line in order to encourage and promote the intent of
the Village Commercial Zone.
184. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 500-28 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-29
460:800
E. In the VC Zone, there shall be no parking permitted in the front yard of
any building, and all front yards shall be landscaped and designed to
encourage pedestrian movement through the construction of sidewalks
and plazas. Shared parking is to be encouraged wherever possible.
F. All building walls facing any street or residential district line shall be
suitably finished for aesthetic purposes. All buildings in shopping
centers shall be compatibly designed whether constructed all at one
time or in stages over a period of time.
G. All areas not utilized for buildings, parking, loading, access aisles and
driveways, or pedestrian walkways shall be suitably landscaped with
shrubs, ground cover, seeding or similar plantings.
H. Where more than one building is permitted per lot, side yards are
required between buildings with the respective side yard being equal to
the height of the highest of the buildings which the side yard shall
separate, or 30 feet, whichever is greater, unless the buildings are a
portion of a planned use area.
I. All uses permitted in § 500-26 may be located in one or more buildings,
attached or separated.185
J. General requirements specific to the OT Zone shall be: [Added
2-10-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-1]
(1) Hours of operation for nonretail uses shall be 6:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m., except that bed-and-breakfasts shall not have limits to hours
of operation.
(2) Site lighting shall be in accordance with § 500-69, except that the
fixture mounting height shall not exceed 15 feet. Lighting
associated with the permitted, nonresidential uses shall be turned
off from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., except that one parking lot light
with a motion sensor may be used if approved by the reviewing
Board at the time of site plan review. Bed-and-breakfasts shall not
have limits to site lighting.
(3) Buffer areas. The following buffer areas shall be provided:
(a) Rear yard: 35 feet.
(b) Side yard: 10 feet.
(c) Adjoining residential zone: 35 feet.
(4) All building walls facing any street or residential district line shall
be architecturally residential in character.
185. Editor's Note: Former Section 18-4.5J, Wireless telecommunications facilities, added
7-1-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-12, which previously followed this subsection, was repealed
12-11-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-51.
§ 500-29 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-29
460:801
§ 500-30. Accessory contractor storage.
§ 500-31. Accessory residential apartments.
(5) All areas not utilized for buildings, parking, loading, access aisles,
driveways, or pedestrian walkways shall be landscaped.186
A. Storage of contractors' equipment shall be housed in a building and not
stored outdoors.
B. The accessory building shall not exceed the size of the principal
building (ground floor area) and, in any case, shall not exceed 1,500
square feet.
C. Contractors' storage buildings shall be located in the rear yard only and
be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the side and rear property line.
D. A buffer of 25 feet shall be established along any common property line
with a residential district or use.
A. Lot size and density. The minimum lot size in a commercial zone in
which apartments are permitted shall be one acre. The total density of
apartments shall be two apartments per acre of land. In no case shall
there be more than eight apartments on any commercial site within the
designated zones. The total square footage of the building area utilized
for apartments shall not exceed the total gross square footage or floor
area of the associated commercial uses on the site.
B. Apartment size. Each apartment shall have a minimum of 600 square
feet. No apartment shall have a floor area that exceeds 800 square feet.
C. Prohibited uses. Apartments over uses which would not be compatible
with a residential use shall be prohibited. These uses may include but
are not limited to auto repair, gas stations, mini-storage centers,
lumberyards, industrial-type uses, etc.
D. Unit access. Separate access to the apartment shall be provided
through an interior entrance and hallway. No outside entrances directly
to the apartment units are permitted.
E. Parking. A minimum of 1.5 parking spaces for each dwelling unit shall
be provided. Parking shall be placed so that it does not interfere with
access to and from the property or from the commercial operation of
the building.
F. Utilities. Each commercial/apartment site shall meet all Township and
state health codes for the supply of water and sewer facilities. The
applicant shall have the utilities approved for water yield and septic
capacity prior to the approval of any accessory apartment.
186. Editor's Note: Original Sections 18-4.6, 18-4.7 and 18-4.8, which previously followed this
section, were repealed 4-6-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-11.
§ 500-29 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-31
460:802
§ 500-32. Minimum off-street loading.
§ 500-33. Minimum off-street parking.
Where a permitted use of land includes different specific activities with
different specific parking requirements, the total number of required
parking spaces shall be obtained by individually computing the parking
requirements for each different activity and adding the resulting numbers
together. In adjacent commercial uses, combined parking and access will be
G. Open space. Apartments may have open balconies or terraces or patios.
These shall only be constructed on the rear of the building. Suitable
open recreational space shall be provided on the site in question to
permit passive recreational activities. Such activity areas shall not be
placed in the front yard of the site and shall be encouraged to be placed
in proximity of a natural resource if practicable.
A. Each activity shall provide for off-street loading and unloading with
adequate ingress and egress from streets and shall provide such areas
at the side or rear of the building. Each space shall be at least 15 feet by
40 feet. There shall be no loading or unloading from the street.
B. Individual uses shall provide one space for the first 5,000 square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof in each building and one additional
space for each additional 7,000 square feet of gross floor area or
fraction thereof. Loading area requirements may be met by combining
the floor area of several activities taking place under one roof and
applying the above ratios.
C. Shopping center proposals shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis to
establish the adequacy of proposed loading facilities.
D. There shall be at least one trash and garbage pickup location provided
by each building which shall be separated from the parking spaces by
either a location within the building or in a pickup location outside the
building which shall be a steel-like, totally enclosed container located in
a manner to be obscured from view from parking areas, streets and
adjacent residential uses or zoning districts by a fence, wall, planting,
or combination of the three. If located within the building, the doorway
may serve both the loading and trash/garbage functions, and if located
outside the building, it may be located adjacent to or within the general
loading areas provided the container in no way interferes with or
restricts loading and unloading functions. All sites will provide for
recycling of usable materials and if compactors are used they will be
adequately enclosed to prevent nuisance, either visual or noise related.
E. All off-street loading areas shall be lighted. See § 500-69.
F. There shall be no off-street loading area requirement in the Office
Transition Zone. [Added 2-10-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-1]
§ 500-31 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-33
460:803
encouraged. Each individual use shall provide parking spaces according to
the following minimum provisions:
A. Local retail and service activities and shopping centers shall provide
parking at the ratio of five spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area.
B. Restaurants, bars, and taverns shall provide a minimum of one space
for every three seats, but in all cases a sufficient number of spaces to
prevent any parking along public rights-of-way or private driveways,
fire lanes and aisles.
C. Department stores shall provide parking at the ratio of seven spaces
per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
D. Garden centers shall provide parking at the ratio of six spaces per 1,000
square feet of gross floor area of buildings plus one-half space per
1,000 square feet of outside storage, sale or display area.
E. Banks and offices shall provide parking at the ratio of five spaces per
1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
F. Theaters shall provide one space for every four seats.
G. Bowling alleys shall provide four spaces per bowling lane.
H. Apartments shall provide 1.5 spaces for each living unit.
I. Marinas shall provide 0.5 space for every boat slip and additional
spaces for accessory uses, i.e., retail sales, restaurant, the
requirements for which are included in this section.
J. Racquetball and tennis facilities shall provide five spaces for each
court. Health clubs and other recreational facilities shall provide one
space for every 100 square feet of floor area.
K. Furniture and appliance retail uses shall provide one space for every
400 square feet of retail floor area and one space for every 800 square
feet of storage or warehouse space.
L. Bed-and-breakfasts shall provide one space per guest room in addition
to the required two spaces for the permanent residence. [Added
1-21-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-1]
M. Hotels and motels shall provide 1.25 spaces per room. [Added
1-21-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-1]
N. See Article IX, General Provisions and Design Standards, of this chapter
for additional standards.
O. In the OT Zone, nonretail uses shall provide parking at the ratio of one
space per 300 square feet of business space. [Added 2-10-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-1]
§ 500-33 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-34
460:804
§ 500-34. Height limits. [Amended 7-1-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-12;
12-11-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-51]
Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of stairways, tanks,
ventilating fans, air-conditioning equipment or skylights, spires, cupolas,
flagpoles, chimneys or similar structures may be erected above the height
limits prescribed by this chapter, but in no case more than 25% more
than the maximum height permitted for the use in the district, except for
residential dwellings as permitted in this chapter, and except that farm silos
shall have no height restrictions.
§ 500-35. Conditional uses.
See Article X, Conditional Uses, of this chapter.
A. Conditional uses in the NC and the VC Zone shall be as follows:
(1) Service stations, except in the VC Zone.
(2) Drive-in banks.
(3) Essential services.
B. Conditional uses in the CC Zone shall be as follows:
(1) Service stations.
(2) Drive-in banks.
(3) Drive-in restaurants.
(4) Essential services.
C. Conditional uses in the LC Zone shall be as follows:
(1) Drive-in banks.187
(2) Drive-in restaurants.
(3) Essential services.
(4) Outdoor storage of boats and boat trailers as principal and
accessory uses.
(5) Boat storage buildings and boat trailer storage as principal and
accessory uses.
D. Conditional uses in the HC Zone shall be as follows:
(1) Service stations.188
187. Editor's Note: Former Section 18-4.15C1, Hotels and motels, which previously preceded
this subsection, was repealed 1-21-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-1.
188. Editor's Note: Former Section 18-4.15D2, Hotels and motels, which previously followed
this subsection, was repealed 1-21-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-1.
§ 500-34 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-35
460:805
§ 500-36. Seasonal/temporary retail sale of Christmas trees.
(2) Car washes.
(3) Drive-in banks.
(4) Drive-in restaurants.
(5) Automobile sales establishments.
(6) Essential services.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide a procedure by
which persons may be allowed to sell and store Christmas trees and
other cut evergreens on a temporary basis during the pre-Christmas
season and to provide for adequate control over such temporary
establishments in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare
and to make provision for proper cleanup after the cessation of such
temporary operation.
B. Designated zone. Seasonal/temporary retail sales of Christmas trees
shall be permitted in the VC, NC, CC, HC and LC Zones only, and only if
the terms of this section are fully complied with.
C. Permit required. No property shall be utilized for the temporary sale of
trees, wreaths, and other similar decorations ("Christmas trees")
during the Christmas season without the issuance of a temporary
permit from the Construction Official, after a satisfactory fire safety
inspection of the proposed sale site.
D. Term of permit. No permit shall be issued for a period longer than 42
days, and all permits shall expire on December 31 of the year in which
issued.
E. Hours of operation. The sales of Christmas trees shall occur between
the hours of 9:30 a.m. and 9:30 p.m. only.
F. The temporary sale and storage of Christmas trees shall be restricted
as follows:
(1) No Christmas tree shall be stored within 50 feet of any wooden
frame structure.
(2) No Christmas tree shall be placed upon any sidewalk.
(3) No Christmas tree shall be placed upon that portion of a corner lot
which is closer to the intersection of the bounding street lines than
a straight line drawn between two points measured 25 feet along
each such street line from the intersection of those two street lines.
(4) No Christmas tree shall be stored or sold on lots on which there is a
principal residential use.
§ 500-35 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-36
460:806
§ 500-36.1. Temporary outdoor commercial sales event and
seasonal farmers' market sales. [Added 5-6-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-007; amended 7-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-016]
(5) Off-street vehicular circulation and parking for at least 10 vehicles
shall be maintained.
(6) Two signs shall be permitted on the site and such signs shall not
exceed a total of 25 square feet in the NC and VC Zones, and 32
square feet in the CC, LC and HC Zones. No sign shall be a type
that flashes, rotates or moves or one which incorporates moving
components. Such signs and all their supports shall be at least 10
feet from any building or structure and 10 feet from any side or
rear lot line and shall be located back from the street line a
distance of not less than five feet in the VC, NC, CC and LC Zones
and 10 feet in the HC Zone.
(7) Exterior lighting illumination patterns shall not intrude upon
adjacent properties or otherwise extend beyond the property line of
the lot upon which the Christmas trees are displayed for sale.
G. Permit fee and bond.
(1) The fee for a permit to sell Christmas trees in accordance with this
section shall be set forth in Chapter 414, Fees, Land Development.
[Amended 12-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-030]
(2) The applicant shall post a cash bond in the sum of $200, such sum
to defray the Township's costs and otherwise assure that all
Christmas trees shall be removed from the premises for disposal
not later than January 1 of each year. The application shall
constitute a limited right-of-entry and the cash bond may be
appropriated to effectuate such purposes, in the event of the
vendor's default.
H. Exemptions. This section only applies to the temporary use of land for
the retail sale of Christmas trees. Premises used throughout the year
for the sale of trees, shrubbery, plants, farm produce and other similar
landscaping or agricultural products shall be exempt from the
provisions of this section.
I. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Construction
Official with reference to the issuance of a permit may appeal such
decision to the Township Administrator by notifying the Township Clerk
of the intent to appeal within 10 days of the applicant's receipt of the
Construction Official's decision. The Township Administrator shall then
schedule a hearing on such appeal within 10 days of receipt of the
notice of appeal, at which time the applicant may present evidence.
[Amended 9-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to permit and regulate the
outdoor display and sale of merchandise within the Township of West
§ 500-36 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-36.1
460:807
Milford in such a manner as to protect the public's health and safety
and to ensure the integrity of the Township's land use plan and zoning
regulations.
B. Designated zones. Temporary outdoor commercial sales events and
farmers' markets shall be permitted on any property in the NC, VC, CC,
HC and LC Zone Districts where said property satisfies the minimum lot
area standards of the applicable zone district. Said activities shall also
be permitted in any zone district upon lands owned by the Township of
West Milford, the West Milford Board of Education and on the grounds
of a house of worship where the property in question is in compliance
with the standards set forth in Chapter 500, Article X, Conditional Uses,
§ 500-94, Houses of worship.
C. Permit required. No property shall be utilized for a temporary outdoor
commercial sales event or for the purpose of establishing a seasonal
farmers' market as defined in Chapter 420 without the issuance of
either a temporary outdoor commercial sales event permit or a seasonal
farmers' market permit, as applicable, from the Township's
Administrative Officer or Zoning Officer in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Term of permit.
(1) A temporary outdoor commercial sales event permit shall be
required for each sales event, with a maximum of six events per
calendar year for any property within West Milford Township. An
event conducted over the course of two consecutive days shall
constitute a single event for the purposes of issuing a permit and
shall count as a single event towards the total of six events
permitted per property within a calendar year. No permit under
this section shall be valid for more than two consecutive days.
(2) A seasonal farmers’ market permit shall be required for each
seasonal event. One permit shall cover the entire duration of the
seasonal event permitted within the time period from mid-May
through mid-October of each calendar year. The sponsor of the
seasonal farmers' market shall be responsible to secure said
permit, which shall cover any and all vendors participating in the
event. [Amended 5-22-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-011]
E. Hours of operation. Functions authorized by a temporary outdoor
commercial sales event permit or a seasonal farmers' market permit
shall be limited to hours between 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
F. All temporary outdoor activities shall adhere to the following standards:
(1) Applicant shall be responsible for securing all requisite permits
from the Township's Construction Code Official and subcode
officials and from the Township's Health Department, if applicable.
Applicant shall abide by any and all provisions to ensure the
public's health, safety and welfare that may be attached as
§ 500-36.1 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-36.1
460:808
conditions of a temporary outdoor commercial sales permit as
determined by the Township, including, but not limited to, the
Police, Health and Planning Departments.
(2) No structures, tables, stalls or other appurtenances shall obstruct a
sidewalk or emergency access lane.
(3) Temporary signage shall be subject to § 500-160 of this chapter.
G. Permit fee. The fee for a temporary outdoor commercial sales permit
and a seasonal farmers' market permit shall be as set forth in Chapter
400, § 414-6.
H. Exemptions. The display and sale of merchandise by nonprofit
organizations for fundraising purposes shall be exempt from the
requirements of this section.
I. Appeals. Where there is a dispute regarding a decision by the
Township's Administrative Officer or Zoning Officer as to whether an
activity qualifies for a permit under this section, the matter shall be
referred to the West Milford Zoning Board of Adjustment for a
determination pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a.
§ 500-36.1 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-36.1
460:809

ARTICLE V
Office Research Zone
§ 500-37. Purpose.
The purpose of the Office Research Zone (OR) is to attract major office
and research facilities to large lot development areas in a semirural
environment. These uses are designed to be such that would contribute
to the overall development of the Township and bring employment and
associated economic opportunities to the population and yet be nonharmful
to the sensitive and fragile environment.
§ 500-38. Principal permitted uses on the land and in the buildings.
Principal permitted uses shall be as follows:
A. Administrative and corporate offices.
B. Scientific or research laboratories.
C. Computer centers.
D. Hotels and conference centers.
E. Public utilities as permitted uses in accordance with § 500-96 and
definitions.
F. Bed-and-breakfasts. [Added 1-21-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-1]
G. Wireless telecommunications facilities subject to the following: [Added
12-11-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-51]
(1) Proposed activity shall comply with the following criteria, as
applicable:
(a) Antennas being placed on public streetlights, telephone poles
and utility stanchions, the height of the antennas shall not
exceed five feet above the existing pole or stanchion. The
support equipment is subject to:
[1] Placement on the pole;
[2] Placement at the base within the right-of-way; or
[3] Placement underground.
(b) Monopoles or lattice towers that were approved by the
Planning Board or Zoning Board prior to the enactment of this
Subsection G, but not extending the height of the support
structure.
(c) Disguised within new or existing church steeples, freestanding
clock towers, freestanding flagpoles or decorative light
stanchions, as follows:
§ 500-37 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-38
460:811
[1] The height of the structure shall not exceed 60 feet;
[2] Freestanding flagpoles, freestanding clock towers and
decorative light stanchions shall maintain the accessory
building setbacks as specified in § 500-40 and shall
maintain a minimum front yard setback of 10 feet;
[3] Freestanding flagpoles, freestanding clock towers and
decorative light stanchions shall not impede vehicular or
pedestrian traffic nor cause sight distance impediments
for vehicles entering or exiting a site.
(d) Roof structures, provided that no aspect of the wireless
telecommunications facility is visible from ground level when
viewed from street frontage.
(e) The monopole and antennas may be designed as a tree in
appearance to include branches and appropriate painting with
a maximum height not to exceed 10 feet above the identified
average of the tree height determined in the following manner:
§ 500-38 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-38
460:812
§ 500-38 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-38
460:813
§ 500-39. Accessory uses permitted.
Accessory uses which are customarily incidental to and located on the same
lot as the principal use and which, unless otherwise specified, shall be
located within a principal building and shall show no external evidence of
such use. These may include but shall not be limited to:
Explanations for Diagram and Tables
The Plan View Diagram depicts the two-hundred-fifty-foot
radius with seven profile lines distanced from each other as
shown. Within this radius, all trees with a diameter of six
inches or greater are to be located and the location depicted
on the Plan View Diagram. All trees surveyed that fall along
and within 10 feet of each side of the profile lines are then to
have their tree height surveyed and recorded on Table A.
Table A is a compilation of the surveyed tree heights and
tree species as identified along the profiles in the Plan View
Diagram. The information will be exhibited by the applicant
on seven separate tables (Tables A1 through A7), one for each
profile line.
Table B is the final compilation of the average tree heights and
average anticipated tree heights for each of the seven profile
lines (as calculated in Tables A1 through A7) to determine
the maximum height of the proposed wireless
telecommunications facility.
(f) Equipment shelters to service antennas not located on
telephone poles or streetlights shall be set back a minimum of
15 feet from all property lines and shall be camouflaged in a
structure that is architecturally complementary to the antenna
camouflage and the surrounding buildings, or may be located
on the roof, provided that no aspect of the wireless
telecommunications facility is visible from ground level when
viewed from street frontage.
(g) All facilities shall be suitably secured in accordance with
§ 500-68, Fences, walls and sight triangles, of this chapter.
(h) Landscaping as screening shall be provided around the
security fencing.
(i) All electrical connections, wires and conduit from the
antenna's structures to the ground structures shall be installed
underground.
(j) In the event such wireless telecommunications facilities are
abandoned or not operated for the use as approved for a period
of six months, the same shall be removed, at the option of the
Township, at the sole expense of the property owner.
§ 500-38 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-39
460:814
§ 500-40. Area and yard requirements.
§ 500-41. General requirements.
A. Restaurant or cafeteria primarily for supplying meals only to employees
and conference center guests, except for hotels.
B. Newsstands, post office, branch banking facilities serving primarily
employees and guests of the principal use.
C. In-service training school for employees.
D. Indoor and outdoor recreation facilities, provided that such uses,
including any accessory building associated therewith, shall be planned
as an integral part of the overall office or conference center.
E. Assembly halls for meetings incidental to the business of any principal
use.
F. Maintenance, utility and storage facilities incidental to any principal
use.
G. Signs. (See Article XIV, Signs.)
H. Fences and walls. (See § 500-68.)
A. Lot area. Minimum lot area shall be 10 acres.
B. Lot frontage: 350 feet.
C. Lot width: 350 feet.
D. Lot depth: 500 feet.
E. Front yard: 100 feet.
F. Side yard: 75 feet.
G. Rear yard: 150 feet.
H. Floor area ratio (FAR).
(1) One-story building: 0.20.
(2) Multistory building: 0.27.
I. Maximum impervious coverage: 50% of lot area.
J. Maximum building height: three stories, 40 feet.
A. All areas not utilized for buildings, parking, loading, access aisles and
driveways or pedestrian walkways shall be suitably landscaped with
shrubs, ground cover, seeding or similar plantings and maintained in
good condition.
B. Buffer areas.
§ 500-39 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-41
460:815
§ 500-42. Accommodations at hotels and conference centers.
Each unit of accommodation shall contain a minimum floor area of 300
square feet.
§ 500-43. Minimum off-street parking.
Where a permitted use of land includes different specific activities with
different specific parking requirements, the total number of required
parking spaces shall be obtained by individually computing the parking
requirements for each different activity and adding the resulting numbers
together. Each individual use shall provide parking spaces according to the
following minimum provisions:
§ 500-44. Minimum off-street loading.
Each activity shall provide for off-street loading and unloading and shall
provide such areas at the side or rear of the building. Each space shall be
(1) A minimum buffer of 50 feet shall be provided adjacent to each side
property line. A minimum buffer of 100 feet shall be provide
adjacent to each rear property line.
(2) Where a proposed OR use borders a residential zone or use, the
minimum buffer shall be 100 feet.
(3) All the natural plant life shall be left in its original condition within
such buffer areas, as much as practicable.
(4) In the event said natural plant life within the buffer area is
insufficient to create sufficient screening for any reason, such area
shall be landscaped with plants, trees, shrubs and grass as may be
required by the Planning Board during site plan review.
C. No parking shall be permitted within 75 feet of the front street line. No
on-street parking for vehicles shall be permitted in said zone. All
parking and service areas shall be screened from the view of adjoining
properties or streets.
A. Offices and laboratories shall provide four spaces per 1,000 square feet
of gross floor area.
B. Restaurants shall provide a minimum of one space for every three seats,
but in all cases a sufficient number of spaces to prevent any parking
along public rights-of-way or private driveways, fire lanes and aisles.
C. Hotels shall provide 1 1/4 spaces per sleeping unit, and one space per
daytime employee and spaces in accordance with accessory uses such
as restaurants, etc.
D. Bed-and-breakfasts shall provide one space per guest room in addition
to the required two spaces for the permanent residence. [Added
1-21-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-1]
§ 500-41 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-44
460:816
at least 15 feet by 40 feet. There shall be no loading or unloading from the
street of the front of the building.
§ 500-44 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-44
460:817

ARTICLE VI
Limited Manufacturing and Industrial
§ 500-45. Purpose.
The Limited Manufacturing and Industrial Zone (LMI) is located to take
advantage of major highway access, railroad access and proximity to the
airport facility. The standards are intended to require maximum attention
to proper site designing, including the location of structures and parking
areas, proper ingress and egress, development of an interior street system,
architectural design landscaping and the compatibility of any proposal with
the natural foliage, soils, contours, drainage patterns and the need to avoid
visual intrusions and performance nuisances upon adjacent residences or
residential zones. It is intended that existing foliage and natural features
be retained and enhanced in relation to the site as well as the surrounding
area.
§ 500-45.1. Definitions. [Added 12-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-018]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ORGANIC RECYCLING — Any organic material that, when accumulated,
will become active compost.
CLASS B RECYCLING FACILITY — A recycling center that receives, stores,
processes and/or transfers Class B recyclable material. Class B recyclable
material means a source-separated, recyclable material which is subject to
DEP approval prior to receipt, storage, processing or transfer at a recycling
center in accordance with N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.34b, and which includes, but is
not limited to, the following:
COMPOSTING — The controlled biological degradation of organic matter to
make compost.
MULCH MANUFACTURE — The manufacture of horticultural mulch from
wood, wood products or similar materials. This term does not include the
production of mulch as a byproduct of on-site farming.
Source-separated, nonputrescible waste concrete, asphalt, brick, block,
asphalt-based roofing scrap and wood waste;
A.
Source-separated, nonputrescible waste materials other than metal,
glass, paper, plastic containers, corrugated and other cardboard
resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition
operations on houses, commercial buildings, pavements and other
structures;
B.
Source-separated whole trees, tree trunks, tree parts, tree stumps,
brush and leaves provided that they are not composted;
C.
D. Source-separated scrap tires; and
E. Source-separated, petroleum-contaminated soil.
§ 500-45 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-46
460:819
§ 500-46. Principal permitted uses on the land and in buildings.
Principal permitted uses shall be:
A. Offices and office buildings.
B. Laboratories of an experimental, research or testing nature which carry
on processes within completely enclosed buildings and which do not
produce noticeable noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare,
disease, or health hazards outside the buildings, or negatively impact
any environmental media.
C. Industrial plants, provided that the synthesis of chemical products for
direct industrial sale is not involved in the manufacturing, assembling
or fabricating process.
D. Wholesale distribution centers and warehouses.
E. Industrial parks on tracts of land at least 25 acres in area comprised of
the preceding uses.
F. Farms.
G. Public utility uses as conditional uses under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67. See
§ 500-96 for additional standards.
H. Construction enterprises, including contractors' storage yards, vehicle
repair garages and body shops.
I. Soil removal operations pursuant to Chapter 460, Soil Removal and Soil
Fill, of the Code of the Township of West Milford.
J. Bed-and-breakfasts. [Added 1-21-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-1]
K. Wireless telecommunications facilities in the LMI Zone, provided that
the subject property or properties are improved with a principally
permitted use, subject to the following: [Added 7-1-1998 by Ord. No.
1998-12; amended 12-11-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-51]
(1) Proposed activity shall be placed on one of the following, as
applicable:
(a) Antennas being placed on public streetlights, telephone poles
and utility stanchions, the height of the antennas shall not
exceed five feet above the existing pole or stanchion. The
support equipment is subject to:
[1] Placement on the pole; or
[2] Placement at the base within the right-of-way; or
[3] Placement underground.
(b) Monopoles or lattice towers that were approved by the
Planning Board or Zoning Board prior to the enactment of this
§ 500-46 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-46
460:820
§ 500-47. Accessory uses permitted.
Subsection K, but not extending the height of the support
structure.
(c) Wireless telecommunications facilities disguised within new or
existing freestanding flagpoles or decorative light stanchions,
as follows:
[1] The height of the structure shall not exceed 60 feet;
[2] Freestanding flagpoles and decorative light stanchions
shall maintain the accessory building setbacks as specified
in § 500-48 and shall maintain a minimum front yard
setback of 10 feet;
[3] Freestanding flagpoles and decorative light stanchions
shall not impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic nor cause
sight distance impediments for vehicles entering or exiting
a site.
(d) Roof structures, provided that no aspect of the wireless
telecommunications facility is visible from ground level when
viewed from street frontage.
(2) Equipment shelters to service antennas not located on telephone
poles or streetlights shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from all
property lines and shall be camouflaged in a structure that is
architecturally complementary to the antenna camouflage and the
surrounding buildings, or may be located on the roof, provided that
no aspect of the wireless telecommunications facility is visible from
ground level when viewed from street frontage.
(3) All facilities shall be suitably secured in accordance with § 500-68,
Fences, walls and sight triangles, of this chapter.
(4) Landscaping as screening shall be provided around the security
fencing.
(5) All electrical connections, wires and conduit from the antenna's
structures to the ground structures shall be installed underground.
(6) In the event such wireless telecommunications facilities are
abandoned or not operated for the use as approved for a period of
six months, the same shall be removed, at the option of the
Township, at the sole expense of the property owner.
A. Off-street parking.
B. Signs. (See Article XIV, Signs.)
C. Garages, storage buildings and other customary accessory uses
incidental to the principal use.
§ 500-46 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-47
460:821
§ 500-47.1. Conditional uses permitted. [Added 12-20-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-018]
D. Temporary construction trailers and one sign not exceeding 100 square
feet, advertising the prime contractor, subcontractors, architect,
financing institution and similar data for the period of construction
beginning with the issuance of a construction permit and concluding
with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or one year, whichever is
less, provided such trailers and sign are on the site where construction
is taking place and are set back at least 15 feet from all street and lot
lines.
E. Employee cafeterias as part of a principal building, provided the
cafeteria is limited in service to the employees of the principal use
designated on the site plan as approved by the Board.
F. Fences and walls. (See § 500-68.)
G. Outdoor storage of boats and boat trailers subject to §§ 500-48 and
500-49 and that trailers shall be screened from view by fencing, walls,
landscaping or other means as approved by the Planning Board.
A. The following conditional uses shall be permitted in the LMI Zone:
(1) Organic recycling;
(2) Class B recycling facility;
(3) Class B recycling facility exempt classification pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:26A-1.4.
B. The following are permitted accessory uses as to a conditional use in
the LMI Zone:
(1) Composting;
(2) Topsoil production and mulch manufacturing.
C. The following are the conditional use standards in the LMI Zone:
(1) Minimum lot/tract area of five acres.
(2) Topsoil and/or mulch operations shall not exceed 30% of the total
lot/tract area.
(3) Any area in which materials are stored or sold shall be at least 300
feet from any residential structure and 25 feet from any property
line, with said distances being measured in a straight line between
the material storage/sale area and the closest residential structure
or property line. This requirement may be reduced up to 50% when
there is sufficient year-round visual screening as determined by the
Township Engineer.
§ 500-47 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-47.1
460:822
(4) No material stockpile shall exceed 25 feet in height except upon
favorable recommendation in that it does not jeopardize the public
health, safety or aesthetics of the Township by the Township
Engineer and the Hudson/Essex/Passaic Soil Conservation District
(HEPSCD).
(5) No piece of equipment, such as trucks, screeners, backhoes,
loaders, etc., and any activity relating to the storage, sale or use of
said products shall be located outside the setbacks set forth in
§ 500-47.1C(3).
(6) The approving authority, at its discretion, may require the visual
screening of material storage and sales areas, driveways, roads,
parking areas, and equipment work areas for the protection of the
general public and neighboring properties. Visual screening may
include, but shall not be limited to, fences, vegetation, earth berms,
or any combination of these features.
(7) The applicant shall provide adequate protection of adjacent and
neighboring properties from any airborne materials and
stormwater runoff that may be created by or result from the
activities carried out on the property.
(8) All driveways, access roads and parking areas shall be constructed
of asphalt, concrete or compacted stone. All compacted stone
surfaces must be maintained in such a way as to prohibit dust or
dirt from becoming airborne.
(9) All equipment repairs shall be performed inside a building. The
building shall be sited to comply with the setback requirements
specified above. Repair of equipment shall be limited to equipment
owned by the applicant and used for the conduct of the specified
activities.
(10) For the protection of the general public and neighboring
properties, this use may be operated between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. and 1:00
p.m., Saturdays, and no Sunday or holiday operations, unless
otherwise approved by the approving authority.
(11) The operator of a Class B recycling facility must provide a valid and
current Class B general approval or notification of exempt
recycling activity issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and proof of full compliance with the
standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:26a-1.1 et seq., including but not
limited to county and NJDEP approval, or Class B exempt status
upon request by Township officials. Only one Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) Class B exempt status will be
permitted.
(12) The operator of the facility must file with the Township's Zoning
Officer a valid and current soil erosion and sediment control plan
§ 500-47.1 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-47.1
460:823
§ 500-48. Area and yard requirements.
No provision stipulated herein shall prohibit a permitted use from being
situated adjacent to a railroad right-of-way for purposes of loading and
unloading materials.
Minimum Requirements Individual Uses
Industrial Park
Uses
Principal buildings
Tract area — 25 acres
Lot area (acres) 3 2
Lot frontage (feet) 300 200
Lot width (feet) 300 200
Lot depth (feet) 300 200
certification issued by the Hudson/Essex/Passaic Soil Conservation
District. All amendments and updates to the approved plan must
be filed with the Zoning Officer within five days of approval by the
Hudson/Essex/Passaic Soil Conservation District.
(13) The operator of the facility must file with the Township's Zoning
Officer documentation certifying that this site is included in the
Passaic County Solid Waste Management Plan within 15 days of
such approval.
(14) The operator of the facility must file with the Township's Health,
Fire and Zoning Officers a current operational manual specifying
methods and schedules for noise and dust control and off-tract
street cleaning, and on-site fire suppression facilities and ensure
that all related updates are filed with said Township officials within
seven days of any amendments thereto.
(15) All deliveries for topsoil and/or mulch operation shall provide
documentation verifying material is free of hazardous and/or
contaminated material, and the operator of the facility must
produce such documentation upon request by Township officials.
(16) The site operator must maintain records and engage in a process of
adequate, reliable recordkeeping to demonstrate that the facility is
operating within its volume limitations. In addition to these records
being filed with the DEP, copies must be filed monthly with the
Township's Zoning Officer and made available for public inspection.
(17) This legislation does not preclude any recycling, composting and
topsoil operation as governed herein from obtaining all necessary
approvals, including but not limited to municipal land use
approvals, DEP approvals, Highlands Act approvals, Soil
Conservation approvals and any other approvals related to the
activities at the approved site.
§ 500-47.1 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-48
460:824
Minimum Requirements Individual Uses
Industrial Park
Uses
Side yard, each (feet) 75 50
Front yard (feet) 125 75
Rear yard (feet) 75 50
Accessory buildings
Distance to side line (feet) 50 25
Distance to rear line (feet) 50 25
Distance to other building
(feet)
50 25
Maximum Coverage* Individual Uses
Industrial Park
Uses
Combined principal and accessory
buildings
35% 35%
Total impervious 70% 70%
*NOTE: The maximum building coverage may increase by a square footage
amount equal to that square footage of the buildings used for inside
parking and/or loading, provided that in no case shall the maximum
building coverage exceed 50%.
§ 500-49. General requirements.
A. Gross floor area minimum. Each principal building shall have a
minimum gross floor area of 5,000 square feet.
B. Any principal building may contain more than one principal use or
organization.
C. Maximum building height. No buildings shall exceed 35 feet in height.
[Amended 7-1-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-12; 12-11-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-51]
D. At least the first 50 feet adjacent to any street line and rear lot line and
40 feet adjacent to any side lot line shall not be used for parking, shall
be planted and maintained in lawn area, ground cover, or landscaped
with evergreen shrubbery.
E. No merchandise, products, equipment or similar material or objects
shall be displayed or stored outdoors unless specifically approved by
the Planning Board during the site plan review. The exception to this
shall be outdoor storage of boats and boat trailers which shall be
permitted as an accessory use, provided that all boats and trailers shall
be screened from view by fencing, walls, landscaping, or such other
means as approved by the Planning Board.
§ 500-48 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-49
460:825
§ 500-50. Minimum off-street loading.
§ 500-51. Minimum off-street parking.
F. All buildings shall be compatibly designed, whether constructed all at
one time or in stages over a period of time. All building walls facing any
street or residential district line shall be suitably finished for aesthetic
purposes.
G. All portions of the property not utilized by buildings or paved surfaces
shall be landscaped utilizing combinations such as landscaped fencing,
shrubbery, lawn area, ground cover, rock formations, contours, existing
foliage and the planting of conifers and/or deciduous trees native to the
area in order to either maintain or reestablish the tone of the vegetation
in the area and lessen the visual impact of the structures and paved
areas. The established grades on any site shall be planned for both
aesthetic and drainage purposes. The grading plan, drainage facilities
and landscaping shall be coordinated to prevent erosion and silting as
well as assure that the capacity of any natural or man-made drainage
system is sufficient to handle the water generated and anticipated both
from the site and contributing upstream areas, zero runoff is a
requirement.
H. A minimum buffer area of 75 feet in width shall be provided along any
common property line with a residential district or residential use.
A. Each activity shall provide for off-street loading and unloading with
adequate ingress and egress from streets and shall provide such area at
the side or rear of the building. Each space shall be at least 15 feet by
40 feet, and one space shall be provided for every 8,000 square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof in each building. There shall be no
loading or unloading from the street.
B. Loading area requirements may be met by combining the floor areas of
several activities taking place under one roof and applying the above
ratios.
C. There shall be at least one trash, recycling, and garbage pickup location
provided by each building which shall be separated from the parking
spaces by either a location within the building or a pickup location
outside the building which shall be a steel-like, totally enclosed
container located in a manner to be obscured from view from the
parking areas, streets and adjacent residential uses or zoning districts
by a fence, wall, planting or combination of the three. If located within
the building, the doorway may serve both the loading and trash/
garbage functions. If a container is used for trash/garbage functions
and is located outside the building, it may be located adjacent to or
within the general loading areas, provided the container in no way
interferes with or restricts loading and unloading functions.
D. All off-street loading areas shall be lighted. See § 500-73.
§ 500-49 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-51
460:826
A. Offices and laboratories shall provide parking at the ratio of four spaces
per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
B. Industrial plants and wholesale distribution centers and warehouses
shall provide parking at the ratios of one space for every 1,000 square
feet of gross floor area used for inside storage and warehousing, in
addition to one space for every 700 square feet of gross floor area used
for manufacturing, research, or testing and one space for every 200
square feet of gross floor area used for offices. Additionally, one space
shall be provided for every vehicle owned and/or operated by the use
operating from the site.
C. Public utilities shall provide sufficient spaces and maneuvering area to
prevent any parking along public rights-of-way or private driveways,
fire lanes and aisles.
D. Bed-and-breakfasts shall provide one space per guest room in addition
to the two required spaces for the permanent residence. [Added
1-21-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-1]
E. See Article IX, General Provisions and Design Standards, for additional
standards.
§ 500-51 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-51
460:827

ARTICLE VII
Special Economic District
§ 500-52. Purpose.
The purpose of the Special Economic District Zone (SED) is to create a
unique living and working environment in special area of the Township. This
district encourages economic development of mixed uses in a setting which
will preserve environmentally sensitive land areas and offer development
reflective of surrounding land uses, including the airport in particular,
and promote compatibility between these uses. The design of this zone
is intended to be flexible and to encourage creative design and planning
techniques for both nonresidential and residential uses. Although a mix of
uses is permitted, nonresidential uses shall predominate the development
of this zone.
§ 500-53. Permitted uses.
§ 500-54. Accessory uses.
§ 500-55. Minimum tract size.
The minimum tract size for SED uses shall be 500 acres.
§ 500-56. Component mix.
The individual components of development in the SED zone shall be as
follows:
A. Industrial, light manufacturing and distribution.
B. Executive and administrative offices.
C. Research laboratories and testing facilities.
D. Multifamily residential dwelling units.
E. Single-family residential dwelling units.
F. Bed-and-breakfasts. [Added 1-21-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-1]
A. Commercial uses for servicing the planned development of the SED
Zone.
B. Community/public buildings or facilities.
C. Recreational facilities designed primarily for the planned development
of the SED Zone.
D. Signs. (See Article XIV, Signs.)
E. Fences and walls. (See § 500-68.)
A. Multifamily: maximum of 10% of the total tract.
§ 500-52 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-56
460:829
§ 500-57. Area and yard requirements.
Building and lot requirements shall be as follows:
§ 500-58. General requirements.
B. Single family: minimum of 10% of total tract, maximum of 20% of total
tract.
C. Industrial/distribution: minimum of 25% of total tract, maximum of 50%
of total tract.
D. Office, research: minimum of 10% of total tract, maximum of 50% of
total tract.
A. For industrial, distribution, offices and laboratories, as specified in
Article VI, Limited Manufacturing and Industrial, for LMI uses.
B. For multifamily residential uses, as specified in § 500-18, Planned
neighborhoods, pertaining to planned development.
C. For single-family residential:
(1) No greater than 50% of the total single-family units shall be built on
one-acre lots, subject to natural features provision of this chapter.
No less than 40% of the total single-family units shall be built on
two-acre lots subject to the natural features provision of this
chapter.
(2) Area and yard requirements as specified in appropriate R-1 and R-2
provisions of this chapter, except not including the provisions for
cluster and sewer and water facilities requirements.
A. A concept plan shall be first submitted for general review by the
Planning Board. Thereafter, a general preliminary plan shall be
submitted for overall review and approval. Said plan shall include a
phasing program to determine component mix and compatibility.
B. Each phase shall than be submitted for approval. No more than 50% of
residential units can be built before 50% of the nonresidential
component of the project. A balance between residential,
nonresidential and commercial components shall be reviewed by the
Planning Board to ensure a balanced plan implementation.
C. Open space. A minimum of 20% of the total tract shall remain as open
space. This area shall be designed as uniform land areas which can be
utilized as passive or active recreation and which can be utilized as a
buffer to surrounding land uses. There shall also be internal open space
within each component to connect various project components and to
connect individual lots within each component, such as trails,
greenway, sidewalks or bike paths. Open space is also subject to
maintenance provisions, etc., of § 500-18, Planned neighborhoods.
§ 500-56 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-58
460:830
§ 500-59. Parking.
Parking requirements shall be those specified for each component use
described in this chapter.
§ 500-60. Off-street loading and unloading.
All loading and unloading requirements shall be governed by the provisions
for each component use.
D. Natural features. The natural features provisions of this chapter as
described in § 500-71 apply to this zone.
E. Utilities. Central sewer and water facilities shall be provided for all
residential and nonresidential components of any project within the
SED Zone. Concept review shall discuss sewer and water facilities, and
phasing shall include such utilities construction in the first phase of
development. Water and sewerage shall be constructed to meet the
West Milford Township Municipal Utility Authority's criteria for public
acceptance as well as the requirements of New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and the adopted Wastewater Management
Plan.
§ 500-58 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-60
460:831

ARTICLE VIII
Historic New City Preservation Zone
[Added 12-7-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-39; amended 11-4-1998 by Ord.
No. 1998-21]
§ 500-61. Purpose.
There is hereby established the Historic New City Preservation Zoning
District (HNCP) for the purposes of preserving the historic structures
existing within this zone, and to promote the renovation and the
development of new buildings in conformance with the requirements of
the zone. Accordingly the zone is separated into six development areas
with specific permitted uses for each identified area that relate to the
historic, cultural and economic development goals of this zone. This zone
is in furtherance of the Master Plan Historic Preservation Element and
the Township of West Milford Historic Preservation Ordinance and is in
conformance with the State Development and Re-Development Plan.
§ 500-62. Principal permitted uses on the land and in the buildings.
An "X" in Table 1 denotes those permitted uses that are permitted in the
given development area.
Table 1
Principal Permitted Uses
Principal
Permitted
Uses Area 1 Area 1A Area 2 Area 3 Area 4 Area 5
Specialty retail
outlet centera
X
Specialty
galleriesb
X X X X X
Professional
offices
X X X X X
Residencesc X X X X X
Restaurants X X X X
Cafes X X X X X X
Bed-andbreakfasts
X X X
Common areasd X X
Antique fairs
and shows
X
Cultural studio
facilitiese
X X X X X
§ 500-61 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-62
460:833
Table 1
Principal Permitted Uses
Principal
Permitted
Uses Area 1 Area 1A Area 2 Area 3 Area 4 Area 5
Sales of art and
craft supplies
X X X X X
Furniture
making, repair
and refinishing
X X X X X
Theatersf X X
Bandstands X
NOTES:
a Specialty retail outlet center compatible with the historic image of New
City and specializing in outdoor apparel and providing display and sale
areas for art and craft products.
b Specialty galleries for display and sale of art and craft work created on
the premises.
c As a shared use with those permitted commercial uses in a specific
development area.
d Common area for the display and sale of art and craft work both created
on-site and brought to the site by invitation for fairs and shows.
e Cultural studio facilities for instruction in visual and performing arts.
f Theaters for performing arts.
§ 500-63. Accessory uses permitted.
An "X" in Table 2 denotes those permitted uses that are permitted in the
given development area.
Table 2
Accessory Uses Permitted
Development
Area Gazebos
Storage
Shedsa
Temporary
Tents
Parking
Areasb
Community
Gardens Signsc
1 X X X X X
1A X X X X X
2 X X X
3 X X X X
4 X X X X
§ 500-62 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-63
460:834
Table 2
Accessory Uses Permitted
Development
Area Gazebos
Storage
Shedsa
Temporary
Tents
Parking
Areasb
Community
Gardens Signsc
5 X X X X X X
NOTES:
a Not to exceed 600 square feet.
b Other than off-street parking for individual house\galleries.
c Subject to Article XIV, Signs, of the Land Development Ordinance.
§ 500-64. Yard and area requirements.
Bulk Requirementsa
Development Area
1 1A 2 3 4 5
Lot area Entire
development
area
20,000
square feetb
12,500
square feet
12,500
square feet
12,500
square feet
20,000 square
feetb
Lot frontage 500 feet 80 feet 80 feet 80 feet 80 feet 80 feet
Lot width 500 feet 80 feet 80 feet 80 feet 80 feet 80 feet
Lot depth 600 feet 120 feet 120 feet 120 feet 120 feet 120 feet
Side yard 50 feet 10 feet 10 feet 10 feet 10 feet 10 feet
Distances
between
buildings
15 feet 30 feet 60 feet 60 feet
Front yardc, d, e 50 feet 15 feet
40 feet (max)
15 feet (max) 15 feet (max) 15 feet (max)
Rear yard 100 feet N\A 60 feet 60 feet 60 feet 60 feet
NOTES:
a Unless otherwise noted, all bulk requirements are to be considered minimum standards.
b In order to promote the continuation of the New City character in future subdivisions within this zone,
in subdivisions creating five or more lots, the size of any lot may be reduced to 12,500 square feet,
provided the resulting average lot size in the subdivision shall not be less than 20,000 square feet.
No lot may be resubdivided that would result in the reduction of the average minimum lot size below
20,000 square feet.
§ 500-63 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-64
460:835
c At the time of either subdivision approval or issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs
first, the applicant shall designate which frontage will be considered the front yard on those lots that
are either corner lots or through lots. That designation shall then be utilized for any requests pertaining
to placement of accessory structures, building additions and the like.
d Front yard setback for new buildings shall not vary more than 1/2 the distance of the average setbacks
of the buildings adjacent to either side of the subject lot.
e Pertains only to buildings related to street.
§ 500-65. Special design criteria and standards.
A. Development Areas 1 through 5 may be developed as one
comprehensive project without subdivision of land or via subdivision
approval for the purposes of selling lots with or without existing
structures. Prior to any redevelopment occurring or application for
subdivision being filed with the Township, the property owner or
applicant shall first submit a concept application as per Chapter 470,
Article II, Informal Review of Concept Plan, said plan addressing the
procedures for the redevelopment of New City. This submitted plan
shall be reviewed by the Historic Preservation Commission with its
comments forwarded to the Planning Board for its consideration prior
to providing comment on the submitted plan. In addition to the
requirements of Chapter 470, Article II, said plan shall set forth the
following:
(1) The time frame for the development of the area, including a
phasing plan.
(2) The anticipated number of buildings and/or lots.
(3) The percentage of building floor area to be utilized for various
permitted uses within the zone.
(4) The economic feasibility to proceed with the proposed
development.
B. Redevelopment of existing structures and new buildings within
Development Areas 2 through 5 shall be in conformance with the
following criteria:
(1) Renovation of existing structures and reconstruction of structures
on existing foundations shall be in conformance with Article XIII,
Historic Preservation Commission, of this chapter.
(2) New construction shall be compatible with but not identical to the
historic properties in terms of building style, design and size.
(3) The placement of new buildings shall spatially relate to the existing
structures in terms of orientation and relationship to the street.
(4) Conformance with Subsection F of this section.
§ 500-64 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-65
460:836
C. Special criteria for Development Area No. 3.
(1) Within this Development Area there shall be common exhibition
and fair grounds for the display of goods and conduct of activities
related to the permitted uses within the zone. (A minimum of 10%
of the area, excluding the retail outlet center and its associated
parking, shall be devoted to a common area, and its location shall
be delineated on the plans initially submitted to the Township as
stated in Subsection A of this section.)
(2) Development shall occur so as to result in one road frontage
remaining undeveloped with the exception of the rehabilitation of
existing buildings or reconstruction of buildings on existing
building foundations.
(3) For the purposes of establishing this common area, a no-building
zone shall be established a distance 60 feet from and parallel to the
abutting right-of-way line of the street.
(4) No portion of a building may be constructed so as to encroach upon
this common area.
(5) Structures permitted to be placed upon the common area are
limited to open pavilions, bandstands and gazebos. The impervious
coverage from such structures shall be limited to no more than 15%
of the common area.
D. New City road system.
(1) Vehicular access to New City shall be gained from Route 23 North
and New City Road and terminate in an improved parking facility
within New City Development Area 5 west of New City
Development Area 2. This access shall be improved based upon
plans submitted by the applicant to the Township for review by the
staff and approved by the Township Planning Board.
(2) Vehicular access shall be restricted to Development Areas 1A, 2, 3,
4 and 5 except for delivery and service vehicles and emergency
equipment.
(3) The existing New City road system shall be maintained in its
current configuration and paved width and shall only be improved,
except for normal maintenance, with the approval of the Township
Engineer and Planning Board after review by the Township Historic
Preservation Commission.
(4) For Development Area 1, the principal means of access to and from
the site shall be provided from State Highway 23.
E. Parking standards shall be as follows in Table 3:
§ 500-65 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-65
460:837
Table 3
Parking Standards
Development
Areas 1A to 5
Development
Area 1
Residence 1.5 spaces N/A
Retail and office
floor area
1 per 200 square
feet of gross floor
area
1 per 200 square
feet of gross floor
area
Common area 1 per 400 square
feet of galleries
Cars
Bed-and-breakfast 1 per bedroom
Buses Retail floor area N/A 1 per 10,000
square feet of retail
floor area
F. Historic design guidelines.
(1) Building materials, scale, massing, exterior building colors and the
interrelationship of the historic properties shall be addressed by
the applicant for review by the Historic Preservation Commission.
Characteristics such as combination of clapboard and shingling as
surface materials, porches, asymmetrical massing and variety in
orientation should be preserved in existing development and
incorporated into any new development. The above shall be
reviewed by the Historic Preservation Commission with
recommendation to the Planning Board.
(2) Street trees shall remain except as otherwise approved by the
Historic Preservation Commission and Planning Board.
G. Other design guidelines. The general provisions and design standards
of Article IX, General Provisions and Design Standards, of this chapter
shall apply to the Historic New City Preservation Zone, except as may
be superseded by this article.
§ 500-65 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-65
460:838
ARTICLE IX
General Provisions and Design Standards
§ 500-66. Accessory buildings.
§ 500-67. Appearance of buildings.
A. Accessory buildings as part of principal buildings. Any accessory
building attached to a principal building shall be considered part of the
principal building and the total structure shall adhere to the yard
requirements for the principal building regardless of the technique of
connecting the principal and accessory buildings.
B. Accessory buildings not to be constructed prior to principal building.
No construction permit shall be issued for the construction of an
accessory building prior to the issuance of a construction permit for the
construction of the main building on the same premises. If construction
of the main building does not precede or coincide with the construction
of the accessory building, the Construction Official shall revoke the
construction permit for the accessory building until construction of the
main building has proceeded substantially toward completion.
C. Distance between adjacent buildings. The minimum distance between
an accessory building and any other buildings on the same lot shall be
as prescribed in §§ 500-12, 500-28, 500-40 and 500-48, except that no
poultry or livestock shelter shall be erected nearer than 100 feet to any
dwelling on the same lot.
D. Size of accessory buildings. Any accessory building exceeding 1,500
square feet in size shall be subject to Planning Board approval for any
use.
E. Height of accessory buildings. The height of accessory buildings shall
be as prescribed in §§ 500-11, 500-34, 500-40 and 500-49.
F. Location. An accessory building may be erected in side or rear yard
areas only and shall be set back from side and rear lot lines as
prescribed in §§ 500-12, 500-23C(4)(b), 500-28, 500-40 and 500-48,
except that, if erected on a corner lot, the accessory building shall be
set back from the side street to comply with the setback line applying to
the principal building for that side street and except further that no
poultry or livestock shelter shall be erected nearer than 50 feet to any
lot lines.
G. Accessory buildings not exceeding 100 square feet. All accessory
buildings that do not exceed 100 square feet in total area and are not
used to shelter livestock or poultry may be located within five feet of
any side or rear lot line.
A. Within any residential district, no building with a permitted
professional home office or home occupation shall be constructed or
§ 500-66 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-67
460:839
altered so as to be inharmonious with the residential character of the
adjacent residential area.
B. The Township Council hereby finds that uniformity in the exterior
design and appearance of dwellings erected in the same residential
neighborhood tends to adversely affect the desirability of the immediate
and neighboring areas for residential purposes and impair existing
residential property and the value of both improved and unimproved
real property in such areas and, in addition, tends to deprive the
municipality of tax revenue and destroy a proper balance between the
taxable value of real property in such areas and the cost of municipal
services provided therefor. It is the purpose of this section to prevent
these and other harmful effects of uniformity in design and appearance
of dwellings erected in any housing development in the same
residential neighborhood and thus to promote and protect the general
welfare of the community.
C. No more than one construction permit shall be issued for any particular
single-family detached dwelling unit design in any housing
development consisting of two or more detached dwellings when the
houses are substantially alike in exterior design and appearance unless
such similar houses either are separated by a distance of at least 300
feet or are situated on individual lots which are themselves separated at
all points by a distance of at least 150 feet, whichever distance will
provide the least separation between houses.
D. Houses within such specified distance from each other shall be
considered uniform in exterior design and appearance if they have any
one of the following characteristics:
(1) The same basic dimensions and floor plans are used without
substantial differentiation of one or more exterior elevations.
(2) The height and design of the roofs are without substantial change
in design and appearance.
(3) The size and type of windows and doors in the front elevation are
without substantial differentiation.
(4) In addition, there shall be:
(a) No less than two separate basic house designs in every housing
development consisting of eight or fewer houses.
(b) No less than three basic house designs in every housing
development consisting of 15 or fewer houses.
(c) No less than five basic house designs in every housing
development consisting of 50 or fewer houses.
(d) No less than six basic house designs in every housing
development consisting of 77 or fewer houses.
§ 500-67 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-67
460:840
§ 500-68. Fences, walls and sight triangles.
(e) No less than eight basic house designs in every development
consisting of 78 or more houses.
E. To insure conformity with the provisions of this section, no construction
permit shall hereafter be issued for more than one dwelling in any
housing development until the builder shall post or cause to be posted
on each specific lot on the map of the subdivision on file with the
Construction Official the type and model for each house for which a
construction permit has been or is being issued.
F. The provisions, requirements, and standards heretofore set forth shall
not be considered met where there is an attempt to make minor
changes or deviations from building plans and location surveys which
show an obvious intent to circumvent the purpose of this section.
A. All permitted fences shall be situated on a lot in such a manner that the
finished side of the fence shall face adjacent properties. No fence shall
be erected of barbed wire, topped with metal spikes, or constructed of
any material or in any manner which may be dangerous to persons or
animals, except that these provisions shall not apply to farms or where
necessary for the keeping of farm animals as provided in § 500-90 and
except further that fences permitted for commercial and industrial uses
may be topped by a barbed wire protective barrier. Moreover,
notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, retaining walls
may be constructed as approved by the Township Engineer upon
submission of a request for approval to the administrative officer. Any
Township review of the submitted request shall consider the safety and
aesthetic aspects of the proposed retaining wall.
B. On any lot in any residential district, no wall or fence shall be erected or
altered so that such wall or fence is over four feet in height in the front
yard areas and six feet in height in the side and rear yard areas except:
[Amended 11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-19]
(1) A private residential swimming pool area shall be surrounded by a
fence at least four feet, but no more than six feet, in height.
Swimming pool areas shall be located in rear or side areas only. See
§ 500-86 for additional standards.
(2) A tennis court area, located in rear yard areas only, may be
surrounded by a nonopaque fence, a maximum of 15 feet in height.
The fence shall be set back from any lot line the distances required
for accessory buildings in the zoning district as specified.
(3) Buffer areas shall meet the requirements specified in this
chapter.189
189. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 500-67 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-68
460:841
§ 500-69. Lighting.
(4) Off-street parking, loading, and driveway areas shall meet the
requirements specified in § 500-73.
(5) Where necessary for the keeping of farm animals as provided for in
§ 500-90.
C. On any lot in any nonresidential district, no wall or fence shall be
erected or altered so that the wall or fence shall be over three feet in
height in the front yard areas and six feet in height in side and rear yard
areas. [Amended 11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-19]
D. Sight triangle easements shall be required at intersections, in addition
to the specified right-of-way width, in which no grading, planting or
structure shall be erected or maintained except for street signs, fire
hydrants, and light standards. The "sight triangle" shall be defined as
that area outside of the street right-of-way which is bounded by the
intersecting street lines and the straight line connecting "sight points,"
one each located on the two intersecting street center lines; arterial
streets at 300 feet; collector streets at 200 feet; and local streets at 90
feet. Where the intersecting streets are both arterials, both collectors,
or one arterial and one collector, two overlapping sight triangles shall
be required, formed by connecting the "sight point" noted above with a
"sight point" 90 feet on the intersecting street. Such easement
dedication shall be expressed on the site plans as follows: "Sight
triangle deeded for the purposes provided for and expressed in the
Land Development Ordinance."
A. Streetlighting of a type supplied by the utility and of a type and number
approved by the Township Engineer shall be provided for all street
intersections and along all arterial, collector, and local streets and
anywhere else deemed necessary for safety reasons. Wherever electric
utility installations are required to be underground, the applicant shall
provide for underground service for streetlighting.
B. All parking areas and walkways thereto and appurtenant passageways
and driveways serving commercial, public, office, industrial, apartment,
or other similar uses, having common off-street parking and/or loading
areas and building complexes requiring area lighting shall be
adequately illuminated for security and safety purposes. The lighting
plan in and around the parking areas shall provide for nonglare, colorcorrected
lights focused downward. The light intensity provided at
ground level shall be a minimum of 0.3 footcandle anywhere in the area
to be illuminated, shall average a minimum of 0.5 footcandle over the
entire area, and shall be provided by fixtures with a mounting height
not more than 25 feet or the height of the building, whichever is less,
measured from the ground level to the center line of the light source,
spaced a distance not to exceed five times the mounting height. Any
other outdoor lighting such as building and sidewalk illumination,
driveways with no adjacent parking, the lighting of signs and
§ 500-68 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-69
460:842
§ 500-70. Lot configuration.
§ 500-71. Natural features.
ornamental lighting, shall be shown on the lighting plan in sufficient
detail to allow determination of the effects to adjacent properties,
traffic safety, and overhead sky glow. The objective of these
specifications shall be to minimize off-premises effects. No lights shall
shine into windows or onto streets and driveways in such manner as to
interfere with or distract driver vision. To achieve these requirements,
the intensity of such light sources, the light shielding, and similar
characteristics shall be subject to site plan approval.
A. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be either at right angles or
radial to street lines.
B. Each lot shall front upon a street and be capable of providing safe
access to and from any uses situated thereon.
C. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such new street line and all setbacks shall be
measured from such line.
D. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use, due to factors such as poor drainage conditions or flood
conditions, percolation tests or test borings, indicating the ground
conditions are inadequate for proper sewage disposal for on-lot sewage
treatment or similar circumstances, the Board, after adequate
investigation, may withhold approval of such lots. If approval is
withheld, the Board shall give reasons and notify the applicant and
enter such reasons in the minutes.
E. Monuments shall be installed for all newly created lots in compliance
with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11. All lot corners shall be
marked with a metal alloy pin of permanent character.
A. Natural features such as trees, hilltops and views, natural terrain, open
waters, trails, stream corridors, and natural drainage lines shall be
preserved whenever possible in designing any development containing
such features.
B. No topsoil shall be removed from areas intended for lawn or open
space. Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be
redistributed so as to provide sufficient cover to all such areas, which
shall be stabilized by the approved seeding and/or planting.
C. A conscious effort shall be made to preserve existing trees and shrubs
on the site. Stripping trees from a lot or filling around trees on a lot
shall not be permitted unless it can be shown that grading or
construction requirements necessitate removal of trees, in which case,
those lots shall be replanted with trees. All newly planted shade trees
shall be nursery-grown stock not less than 2 1/2 inches in diameter,
§ 500-69 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-71
460:843
planted and staked in a manner approved by the Planning and Building
Department. Trees shall be of the following species: willow oak, red
oak, scarlet oak, pin oak, ginkgo (male only), Japanese pagoda tree,
thornless sunburst honey locust, Norway maple, Norway red, and
columnar maple. All trees not surviving after one growing season shall
be replaced by the developer. Other species may be proposed in writing
to the Planning Board for its approval. In any case, a sufficient number
of shade trees shall be provided and planted to insure a minimum of
eight trees per acre of lot area.
D. The building designs shall attempt to work with the existing conditions
(topography, rock outcroppings, etc.) rather than alter them, to
minimize the impacts of development.
E. All residential subdivisions for the creation of new building lots shall, in
addition to this section, also comply with the land disturbance criteria
as set forth in § 470-14C, Land disturbance criteria. Any lot adjustments
made to comply with the provisions of this section of this chapter that
do not reduce the minimum required lot size will be reviewed through a
waiver process.
F. Critical areas. Certain areas of the Township exhibit various
environmental and physical constraints such as steep topography,
floodplains, wetlands, rock outcrop areas, etc. Development of these
areas would have a severe and negative impact upon the land and water
quality within the Township.
(1) Limitations on development. Development of structures or
buildings on designated critical areas shall be limited according to
the schedule of limitations set forth in Subsection F(3) below.
Roads and driveways may be constructed across streams and
floodplains, providing no viable alternate exists and providing
appropriate local, state, and federal approvals are obtained.
Critical areas may be utilized for computing gross densities.
However, a minimum of 25% (maximum one acre) of the total lot
area or 20,000 square feet, whichever is greater, must be of
contiguous not-critical areas for the construction of the unit.
Further, the associated limit of construction around each unit shall
not exceed 25% of the lot area or 20,000 square feet, whichever is
greater. This will be reviewed on a lot-to-lot basis at the time of
subdivision and may require reconfiguration of the development
and/or a reduction in the number of lots. Nothing herein contained,
however, shall be construed to prohibit the use of any wetland or
floodplain for farming, grazing, plant nurseries, horticulture, truck
farming, forestry, wild crop harvesting, open recreation uses,
hunting and fishing, providing such uses are permitted in the zone
in which the premises is located.
(2) Exceptions.
§ 500-71 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-71
460:844
(a) Development limitations shall not apply to the following
development applications:
[1] A single-family detached dwelling on existing lots of
record.
[2] Minor subdivisions that will not result in the creation of
any new building lots.
[3] Agricultural and silvaculture operations, providing plans
have been approved by the Soil Conservation District and
the New Jersey Division of Forestry, respectively.
[4] All changes in occupancy in commercial or industrial
zones, providing there is no expansion of structures or
increase in paved areas.
(b) In review of development applications, the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment shall be guided by the schedule of
limitations set forth in Subsection F(3) below.
(3) Schedule of Limitations on Development. For all development not
specifically excepted, the developer shall designate all critical
areas on the site. Development on the designated critical areas
shall be limited as follows:
Critical Area Source Percent Limit
Lakes and ponds U.S. Geological Survey
Maps, Aerial Photos,
Master Plan, Natural
Resources Inventory
100%
Wetlands National Wetlands
Inventory U.S. Department
of Agriculture 1979,
delineated and regulated
as per N.J. Department of
Environmental Protection
Wetlands Regulations
100%
Floodplains Federal Emergency
Management Agency Flood
Insurance Study
100%
Steep slopes Greater than 35% 100%
Streams As defined in § 420-6, a
buffer of 80 feet each side
of a waterway (measured
from the top of the bank)
or the limits of the
floodplain, whichever is
greater
100%
§ 500-71 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-72
460:845
§ 500-72. Nonconforming lots, structures and uses.
A. Lots.
(1) Isolated lots. Any existing lot conforming to the standards of the
Zoning Ordinance adopted on May 7, 1969, may have constructed
upon it a new dwelling or may have additions to an existing
dwelling and/or construction of an accessory building without an
appeal for variance relief, provided the existing uses on the lot
conform to the permitted use stipulated in this chapter for the lot in
question.
(2) Contiguous lots. Whenever title to two or more contiguous lots is
held by the same owner, regardless of whether or not each of the
lots may have been approved as portions of a subdivision or
acquired by separate conveyance or by other operations of law, and
one or more of the individual lots should, by reason of exceptional
shallowness, topographical conditions, substandard area or yard
space or similar measurements, not conform to the minimum lot
area and dimension requirements for the zone in which it is
located, the contiguous lots of the owner shall be considered as a
single lot. The exception to this requirement shall be any lot which
meets all of the following criteria:
(a) Either:
[1] The lot(s) were created by virtue of subdivision approval
by the Township; or
[2] That those lots were previously shown as separate lots on
the Tax Map of the Township of West Milford; and
(b) That those lots comply with the standards of the Township
Zoning Ordinance adopted May 7, 1969; and
(c) That the owner has obtained a zoning permit indicating that all
involved lots comply with this chapter.
(3) Whenever the owner of a lot, existing at the time of adoption of this
chapter, has dedicated or conveyed land to the Township in order to
meet the minimum street width requirements of the Official Map or
Master Plan of the Township, the Construction Official shall issue
building and occupancy permits for the lot whose depth and/or
areas are rendered substandard in area only because of such
dedication and where the owner has no other adjacent lands to
provide the minimum requirements.
(4) Any lot not conforming to the present zoning regulations and being
developed pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the May 7,
1969, zoning standards, including the standards for maximum
building coverage, except that the following building coverage
limitations shall not be exceeded:
§ 500-72 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-72
460:846
§ 500-73. Off-street parking and loading areas.
Present Zone
Principal Building
(square feet)
Accessory Building
(square feet)
LR 2,000 600
R-1 4,356 800
R-2 8,712 1,500
R-3 13,068 1,500
R-4 17,424 1,500
(5) Whenever two or more contiguous lots are merged or are being
merged to create one building lot and one or more of the lots meet
the standards of the Zoning Ordinance adopted on May 7, 1969, the
new merged lot shall be considered a conforming lot and subject to
the criteria in Subsection A(1) through (4) of this section. [Added
9-15-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-29]
A. In all nonresidential zones where any building or structure is erected,
enlarged or increased in capacity, there shall be provided off-street
parking for automotive, bicycle and other vehicles and off-street loading
facilities in accordance with the requirements set forth herein as well
as the parking space requirements for the handicapped contained in
N.J.S.A. 52:32-11 et seq. All required parking and loading facilities shall
be paved with an all-weather impervious surface and shall be
completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
B. Required parking spaces or loading berths may not be located on
streets, access aisles, or driveways. No areas specifically intended for
loading use may be located between the front building line and the
street line unless otherwise specified in other sections of this chapter.
C. All required parking spaces shall be on the same lot or tract of land as
the building or use to which they are accessory, unless the Planning
Board, as part of the site plan review, shall approve collective off-street
parking facilities for two or more buildings or uses on contiguous lots.
The total number of spaces in such collective off-street parking facilities
shall be not less than the sum of the spaces required for the individual
uses, computed separately. Such approval shall be granted only subject
to the submission of appropriate deed restrictions, acceptable to the
Planning Board Attorney, guaranteeing the availability of such facilities
throughout the life of the buildings or uses to which they are proposed
to be accessory.
D. Where it can be demonstrated, at the time of Planning Board review,
that the parking or loading area requirements of this chapter are in
excess of actual needs, the Planning Board may permit a portion of the
proposed parking or loading areas to be appropriately graded and
landscaped, but left unpaved. If, following construction, the experience
§ 500-72 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-73
460:847
with the actual operation of the proposed use should show the need for
additional off-street parking or loading, the Planning Board may require
such unpaved space to be paved upon recommendation of the Planning
Director and Township Engineer.
E. Every public or private off-street parking or loading area shall be
maintained in good condition, free of hazards and deterioration. All
paved areas, sidewalks, curbs, drainage facilities, lighting, bumpers,
guardrails, markings, signs, bicycle parking devices, landscaping and
other improvements shall be maintained in workable, safe and good
condition. Further, the Township Council may authorize repairs for such
improvements if, after proper notice, the owner fails to maintain any
improvements that are governed by a development of other similar
agreement or if said body finds that the resulting conditions constitute
a public health and safety hazard.
F. Landscaping.
(1) Except for detached dwelling units, a screen planting of
appropriate plant material not less than four feet in height shall be
provided between the off-street parking areas and any lot line or
street line except where a building intervenes or where the
distance between such areas and the lot line is greater than 150
feet.
(2) All loading areas shall be landscaped and screened sufficiently to
obscure the view of the parked vehicles and loading platforms from
any public street, adjacent residential districts or uses and the
front yards of adjacent commercial and industrial uses. Such
screening shall be an extension of a building, a fence, wall,
planting, or combination thereof and shall not be less than four feet
in height.
(3) Each off-street parking area shall have a minimum area equivalent
to one parking space every 20 parking spaces landscaped, with 1/2
such spaces having shrubs no higher than three feet and the other
half having trees with branches no lower than seven feet. Such
landscaped spaces shall be distributed throughout the parking area
in order to break the view of long rows of parked cars in a manner
not impairing visibility and shall not be construed as meeting the
requirements for buffers or screening as specified in this chapter.
(4) All landscaping in parking areas shall be carefully located so as not
to obstruct vision. The landscaping shall include at least one tree
for each 10 parking spaces, and the trees shall be appropriately
grouped. In narrow islands, low spreading plants, such as creeping
juniper, English ivy, myrtle or pachysandra, are appropriate.
(5) All parking lots with a capacity of 60 or more vehicles shall be
designed to include pedestrian walkways throughout the lots. They
shall be raised at least six inches above the parking area and shall
§ 500-73 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-73
460:848
§ 500-74. Surfacing and curbing.
§ 500-75. Parking area design standards.
be protected by permanent and durable curbing so as to assure a
minimum width of four feet free of car overhangs.
G. Lighting. Lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be
arranged to reflect the light away from residential premises and streets
and be in accordance with § 500-69.
A. All parking and loading areas and access drives shall be paved as
outlined below or the equivalent, as determined by the Township
Engineer and approved as part of the development application
approval. All parking areas, regardless of size and location, shall be
suitably drained and maintained and curbed with Belgian block or
granite curbing.
B. Areas of ingress or egress, loading and unloading areas, major interior
driveways or access aisles and other areas likely to experience similar
heavy traffic shall be paved with not less than four inches of compacted
base course or plant-mixed bituminous, stabilized base course,
constructed in one layer and prepared and constructed in accordance
with Division 3, Section 2A, of the New Jersey State Highway
Department Standard Specifications for Roads and Bridge Construction
(1961) and amendments thereto. A minimum two-inch-thick compacted
wearing surface of bituminous concrete (MABC) shall be constructed
thereon in accordance with Division 3, Section 10, of the aforesaid New
Jersey State Highway Department Specifications and amendments
thereto.
C. Parking stall areas and other areas likely to experience similar light
traffic shall be paved with not less than three inches of compacted base
course of plant-mixed bituminous, stabilized base course, prepared and
constructed in accordance Division 3, Section 10, of the aforesaid New
Jersey State Highway Department Specifications and amendments
thereto.
D. Where subbase conditions of proposed parking and loading areas are
wet, springy, or of such a nature that surfacing would be inadvisable
without first treating the subbase, the treatment of the subbases shall
be made in the following manner: The areas shall be excavated to a
depth of six to 12 inches below the proposed finished grade and filled
with suitable subbase material as determined by the Township
Engineer. Where required by the Township Engineer, a system of
porous concrete pipe or PVC subsurface drains shall be constructed
beneath the surface of the parking area and connected to a suitable
drain. After the subbase material has been properly placed and
compacted, the parking area surfacing material, as described
heretofore, shall be spread thereon.
§ 500-73 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-75
460:849
A. Car parking standards. All required car parking spaces shall be laid out
and located in accordance with the following standards set forth below.
Compact car spaces may be permitted by the Planning Board only
where the total number of spaces proposed to be provided exceeds 50
and shall not exceed 30% of the total number required. If permitted,
compact car parking spaces shall be clearly identified by marking the
pavement with the letter "C" and shall be grouped in one or more
locations rather than dispersed throughout the site.
(1) Standard car spaces.
(a) Dimensional requirements shall be as follows:
Aisle Width
Space
(angle)
Width
(feet)
Depth
(feet)
One-Way
(feet)
Two-Way
(feet)
90 9 18 20 25
60 9 18 18 25
45 9 18 13 25
30 9 18 13 25
Parallel 9 18 12 25
Handicapped 12 18
(b) A space which abuts a fixed object, such as a wall or column,
whether within a structure or not, shall have a minimum width
of 10 feet.
(2) Compact car spaces.
(a) Dimensional requirements shall be as follows:
Aisle Width
Space
(angle)
Width
(feet)
Depth
(feet)
One-Way
(feet)
Two-Way
(feet)
90 8 15 20 25
60 8 15 18 25
45 8 15 13 25
30 8 16 13 25
Parallel 8 16.5 12 25
(b) A space which abuts a fixed object, such as a wall or column,
whether within a structure or not, shall have a minimum width
of nine feet.
§ 500-75 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-75
460:850
§ 500-76. Vehicular circulation.
B. All parking spaces shall be identified by means of four-inch painted
lines. Where possible, areas should be separated from roads or aisles by
islands with a minimum width of 10 feet.
C. Types of vehicles.
(1) The parking of automobiles and trucks with a factory rating of one
ton or less and with a nine-foot or smaller bed which shall include
pickups, vans, and similar vehicles that are used for personal or
commercial activities shall be permitted in any zone. The parking of
trucks with a factory rating of more than one ton shall be
prohibited in all residential zones, except as set forth hereafter and
when garaged.
(2) Trucks with a factory rating of more than one ton shall include, but
not be limited to, such vehicles as dump trucks, rack body trucks,
flatbed trucks, mason dump trucks, tank trucks, tractor trailers and
step side trucks, and trucks that are generally used for commercial
activities. The parking of trucks with a factory rating of more than
one ton shall be permitted on all commercial and industrial lots and
those residential lots that have an established nonconforming use,
provided they are used in connection with a business activity on the
lot upon which they are located.
(3) Contractor's equipment shall include, but not be limited to, such
vehicles as backhoes, front end loaders, bulldozers, and cranes.
The parking of contractor's equipment shall not be permitted on
any residential lot, except when such equipment is, in the opinion
of the Construction Official, used in connection with a construction
project on that lot.
A. Access. Access points from any one lot crossing the street line shall be
limited to a maximum of two along the frontage of any single street. The
center lines of any separate access points shall be spaced at least 65
feet apart, shall handle no more than two lanes of traffic, be at least 20
feet from any property line, and shall be set back from the point of
tangency of the existing or proposed curb or pavement radius of any
corner of any intersecting street at least 50 feet, or 1/2 the lot frontage,
whichever is greater, except that in no case need the setback distance
exceed 200 feet. Driveway design shall give due consideration to the
proposed width, curbing, direction of traffic flow, radii of curves, and
method of dividing traffic lanes. Curbing shall be depressed at the
driveway or the curbing may be rounded at the corners and the
driveway connected with the street in the same manner as another
street.
B. Any exit driveway lane shall be located and designed, in profile and
grading, so as to provide the following minimum sight distance
§ 500-75 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-76
460:851
§ 500-77. Performance standards for all uses.
An application for a permit shall provide documentation that the intended
use will comply with the performance standards enumerated below. In
the case of a structure being built where the future use is not known, a
construction permit may be issued with the condition that no certificate of
occupancy will be issued until such time as the documentation is submitted
with respect to the particular occupant. A new application and a new
certificate of occupancy shall be required in the event of a change of any
use of any structure.
measured in each direction from the driver's seat of a vehicle touching
the street line:
Permitted Road Speed
(mph)
Required Sight Distance
(feet)
25 150
30 200
35 250
40 300
45 350
50 400
C. A change in the speed regulations shall not affect a building or use for
which a construction or land use permit has been issued.
D. No driveway shall have a grade which exceeds 5% within 50 feet of the
street line and 10% overall.
E. Each driveway shall, as much as practicable, design driveways so that
they are 90 degrees to the adjacent road.
F. Upon the determination of the Township Engineer, acceleration and/or
deceleration lanes shall be provided and designed in accordance with
design criteria established by the American Association of State
Highway and Transportation Officials Standards Manuals.
G. Residential driveways on arterial or collector roads shall be provided
with on-site turnarounds to prevent vehicle backing onto the roadway.
The Township Engineer may require on-site turnarounds to be provided
on local roads in order to promote safe and efficient access.
H. Residential driveways being proposed through subdivision of lands
shall as much as practical utilize joint driveways to the public road
system.
A. Electrical and/or electronic devices. All electrical or electronic devices
shall be subject to the provisions of Public Law 90-602, 90th Congress,
HR 10790, dated October 18, 1968, entitled "An Act for the Protection
§ 500-76 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-77
460:852
of Public Health and Safety from the Dangers of Electronic Product
Radiation." Radiation products as defined in U.S. Department of Health
and Welfare Publication No. (FDA) 75-8003 shall be so limited and
controlled so that no measurable energy can be recorded at any point
beyond the property boundaries. The applicant, upon request, shall
produce certified data wherein measurements made in accordance with
the procedure and standards set forth in the U.S. Department of Health
and Welfare Publication No. (FDA) 75-8003 adequately demonstrate
compliance with the minimum standards established by the Act. All
other forms of electromagnetic radiation lying between 100 KHz and 10
GHz shall be restricted to the technical limits established in the Federal
Communications Commission's Rules and Regulations. Additionally,
electric or electronic equipment shall be shielded so there is no
interference with any radio or television reception at the lot line, or
beyond the operator's dwelling unit in the case of multifamily dwellings,
as a result of the operation of such equipment.
B. Glare. No use shall produce a strong, dazzling light or a reflection of a
strong, dazzling light, or glare beyond its lot lines. Exterior lighting
shall be shielded, buffered, and directed so that glare, direct light, or
reflection shall not become a nuisance to adjoining properties,
adjoining dwelling units, adjoining districts, or streets.
C. Heat. No use shall produce heat perceptible beyond its lot lines.
Further, no use shall be permitted which would cause the temperature
to rise or fall in any body of water.
D. Noise.190
(1) Noise levels shall be designed and operated in accordance with
local regulations and those rules established by the New Jersey
State Department of Environmental Protection, as they are adopted
and amended.
(2) Measurements shall be made by a competent acoustical engineer
using equipment meeting the United States of America Standards
Institute Standard S 1.4 1961 or the latest revision thereof and S
2.22 or the latest revision. All measurements shall be made in at
least eight frequency bands.
(3) Ambient noise levels shall be made between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 11:00 p.m. for periods of at least one hour and on three
separate occasions during the period when the proposed use shall
be operated.
(4) The permitted noise level of the proposed use, measured at the
property line, shall not exceed the ambient noise levels in each
frequency band.
190. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 226, Noise.
§ 500-77 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-77
460:853
(5) The maximum continuous airborne sound set forth in Title 7,
Chapter 29, of the New Jersey Administrative Code shall not be
exceeded. Where standards are established and are more
restrictive than contained in this chapter, the more restrictive
standards shall be applicable.
E. Noxious odors. Odors due to nonagricultural operations shall not be
discernible at the lot line or beyond. Further, no open burning shall be
permitted in any zone.
F. Storage and waste disposal.
(1) No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes
or forces, nor shall any substance be deposited which can
contaminate an underground aquifer or otherwise render such
underground aquifer undesirable as a source of water supply or
recreation, or which will destroy aquatic life. All materials or
wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which constitute a fire
hazard or which may be edible or otherwise attractive to rodents or
insects shall be stored indoors and enclosed in appropriate
containers adequate to eliminate such hazards. This provision shall
not apply to properly designated, constructed, and maintained
composting operations.191
(2) No liquid waste shall be discharged into the public sewage
collection and disposal system unless the West Milford Municipal
Utilities Authority shall have first investigated the character and
volume of such wastes and shall have certified that it will accept
the discharge of such waste material into the system. The applicant
shall comply with any requirements of said officials, including the
pretreating of such wastes, the installation of processing methods,
separation or screening of wastes, control of pH and other method
of improving such wastes prior to discharge, as a condition of
approval of such facilities.192
G. Ventilation. No use shall obstruct the natural ventilation of adjacent
uses nor contaminate the air with excessive heat or odor. No air
conditioners or exhaust fans shall be permitted to discharge exhausted
air unless set back from all property lines 10 feet or equipped with
baffles to deflect discharged air away from the adjacent use.
H. Vibration. There shall be no vibration which is discernible to the human
sense of feeling beyond the immediate lot.
I. Air pollution.193
191. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 321, Solid Waste; Recycling.
192. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 300, Sewers.
193. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 57, Air Pollution.
§ 500-77 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-77
460:854
§ 500-78. Principal building.
Unless otherwise defined in this chapter, no more than one dwelling unit or
principal building shall be permitted on one lot.
§ 500-79. Public utilities.
(1) No substance shall be emitted into the atmosphere in quantities
which are injurious to human, plant or animal life or to property, or
which will interfere reasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of
life and property anywhere in the Township. All provisions of Title
7, Chapter 27 of the New Jersey Administrative Code, or the
regulations contained this section, whichever shall be the more
stringent, shall apply.
(2) In any nonresidential zone, no smoke, the shade or appearance of
which is darker than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, shall
be emitted into the open air from any fuel-burning equipment;
provided, however, that smoke emitted during the clearing of a fire
box or the building of a new fire, the shade or appearance of which
is not darker than No. 2 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, may be
permitted for a period or periods aggregating no more than three
minutes in any 15 consecutive minutes. Smoke emissions from the
combustion of fuel in mobile sources and from stationary internal
combustion engines shall not exceed the limits set forth in Title 7,
Chapter 27 of the New Jersey Administrative Code.
J. No residential dwelling shall be located within 100 feet of the right-ofway
of a high-tension electric power line. The lot size for a residential
use shall be increased if the Planning Board finds that the area within
the one-hundred-foot distance constrains the lot so that inadequate
outdoor living space results from the location of the high-tension line
right-of-way.
A. Underground installation. All public services shall be connected to an
approved public utilities system where one exists. The developer shall
arrange with the servicing utility for the underground installation of the
utilities' distribution supply lines and service connections in accordance
with the provisions of the applicable standard terms and conditions
incorporated as part of its tariff, then on file with the State of New
Jersey Board of Public Utility Commissioners, and the developer shall
provide the Township with four copies of a final plan showing the
installed location of the utilities. The developer shall submit to the
Board, prior to the granting of final approval, a written instrument from
each serving utility which shall evidence full compliance or intended
full compliance with the provisions of this subsection; provided that lots
which abut existing streets where overhead electric or telephone
distribution supply lines and service connections have heretofore been
installed may be supplied with electric and telephone service from
these overhead lines, but any new service connections from the utilities'
§ 500-77 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-79
460:855
§ 500-80. Sanitary sewers, septic systems, water supply systems and
wells.194
§ 500-81. Streets.195
overhead lines shall be installed underground. In cases where
extensions of service are needed to existing buildings or new buildings
in established subdivisions, industrial parks, or shopping centers, the
present method of service may be continued. In the case of existing
overhead utilities, however, should a road widening or an extension of
service or other such condition occur as a result of the development
and necessitate the replacement or relocation of such utilities, such
replacement or relocation shall be underground.
B. Easements. In large-scale developments, easements along rear
property lines or elsewhere for utility installation may be required.
Such easements shall be at least 20 feet wide and located in
consultation with the companies or Township departments concerned,
and to their fullest extent possible, be centered on, or adjacent to, rear
or side lot lines. Easement dedication shall be expressed in the plan.
A. If a public treatment and collection system is accessible or planned, the
developer shall construct facilities in such a manner as to make
adequate sewage treatment available to each lot and structure within
the development from the treatment and collection system.
B. Any treatment plant and collection system, including individual on-lot
septic systems, shall be designed in accordance with the requirements
of the State Department of Health and Senior Services or Township
ordinances enforced by the Township Health Department, whichever is
more restrictive, and shall be subject to approval by the Township
Health Department.
C. Where central water facilities are accessible, water mains shall be
constructed in such a manner as to make adequate water service
available to each lot or building within the development. The entire
system shall be designed in accordance with the requirements and
standards of the local and/or state agency having approval authority
and shall be subject to their approval. The system shall also be designed
with adequate capacity and sustained pressure.
D. Where no central water facilities are accessible, water shall be
furnished on an individual lot basis. Well installation, sealing, and
testing shall be in accordance with the New Jersey Standards for
Construction of Water Supply Systems in Realty Improvements, N.J.S.A.
58:11-23 et seq., as amended.
194. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 300, Sewers; Ch. 390, Water; and Ch. 399, Well Capping.
195. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 332, Streets and Sidewalks.
§ 500-79 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-81
460:856
A. All developments shall be served by paved public streets with an
adequate crown. The arrangement of streets not shown on the
Township Master Plan or Official Map, as adopted by the Township
Council, shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension of
existing streets and should conform to the topography as far as
practicable.
B. When a new development adjoins land susceptible to being subdivided,
suitable provisions shall be made for optimum access of the remaining
and/or adjoining tract to existing or proposed streets.
C. Local streets shall be so planned and identified with appropriate signs
so as to discourage through traffic.
D. In the event that a development adjoins or includes existing streets that
do not conform to widths as shown on the adopted Master Plan and/or
Official Map or the street width requirements of this chapter, additional
land along either or both sides of the street sufficient to conform to the
right-of-way requirements may be dedicated for the location,
installation, repair and maintenance of streets, drainage facilities,
utilities and other facilities customarily located on street rights-of-way.
If the development is along one side only, 1/2 of the required extra
width shall be dedicated. Additionally, that portion of the existing street
or road adjoining or included within a site plan or major subdivision
shall be improved, including excavation, grading, base courses and
surfacing in accordance with the road improvement standards of this
chapter.
E. In all developments, the minimum public street right-of-way shall be
measured from lot line to lot line and shall be in accordance with the
following schedule.
Arterial
(feet)
Collector
(feet)
Local
(feet)
Right-of-way width 66 60 50
Dedicated right-of-way 60 50 50
Reserved right-of-way 6 10 —
Cartway 46 40 30*
*NOTE: Varies for single-family residential development (see below).
F. Cartway width for local roads.
(1) The following road widths and improvements shall be required in
conjunction with single-family development within specific zoning
districts:
§ 500-81 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-81
460:857
Zone
Pavement Width
(feet) Curbs Drainage
R-4 20 No No
R-3 24 No No
R-2 24 No Yes
R-1 24 Yes Yes
Any higher density 30 Yes Yes
New private roads 20 to 30 Yes Yes
(2) For cluster developments, the road standards for the higher density
must be utilized so that, for example, a cluster development in the
R-4 Zone shall use the R-2 road standards.
G. Grades on all streets shall not exceed 10%. No street shall have less
than a minimum grade of 1/2%.
H. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible and
in no case shall be less than 60 degrees; approaches to all intersections
shall follow a straight line for at least 100 feet. No more than two
streets shall meet or intersect at any one point, and the center lines of
both intersecting streets shall pass through a common point. Measuring
from this common point, two intersections shall be spaced a sufficient
distance to permit a minimum of two lots between the two street rightsof-
way or 300 feet, whichever is more.
I. Any development abutting an existing street classified as an arterial or
collector shall be permitted only one new street connecting with the
same side of the existing street, except where the frontage is sufficient.
More than one street may intersect the arterial or collector street,
provided the streets shall not intersect with the same side of the
existing street at intervals of less than 800 feet. The block corners at
intersections shall be rounded at the curbline with the street having the
highest radius requirement as outlined below determining the
minimum standard for all curblines:
(1) Arterials: 40 feet;
(2) Collectors: 35 feet; and
(3) Local streets: 30 feet.
J. A tangent at least 200 feet long shall be introduced between reverse
curves on arterial and collector streets. When connecting street lines
deflect from each other at any one point, they shall be connected by a
curve with a radius conforming to current AASHTO standards so that
the minimum sight distance within the right-of-way shall be 350 feet for
local streets, 500 feet for a collector street and 800 feet for an arterial
street.
§ 500-81 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-81
460:858
K. Culs-de-sac of a permanent nature, where provision for the future
extension of the street to the boundary of the adjoining property is
impractical or impossible, or of a temporary nature, where provision is
made for the future extension of the street to the boundary line of
adjoining property, shall be no more than 750 feet in length and shall
provide a turnaround at the end with a radius of 50 feet on the curbline
plus a utility and planting strip width of 10 feet around the entire culde-
sac. The center point for the radius shall be on the center line of the
associated street, or if offset, offset to a point where the radius becomes
tangent to the right curbline of the associated street. Culs-de-sac may,
however, be up to 1,200 feet in length for conventional development in
the R-4 Zone.
L. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate
the name of an existing street that confusion results. The continuation
of an existing street shall have the same name. Curvilinear streets shall
change their names only at street intersections. The Board shall reserve
the right to approve or name streets within a proposed development.
M. In all residential zones, all major subdivisions bounded by any existing
or proposed arterial street shall control access to such streets by having
all driveways intersect marginal service streets, parallel streets or
streets intersecting the arterial street.
N. Contiguous open driveways in excess of 15 feet wide shall be
prohibited. Moreover, any use providing direct driveway access to an
arterial street, as indicated on the Master Plan, shall include a
turnaround area on-site.
O. Sight triangles. At all street corners, the areas bounded by the right-of
way lines and a straight line connecting sight points on street center
lines which are the following distances from the intersection of the
center lines shall be dedicated as sight triangles:
(1) Where a local street intersects a local street: 90 feet.
(2) Where a local street intersects a collector street: 90 feet on the
minor and 200 feet on the collector.
(3) Where a local street or a collector street intersects an arterial
street: 90 feet on the local or collector and 300 feet on the arterial.
P. No fences or any other obstruction nor any planting exceeding 24
inches in height as measured above the elevation of the center line of
the road may be placed in any such sight triangle.
Q. The Planning Board may require street widening or other street
improvements on arterials and collectors, including acceleration and
deceleration lanes and curbing, to assure safe ingress and egress to the
adjoining property.
§ 500-81 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-81
460:859
§ 500-82. Road specifications.
R. The approval of any map of land delineating streets by the Township
Council shall in no way be construed as an acceptance of any street
indicated thereon.
A. The pavement width of streets and the quality of surfacing and base
materials shall adhere to the minimum standards set forth by the
Township, County or State Engineers when the paving concerns roads
under their jurisdiction and where such standards exist.
B. Streets under the jurisdiction of the Township having rights-of-way
widths in excess of 50 feet shall be designed and paved as specifically
approved by the Township Engineer. Streets having a fifty-foot right-ofway
width shall be paved with a seven-and-one-half-inch bituminous
concrete pavement and be constructed according to the following
specifications:
(1) All topsoil shall be stripped from the proposed subgrade. The
subgrade when completed shall be true to the lines, grades and
cross sections given on an approved plan or as directed by the
Township Engineer. After the subgrade has been shaped correctly,
it shall be brought to a firm, unyielding surface by rolling the entire
area with a three-wheel power roller weighing not less than 10
tons. All soft and spongy places shall be excavated and refilled
solidly with subbase consisting of broken stone, broken slag,
gravel, suitable earth, or sand, as directed by the Township
Engineer. All evident loose rock or boulders shall be removed or
broken off 15 inches below the subgrade surface. All stumps shall
be removed in their entirety. This shall be done before completing
the rolling of the entire surface of the subgrade. No fill material
shall be spread or rolled while the ground is frozen or thawing, or
during unfavorable weather conditions. Where work is interrupted
by heavy rain, full operations shall not be resumed until the
moisture content of the fill is as required for 98% compaction.
Subgrade shall not be prepared during freezing weather, or when
frozen, or when it is stable due to excessive moisture.
(2) Four-inch macadam base course materials, the aggregate shall be
two-and-one-half-inch size.
(3) No stone shall be laid in the subgrade until the subgrade has been
thoroughly inspected by the Township Engineer and approved by
him.
(4) Macadam foundation course shall be constructed of two-and-onehalf-
inch crushed stone rolled to a minimum thickness of four
inches. The rolling shall begin at the sides and progress to the
center, parallel with the center line of the road. After the stone has
been properly rolled, stone dust shall be spread over the surface
and worked into the voids. The dust shall be applied in thin layers
§ 500-81 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-82
460:860
with intermittent rolling between each application. After
completion of the rolling, the entire base surface shall be broomed
and swept so no surplus stone dust remains on the surface. The
faces of two-and-one-half-inch stones shall show clean and clear.
Spots that have become loose, reveled or rutted shall be repaired
and rerolled to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer.
(5) The macadam foundation shall not be constructed more than two
weeks prior to the time that the bituminous surface is to be applied.
The contractor or developer shall repair any foundation defects to
the satisfaction of the Township Engineer if the construction
procedure is otherwise.
(6) All work with bituminous materials shall take place only when the
atmosphere temperature is above 50 degrees Fahrenheit, and has
remained above 40 degrees Fahrenheit for the preceding eight
hours, and when the weather conditions are otherwise favorable in
the opinion of the Township Engineer. All hot bituminous concrete
mixtures shall be spread by a bituminous concrete paver which
shall be self-contained, power-propelled, provided with an
activated screened or strike-off assembly, and shall meet the
requirements as specified therefore in Article 3.10.3 of the New
Jersey Highway Department Standard Specifications 1961. No
bitumen or bituminous concrete shall be spread unless the
Township Engineer is present.
(7) Two-inch bituminous concrete bottom course, mix No. 2 materials,
the large aggregate shall be one-inch size.
(8) Bituminous binder shall be asphalt cement, penetration grade
85-100.
(9) The bottom course shall be constructed on a base course which
shall be dry, clean and free from frost and loose or adhering foreign
materials, properly finished at the time the bottom course is placed
thereon, and when weather conditions are suitable in the opinion of
the Township Engineer.
(10) A prime coat of MC-30 applied at a rate of 0.5 gallon S.Y. shall then
be placed and allowed to cure. The final compacted thickness shall
not be less than two inches. The hot bituminous mixture shall be
spread and struck off so as to obtain, after compaction, the grade
and crown shown on the plans or adjustments thereof made or
ordered by the Township Engineer. On areas where irregularities or
unavoidable obstacles make the use of self-powered spreading and
finishing equipment impracticable, in the judgment of the Township
Engineer, the mixture may be spread and raked by hand. On such
areas, the mixture shall be dumped on steel dump boards and
spread and raked to give the thickness of material required.
§ 500-82 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-82
460:861
(11) One-and-one-half-inch bituminous concrete surface course, mix five
materials bituminous materials, shall be asphalt cement,
penetration grade 85-100.
(12) Coarse aggregate, shall be broken stone of three-eighths-inch size.
(13) Fine aggregate shall conform to the requirements specified
therefore in Article 8.5.12 of the New Jersey State Highway
Department Standard Specification 1961.
(14) The mixture shall be laid only upon a base which is dry, and when
the weather conditions are suitable in the opinion of the Township
Engineer. The mixture shall be spread and struck off so as to
obtain, after compaction, the grade and crown shown on the plans
or adjustments thereof made or ordered by the Township Engineer.
On areas where irregularities or unavoidable obstacles make the
use of self-powered spreading and finishing equipment
impracticable, in the judgment of the Township Engineer, the
mixture may be spread and raked by hand. On such areas, the
mixture shall be dumped on steel dump boards and spread and
raked to give the thickness of material required.
(15) After the mixture has been properly spread, initial compaction shall
be obtained by rolling with a three-wheel power-driven roller
having a load of not less than 330 pounds per inch of width of rear
wheel and a total metal weight of not less than 10 tons. Subsequent
rolling shall be done with a two-axle tandem roller which shall be
power-driven and shall have a load of not less than 250 pounds per
inch of width of tread of drive roll and shall have a total metal
weight of not less than eight tons.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, all streets in the
Limited Manufacturing and Industrial Zone shall have a minimum
cartway width of 40 feet and shall be constructed according to the
following specifications:
(1) Rolling shall begin at the sides and progress gradually to the
center, until the entire surface has been rolled by the rear wheels.
If the width of the surface course permits, it shall be subjected to a
diagonal rolling in two directions, the second diagonal rolling
crossing the lines of the first. Rolling shall be continued until all
roller marks are eliminated and the finished surface meets the
requirements specified under surface requirement of the standard
specifications. Along curbs and at other places not accessible to the
roller, the mixture shall be thoroughly compacted with hot hand or
mechanical tampers, and smoothing irons which shall be suitable to
the Township Engineer. Any pavement that becomes loose and
broken or mixed with dirt, or is in any way defective shall be
removed and replaced with fresh hot mixture, which shall be
immediately compacted to conform to the surrounding area. Any
area showing an excess of bituminous material shall have the same
§ 500-82 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-82
460:862
removed and replaced. The final compacted thickness shall not
be less than 1 1/2 inches. Then and as directed by the Township
Engineer or his duly authorized representative, the contractor or
developer shall cut samples from the completed pavement and
forward them to the Township Engineer. The areas of pavement so
removed shall be replaced with new mixtures and refinished.
(2) Roads shall have a parabolic cross section with a differential of six
inches from center line to curb.
(3) All rolling shall be done with a three-wheel power-driven roller
having a total weight of not less than 10 tons and a weight on the
rear rolls of not less than 300 pounds per inch of width of roll,
unless otherwise specified.
(4) Aggregates and screenings shall be prepared from trap rock,
granite or dolomite conforming to requirements thereof as
specified in Articles 8.5.4, 8.5.5, 8.5.7 as applicable of the New
Jersey State Highway Department Standards Specifications 1961.
Bituminous material shall conform to Article 8.1.2 of such
Specifications, and bituminous wearing surfaces shall be in
accordance with Section 10 of such Specifications.
(5) The roadbed shall be covered with layers not over six inches in
thickness of Type 2, Class B, soil aggregate, New Jersey
Department of Transportation Specifications, and each layer shall
be compacted with sheepsfoot or rubber tired roller of at least tenton
weight to a final thickness of not less than 15 inches. A
macadam base course, eight inches compacted thickness of twoand-
one-half-inch stone, dust bound, may be substituted in lieu of
the gravel base course. The top shall then be raked. All stones over
three inches in size shall be removed and then shall be graded to a
crown of not less than three inches nor more than six inches per 10
feet of width. After the road has been properly graded, 0.3 to 0.5
gallons of RC-70 shall be applied, then covered at least 15, but not
more than 30, pounds per square yard of three-eighths-inch
washed gravel or crushed stone; the entire surface shall be rolled
with a roller of a minimum weight of five tons until thoroughly
compacted. After penetration oil has been properly cured, then not
less than a week nor more than 90 days thereafter the road shall be
covered with a two-inch, compacted in place, bituminous surface
course, mix 5 or mix 6.
D. Curbs. Belgian block, and granite, or concrete curbing shall be installed
as required by the Board within all subdivisions, and site plans and at
intersections with existing Township, county or state roads and these
shall be laid in a manner approved by the Township Engineer.
(1) Belgian block and granite. The construction detail shall be as
specified on plans available in the Township Engineer's office.
Stones used for secondary and primary local roads shall not be less
§ 500-82 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-82
460:863
§ 500-83. Sidewalks.196
than 10 inches in height and shall be constructed to show a vertical
face above the roadway pavement of six inches. Stones used for
Township collector and arterial roads shall not be less than 12
inches in height and shall be constructed to show a vertical face
above the roadway pavement of eight inches.
(2) Concrete. If concrete, the curbing shall meet the following
specifications:
(a) The concrete to be used for curbs shall be Class B concrete as
specified in the New Jersey State Highway Specifications for
Curbs and Gutters.
(b) Expansion joints shall be provided at intervals of 20 feet and
shall be sealed as specified by the Township Engineer.
(c) Openings for driveway access shall be in such widths as shall
be determined by the Township Engineer, but in no case more
than 15 feet at the edge of the pavement. The curb at such
driveway openings shall be depressed to the extent that 1 1/2
inches extend above the finished pavement. The rear top
corner of this curb shall have a radius of 1/4 inch, and the front
top corner shall have a radius of 1 1/2 inches.
(d) Concrete curbs for state highways, and as required by the
Township Engineer on local roads, shall be eight inches wide at
their base and not less than six inches wide at their top. Their
height shall not be less than 18 inches and be constructed to
show a vertical face above the roadway pavement of seven
inches. The rear top corner of this curb shall have a radius of 1/
4 inch, and the front top corner shall have a radius of 1 1/2
inches.
A. Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of all streets serving an
arterial or collector function as stipulated in the adopted Township
Master Plan and/or Official Map of the Township and on local
residential streets as required by the Board. Sidewalks in
nonresidential developments shall be required, at the Board's
discretion, depending upon the probable volume of pedestrian traffic,
the development's location in relation to other populated areas, and the
general type of improvement intended. Brick pavers in conjunction with
the Town Center Plan shall be required.
B. Where required, sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide and located
as approved by the Board. Sidewalks shall be concrete or an equivalent
approved by the Board and shall be constructed in accordance with
196. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 332, Streets and Sidewalks.
§ 500-82 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-83
460:864
§ 500-84. Shade trees.
§ 500-85. Soil erosion and sediment control.197
A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared by a licensed
New Jersey professional engineer in accordance with specifications for
soil erosion and sediment control of the Hudson, Essex and Passaic Soil
Conservation District. The soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be
submitted to the District for certification pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
The Planning Board shall not give approval to the preliminary application
until receipt of the certification.
§ 500-86. Swimming pools (above and below ground).
§ 500-87. Use of yard by another building prohibited.
No open space provided around any principal building for the purposes of
complying with the front, side, rear or other yard provisions of this chapter
Division 5 of the specifications of the New Jersey State Highway
Department.
A. Planting.
(1) Trees shall be planted along the public right-of-way varying by tree
type every 50 feet.
(2) Trees shall be a minimum of 10 feet in height and a minimum of 50
to 75 feet apart.
(3) Each tree shall have a minimum caliper of 3 1/2 inches measured
two feet above the ground.
B. All trees shall be nursery-grown stock and shall have a root ball
wrapped in burlap, with a replacement guarantee by the developer for
two years.
A. No private residential pool shall be constructed or installed on any lot
unless the lot contains a residence building. Such pool shall be located
in the rear or side yard areas only, shall occupy no more than 75% of the
yard area in which it is located and shall not be located within 10 feet of
the property line nor within 10 feet of any building on the site.
B. A private residential swimming pool area shall be surrounded by a
suitable fence with a self-latching gate at least four feet but no more
than six feet in height, and such fence shall be set back from any lot line
at least five feet if the fence exceeds four feet in height.
C. All swimming pools shall meet the appropriate design standards as set
forth by the National Swimming Pool Institute.
197. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 460, Soil Removal and Soil Fill.
§ 500-83 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-87
460:865
shall be considered as providing the yard provisions for another principal
building.
§ 500-88. Seaplane operations on Greenwood Lake; violations and
penalties.
§ 500-89. Abandonment of vehicles and machinery.
A. It is hereby declared that the use of Greenwood Lake for the purpose of
the landing, and takeoff, of seaplanes or the establishment of
commercial aviation facilities or seaplane bases on land surrounding
Greenwood Lake is contrary to the chief use and general purpose of
Greenwood Lake as to public recreational resource. It is hereby further
declared that such seaplane operations are deemed to be potentially
dangerous to the safety and welfare of the majority of persons who use
Greenwood Lake for various recreational activities in the nature of
boating, fishing, swimming, water skiing and other similar sports.
B. In those zoning districts surrounding and encompassing Greenwood
Lake, the use of the waters of Greenwood Lake for the purpose of
accommodating the landing and takeoff of seaplanes or the
establishment of any commercial aviation facility or seaplane base is
specifically prohibited.
C. The provisions of this section shall not affect:
(1) The operation of Greenwood Lake Airport (formerly known as
"Nairobi Airport");
(2) The forest fire seaplane patrols authorized and conducted by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection or any
successor thereto; or
(3) Seaplane operations in actual distress or emergency conditions.
D. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
section, or any person aiding or abetting or permitting or allowing
violations of any provisions of this section, shall be subject to the
penalty imposed in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, of the
Township Code of the Township of West Milford, as amended.
A. It is hereby declared that the keeping, storage or abandonment of any
vehicle, motor vehicles, motor-drawn vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer, not
currently used for transportation, and not being licensed for the current
year, or of any unused machinery or equipment upon lands within the
limits of the Township, is inimical to the public welfare in that the
exposure to view of such vehicle, motor vehicle, motor-drawn vehicle,
trailer, semitrailer, machinery or equipment is unsightly and
detrimental to the neighborhood.
B. No person shall keep, store, abandon or leave upon any parcel of land,
street, road, alleyway or parkway in the Township any vehicle, motor
§ 500-87 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-89
460:866
§ 500-90. Farm animals.
vehicle, motor-drawn vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, not currently used
for transportation and not being licensed for the current year, or any
unused machinery or equipment. Nothing herein contained shall be
deemed to prohibit the placing, keeping, storing or abandonment of any
such vehicle, motor vehicle, motor-drawn vehicle, trailer or semitrailer,
machinery or equipment in a garage or other building located within
the Township.
C. Whenever it shall appear to the Construction Official of the Township of
West Milford or his duly authorized and designated assistant that the
presence upon any lands within the Township of any vehicle, motor
vehicle, motor-drawn vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, not currently used
for transportation, and not being licensed for the current year, or any
unused machinery or equipment is inimical to the general welfare in
that it is unsightly, the owner or tenant of any land shall be required to
remove therefrom the vehicle, motor vehicle, motor-drawn vehicle,
trailer or semitrailer, machinery or equipment or to place the same in a
garage or other building within five days after receipt by the owner or
tenant of written notice from such Construction Official of the Township
of West Milford or his duly authorized and designated assistant,
requiring the removal. This notice may be served personally upon the
owner or tenant, or may be directed to him by certified mail.
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, farm animals
shall be housed and kept in a manner which will not constitute a public
nuisance.
B. A minimum tract for the keeping of farm animals shall be:
(1) One acre for the keeping of horses, except as provided in
Subsection B(5) of this section. The number of horses permitted
shall be determined by the size of the accessory structure(s)
housing the animals, using 100 square feet of roof area per animal
as the criteria for determining the number of horses permitted on
the property. A minimum of 32 square feet of roof area shall be
required per animal.
(2) One acre for the keeping of cows, sheep, pigs and goats, except as
provided in Subsection B(5) of this section. No more than one
animal shall be kept per acre of lot area.
(3) One acre for the keeping of poultry and fowl, except as provided in
Subsection B(5) of this section, except that there shall be allowed a
maximum amount of six chicken hens allowed on lots of less than
one acre so long as the lot conforms to the minimum lot size within
the zoning district. No more than 32 animals shall be kept per acre
of lot area. [Amended 9-18-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-015]
§ 500-89 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-90
460:867
§ 500-91. Temporary housing permit.
Whenever a legally occupied dwelling has been rendered uninhabitable in
the opinion of the Construction Officer by fire, flood, lightning or any other
disasters, the owner of that dwelling may acquire a permit from the office
of the Construction Official for temporary housing facilities such as, but
not limited to, a mobile home, travel trailer or motor home. Any permit for
temporary housing issued under this provision shall be valid for a period of
six months from the date of issuance, and may be extended for additional
60 days if so warranted in the opinion of the Construction Official. Such
housing facilities shall be placed on the same lot as the dwelling that has
been rendered uninhabitable, provided the applicant acquires the following:
electric service, sewage disposal hookup, potable water supply connection,
and the installation of an approved heat and smoke detector. Any temporary
housing facility must be inspected by the appropriate inspection agencies
having jurisdiction in the Township of West Milford prior to occupancy.
(4) There shall be no minimal lot size for the keeping of rabbits. No
more than 25 rabbits shall be kept on lots of one acre or less and no
more than 75 rabbits shall be kept on lots of over one acre.
(5) No farm animals shall be kept on one-acre lots in subdivisions of
over five lots which have received major subdivision approval from
the West Milford Planning Board.
(6) The housing and keeping of all other farm animals is prohibited.
C. No farm animals shall be kept unless they can be contained on the
property of their owner or the agent of their owner.
D. Any use for the keeping of farm animals prior to the adoption of this
chapter shall be considered nonconforming, provided that the owner
register the use with the Township Zoning Officer within 90 days of the
passage of this chapter.
E. The provisions of this section shall not apply to farms or commercial
horse stables as defined in § 420-6, Definitions.
§ 500-90 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-91
460:868
ARTICLE X
Conditional Uses
§ 500-92. Application and review.
§ 500-93. Issuance of a permit.
The Planning Board or Board of Adjustment shall not authorize the issuance
of a permit for a conditional use unless it shall find that such use:
§ 500-94. Houses of worship.
A. Application for a conditional use shall be made to the Planning Board
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67, or to the Board of Adjustment when
permitted under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76.
B. Review procedures.
(1) The Planning Board shall grant or deny the application within 95
days of submission of a complete application or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant. The review by the
Planning Board of a conditional use shall include any required site
plan review, and the ninety-five-day review period shall apply to the
site plan review as well.
(2) The Board of Adjustment reviewing the application pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76 shall approve or deny the application within 120
days of submission of a complete application.
(3) Failure of the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment to act within
the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the application,
and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the
Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant.
C. The applicant shall give notice of the hearing on the application
pursuant to § 420-9F of the Land Development Ordinance.
A. Is a use permitted as a conditional use in the zone district.
B. Meets all the required conditions for said zone district, except where
the conditions hereinafter set forth specifically amend such conditions.
C. Meets the requirements set forth for the particular conditional use
hereafter described.
A. Houses of worship shall have a minimum lot area of three acres with a
minimum lot width of 300 feet and minimum lot depth of 500 feet.
B. B. Principal structures shall include the house of worship building and
any educational building. Accessory buildings include any residence for
priest, pastor, etc., or nuns, etc., and any hall, auditorium or any other
building complementary to the function of the institution. Maximum
§ 500-92 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-94
460:869
§ 500-95. Schools.
§ 500-96. Essential services.
§ 500-97. Service stations.
building coverage shall be 8% for principal buildings and 2% for
accessory buildings.
C. Houses of worship shall provide one parking space for every five seats.
One seat shall be considered 22 inches in calculating the capacity of
pews or benches.
D. All parking shall be located in the rear or side yard at a minimum
distance of 50 feet from any property line and shall be screened from
view from adjacent properties.
A. No uses other than educational, community affairs and related uses
shall be permitted on the lot.
B. Playgrounds shall be placed in the side or rear yards and be set back a
minimum of 50 feet from side and rear lot lines.
C. The minimum lot size shall be three acres with a minimum lot width of
250 feet and minimum lot depth of 300 feet.
D. Maximum building coverage shall be 8% for principal buildings and 2%
for accessory buildings.
A. The minimum lot size shall be 1/2 acre.
B. A buffer shall be required as follows:
(1) Thirty feet along any common property line with a residential
district or use.
(2) Twenty feet along any other property line.
C. A landscaped strip shall be provided along the front yard for a width of
25 feet parallel to the street line.
A. The minimum lot size for service stations shall be one acre, and the
minimum frontage shall be 150 feet.
B. No service station shall be located within 500 feet of any firehouse,
school, playground, house of worship, or hospital.
C. All appliances, and storage areas, other than fuel pumps or air pumps,
shall be within a building. Fuel pumps and air pumps shall be permitted
within the required front yard space of service stations, but shall be no
closer than 50 feet to any proposed street line. All lubrication, repair or
similar activities shall be performed in a fully enclosed building, and no
dismantled parts shall be displayed outside of an enclosed building.
§ 500-94 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-97
460:870
§ 500-98. Automobile sales establishments.
§ 500-99. Car washes.
D. A landscaped strip shall be provided along the front yard 20 feet wide
parallel to the street line and 10 feet wide along the side and rear lines.
E. A minimum buffer area of 35 feet shall be provided along any common
property line with a residential district or use. The buffer shall contain a
staggered double row of coniferous trees, at least five feet high off the
ground at the time of planting to act as a screen.
F. Impervious coverage shall not exceed 35%.
G. Maximum building coverage for principal and accessory buildings shall
not exceed 10%.
H. The width at the entrance and exit drives shall be 35 feet.
I. Canopies over gas pumps may be erected. If they are, the following
conditions shall apply:
(1) The canopy shall have a pitched roof that is compatible in design
and coloration with the service station.
(2) The canopy is to be of a height of not less than 14 feet over
pavement to allow passage of fuel delivery trucks underneath the
canopy.
J. The applicant shall provide suitable disposal and/or recycling plans for
engine fluids, antifreezes, oils, car parts, batteries and tires.
K. Trash dumpsters shall be on a depressed concrete pad suitable for
containment of fluids.
L. Service stations shall provide six parking spaces for the first lift, wheel
alignment pit or similar work area, five additional spaces for a second
work area, and an additional three spaces for each additional work
area. Such spaces shall be separated from the driveway and general
apron areas which give access to the gasoline and air pumps and
service areas. No designated parking space shall obstruct access to
such facilities.
A. The minimum lot size for automobile sales establishments shall be two
acres.
B. The maximum impervious coverage shall be 40%.
C. Ten parking spaces shall be provided for customer convenience,
separated from vehicular displays and not used by employees.
A. The minimum lot size for car washes shall be one acre.
§ 500-97 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-99
460:871
§ 500-100. Drive-in and fast-food restaurants.
§ 500-101. Drive-in banks.
B. A water recycling plan shall be submitted. Advanced treatment of
liquid, including biodegradable products, and a dual black water/gray
water system is required. Discharge to groundwater standards as
required by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
shall apply.
C. Runoff from wet cars that exit the car wash shall be included in the
stormwater plan so that all water is contained on site.
D. Three access lanes for each mechanized car wash entrance shall be
provided. Each lane must have the capacity for 12 vehicles.
E. All mechanical activities shall be conducted within a totally enclosed
building.
F. An escape exit shall be provided for vehicles that cannot go through the
conveyor.
G. Exit lanes from the car wash shall provide standing room for four cars
per lane at the exit of the car wash.
H. Front yards must be landscaped.
I. Twenty-foot landscaped buffers along side and rear yards are required.
J. An architectural design which is compatible with the size, composition,
coloration of the surrounding commercial uses is required.
K. Car washes shall provide three access lanes for each mechanized car
wash entrance with each lane having a minimum capacity for 12
vehicles, one separate parking space for each waxing, upholstery
cleaning or similar specialized service area, and one parking space for
every two employees. All vehicle entrances shall be from the rear of the
building, and all parked and waiting vehicles shall be accommodated on
the lot.
A. Separate entrance and exit driveways must be provided with one-way
on-site circulation.
B. Stacking for each drive-in window shall accommodate 10 cars on site.
C. Internal vehicle circulation shall be designed in a manner to protect
pedestrian safety; in particular, all vehicle circulation must be designed
to be at least 15 feet from any door.
D. The applicant must provide a maintenance agreement for litter control
and landscaping, including garbage receptacles on site.
E. A landscaped area of at least 20 feet in width shall be provided along
any property line.
§ 500-99 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-101
460:872
§ 500-102. Community buildings and clubhouses.
§ 500-103. Outdoor storage of boats and boat trailers.
A. Drive-in windows are permitted only if attached to a main bank
building.
B. Minimum acreage for a drive-in bank is one acre.
C. All stacking, parking and circulation shall be on site.
D. The stacking capacity for each drive-in window which must be provided
shall be 10 cars for the first window and seven cars for each additional
window.
E. A landscaped area of at least 20 feet wide shall be provided along any
property line.198
A. Minimum requirements.
(1) Lot area: one acre.
(2) Lot frontage: 100 feet.
(3) Width: 100 feet.
(4) Depth: 200 feet.
(5) Side yard: 50 feet.
(6) Front yard: 40 feet.
(7) Rear yard: 60 feet.
B. The front, side and rear yard setbacks as specified in Subsection A shall
be established as a buffer as defined in § 420-6, Definitions, of the Land
Development Ordinance, except that access shall be permitted within
the front yard.
C. Front, side or rear yards abutting a lake shall have no setback
requirements for that yard.
D. Storage buildings or toolsheds as accessory structures for community
buildings/clubhouses.
E. Parking in connection with community buildings/clubhouses shall not
be located within required setbacks. Said parking area shall not exceed
10% of the lot area.
F. Landscaping and screening shall be provided, and building design shall
be of a nature consistent with the character of the neighborhood in
which the use is to be located.
198. Editor's Note: Former Section 18-10.11, Hotels and motels, which previously followed this
section, was repealed 1-21-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-1.
§ 500-101 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-103
460:873
A. Outdoor boat storage as a principal use.
(1) Bulk requirements for the outdoor storage of boats and boat
trailers as a principal use in the property shall be the same as
required for principal buildings except that the rear yard setback
shall be 75 feet and the lot depth shall be 200 feet.
(2) Direct access shall be provided to each stored boat and boat trailer
by means of gravel aisles with a minimum thickness of four-inch
quarry process stone.
(3) Minimum car parking shall be provided at the ratio of one per each
employee within a workday, plus one space for each 10 boat
storage spaces.
(4) Open stacked storage shall not exceed three tiers. The total height,
including the stored boat in the highest tier, shall not exceed 21
feet in height at its highest point as measured from the finished
grade elevation at the mean point of the storage row.
(5) Outdoor storage of boats and trailers shall not be permitted in the
front yard.
(6) Outdoor storage of trailers shall be screened from view by fencing,
walls, or plantings.
(7) The minimum buffer shall be 25 feet, except that a buffer of 75 feet
shall be established along a residential use or zone. This buffer, if
wooded, shall remain wooded, and if open, shall be planted and left
undisturbed by development.
(8) The area for the outdoor storage of trailers shall be delineated on
the site plan and shall be suitably surfaced for maintenance
purposes.
(9) Any on-site office space utilized in the operation of boat storage
shall be considered part of the principal use for the outdoor storage
of boats and boat trailers.
B. Outdoor boat storage as an accessory use.
(1) Outdoor storage of boats and boat trailers as an accessory use shall
comply with the bulk requirements for principal use except that the
rear yard setback shall be 75 feet, and the lot depth shall be 200
feet. The location for the open boat storage shall be clearly
delineated and shall not exceed either 10% of the total lot area or
the combined maximum building coverage of 25% for all buildings
on the lot, including the proposed boat storage area, whichever is
less.
(2) The minimum buffer shall be 25 feet except that a buffer of 75 feet
shall be established along a residential use or zone. This buffer, if
§ 500-103 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-103
460:874
§ 500-104. Boat storage buildings and boat trailer storage.
§ 500-105. Senior citizens' housing in R-2 Zone. [Added 5-1-1996 by
Ord. No. 1996-13]
wooded, shall remain wooded, and if open, left undisturbed by
development.
(3) Outdoor storage of boats and trailers shall not be permitted in the
front yard.
(4) Outdoor storage of trailers shall be screened from view by fencing,
walls, or plantings.
(5) The area for outdoor storage of trailers shall be delineated on the
site plan for review purposes.
A. Boat storage buildings and boat trailer storage as a principal use.
(1) Loading access to any boat storage structure shall not directly face
any perimeter property line, but rather shall face towards the
interior of the lot.
(2) Trailer storage must be incidental to the boat storage.
(3) Trailer storage areas must be screened by fencing, walls, or
landscaping.
(4) Parking must be provided at a ratio of one space per each employee
within a workday plus one space for each 10 boat storage spaces.
B. Boat storage buildings and boat trailer storage as an accessory use.
(1) The bulk requirements for accessory buildings set out in § 500-28
shall be complied with.
(2) The structure shall not exceed 10% of the total lot area or a
combined maximum building coverage of 25% for all buildings on
the lot, including the proposed boat storage building, whichever is
less.
(3) Loading access to the structure shall not directly face any
perimeter lot line, but rather shall face the interior of the lot.
A. Property shall be located within a center, as delineated by the West
Milford Planning Board.
B. Property area and setback requirements shall be as follows:
Criteria Requirement
Minimum lot area 5 acres
Minimum lot width 350 feet
Minimum front yard setback and buffer* 50 feet
§ 500-103 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-105
460:875
§ 500-106. Golf courses. [Added 12-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-21]
Criteria Requirement
Minimum side yard setback and buffer* 50 feet
Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) 0.38
*NOTE: Driveways and sidewalks may be located within a designated
buffer for purposes of providing access to the property.
C. Property must have frontage on an approved and improved Township or
county road.
D. Buildings shall have no more than two stories of living quarters. The
maximum permitted height is 35 feet.
E. The units may be provided in one or more buildings.
F. Minimum unit sizes shall be as follows:
(1) One-bedroom apartment: 600 square feet.
(2) Two-bedroom apartment: 700 square feet.
G. Ancillary uses may include:
(1) Administrative office space for the operation of the complex.
(2) Community rooms only for the use of the residents of the complex
and their guests.
(3) Kiosks for the safety and shelter of individuals awaiting public or
private transportation services. Said kiosks shall not be calculated
in the floor area ratio (FAR).
(4) Recreational amenities to serve only the residents of the complex
and their guests.
(5) Off-street parking lots in accordance with §§ 500-73 and 500-75 of
the Land Development Ordinance.
(6) Fences and walls in accordance with § 500-68 of the Land
Development Ordinance.
(7) Utility and maintenance structures.
(8) Individual garages.
(9) Signs in accordance with Article XIV, Signs, of this chapter.
H. Minimum off-street parking shall be at 1.25 spaces per unit.
I. The complex shall be in compliance with Chapter 470, Article XIII,
Affordable Housing, of the Land Development Ordinance.
§ 500-105 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-106
460:876
§ 500-107. Recreation/entertainment uses limited to outdoor
performing arts centers, ice-skating facilities, or racquet sports
facilities. [Added 12-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-21]
This section shall apply to recreation/entertainment uses limited to outdoor
performing arts centers, ice-skating facilities, or racquet sports facilities,
whether singularly or in combination on one property.
A. Applicable zone: R-3 and R-4 Zones.
B. Chapter 470, Article XVI, Golf Courses, of the Land Development
Ordinance shall apply.
C. Minimum acreage:
(1) Nine-hole courses: 75 acres.
(2) Eighteen-hole courses: 150 acres.
D. Accessory uses permitted:
(1) Pro shops.
(2) Driving ranges.
(3) Clubhouses.
A. Applicable zone: R-4 Zone.
B. Area and bulk requirements:
(1) Minimum acreage: 60 acres.
(2) Minimum frontage: 300 feet of frontage on a state or county road.
(3) Minimum buffers: two-hundred-foot buffers around the perimeter
of the property.
(4) Parking and impervious surface. Sufficient paved parking shall be
provided in the amount determined by the applicant and agreed to
by the Planning Board; however, total impervious coverage shall
not exceed 35% of the total lot area.
(5) Minimum parking shall be provided as follows:
(a) Outdoor performing arts centers: one space per four seats.
(b) Ice-skating facilities: one space per 250 square feet.
(c) Courts: two per court plus three per 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area not devoted to a court.
(d) Shared uses. The applicant may provide parking for the
facilities permitted by this section by utilizing a shared parking
§ 500-106 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-107
460:877
§ 500-108. Indoor/outdoor tennis courts or other similar court/
racquet games. [Added 12-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-21]
§ 500-109. Campgrounds. [Added 12-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-21]
scheme, upon the showing to the Board of said parking
scheme's viability.
(6) For unpaved parking, an area of 310 square feet per vehicle shall
be utilized to determine sufficient parking and driveway area.
C. Accessory sanitary service facilities shall be permitted.
A. Applicable zones: R-3 and R-4 Zones.
B. Area and bulk requirements:
(1) Minimum acreage: five acres.
(2) Minimum frontage: 300 feet.
(3) Minimum buffers: 30 feet around the perimeter of the property.
(4) Minimum parking:
(a) Two per court; and
(b) Three per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area not devoted to a
court.
(5) Maximum impervious area: 10%.
C. Artificial outdoor lighting shall be in accordance with § 500-69 of the
Land Development Ordinance, except that the mounting height of the
light fixture shall not be higher than 12 feet and shall not be mounted
onto buildings.
A. Applicable zone: R-4 Zone.
B. Area and bulk requirements:
(1) Minimum acreage: 20 acres.
(2) Minimum frontage: 50 feet.
(3) Minimum buffers: 50 feet around the perimeter of the property. The
campground shall be obscured from view from outside the
property. Wooded lots shall remain wooded.
(4) Maximum impervious area: 1%.
C. Campsite requirements:
(1) Maximum density: 10 campsites per acre.
(2) Minimum distance between campsites: 20 feet.
§ 500-107 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-109
460:878
§ 500-110. Paintball facilities. [Added 12-17-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-21]
(3) Minimum size: 2,000 square feet.
(4) Maximum slope: 3%.
(5) Each campsite shall provide:
(a) One automobile parking space.
(b) One fireplace or grill.
(c) One picnic table.
(d) Space for a tent or camping vehicle.
D. One caretaker's home may be located on-site.
E. It shall be demonstrated that the campground property has access to a
trail as identified on the Township of West Milford Trails Map or is
adjacent to public open space.
F. Accessory uses permitted:
(1) Registration office; maximum size: 1,000 square feet.
(2) One low-intensity indoor recreation building; maximum size: 2,000
square feet. A camper-supply store shall be permitted within this
building.
(3) Sanitary service buildings.
G. Access and circulation.
(1) The access drive to the registration office or indoor recreation
building, whichever would be reached first, shall not be greater
than 750 feet in length and shall be improved to adequately provide
access for emergency vehicles.
(2) An internal loop system shall be provided, such that it begins and
ends from the access drive.
H. The facility shall be closed and all camper units and camping vehicles
shall be removed between January 15 and March 15 of the same
calendar year.
A. Applicable zone: R-4 Zone.
B. Area and bulk requirements:
(1) Minimum acreage of usable land for the paintball operation: 30
acres.
(2) Minimum buffers: 120 feet around the perimeter of the property.
§ 500-109 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-110
460:879
§ 500-111. Swimming facilities. [Added 12-17-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-21]
§ 500-112. Summer stock theaters. [Added 12-17-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-21]
(3) Minimum parking: 250 square feet of parking area per four
participants at any given session or simultaneous sessions.
C. Temporary uses may include:
(1) Tents.
(2) Temporary sanitary facilities.
D. Artificial outdoor lighting shall be in accordance with § 500-69 of this
chapter, except that the mounting height of the light fixture shall not be
higher than 12 feet and shall not be mounted onto buildings.
A. Applicable zones: R-3 and R-4 Zones.
B. Area and bulk requirements:
(1) Minimum acreage: five acres.
(2) Minimum buffers: 50 feet around the perimeter of the property.
(3) Minimum parking: one space per four persons, based on the design
capacity of the pool.
C. Accessory uses permitted:
(1) Sanitary service facilities.
(2) Snackbars.
D. Artificial outdoor lighting shall be in accordance with § 500-69 of this
chapter, except that the mounting height of the light fixture shall not be
higher than 12 feet and shall not be mounted onto buildings.
A. Applicable zones: R-3 and R-4 Zones.
B. Area and bulk requirements:
(1) Minimum acreage: 10 acres.
(2) Minimum buffers: 50 feet around the perimeter of the property.
(3) Minimum parking for patrons and employees: one space per three
seats.
C. No goods shall be sold in connection with any theater except
refreshments and such incidentals as are customarily sold during
theatrical performances. No such goods shall be offered for sale except
during the time that the theater is open for performances.
§ 500-110 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-113
460:880
§ 500-113. Day camps. [Added 12-17-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-21]
A. Applicable zones: R-3 and R-4 Zones.
B. Area and bulk requirements:
(1) Minimum acreage: 20 acres.
(2) Minimum buffers: 50 feet around the perimeter of the property.
(3) Minimum parking: 1.5 spaces per employee on the largest shift,
plus one space per camp vehicle normally parked on the premises.
C. Access and circulation. The access drive to the dropoff area shall not be
greater than 750 feet in length and shall be improved to adequately
provide access for emergency vehicles.199
199. Editor's Note: Former Section 18-10.24, Wireless telecommunications facilities, added
7-1-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-12, which previously followed this section, was repealed
12-11-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-51.
§ 500-113 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-113
460:881

ARTICLE XI
Piers, Boathouses and Marinas on Greenwood Lake
§ 500-114. Purpose.
In view of the need to insure safe and unobstructed movement of water
traffic as well as the most appropriate utilization of water resources and
open space on Greenwood Lake, the following provisions shall apply to
boathouses and marinas.
§ 500-115. General requirements; permit requirements.
A. Permit required. No boathouse or marina shall be constructed,
enlarged or extended unless and until the owner and/or lessee secures
from the Construction Official a construction permit as provided under
§ 470-4 of this Land Development Ordinance. Normal maintenance and
repair and seasonal replacement of preexisting structures shall not
require a building permit.
B. Marina site plan. Prior to the issuance of a construction permit for a
marina, the Planning Board shall review and approve a site plan in
conformance with the Land Development Ordinance, which shall
include a water traffic circulation plan.
C. Marine services. Permit applications for a marina shall be referred to
the Division of Marine Services by the applicant for any comments and
suggestions as part of the site plan review.
D. Construction limitations.
(1) No boathouse or marina shall extend into Greenwood Lake beyond
the pierhead line or more than 15% of the width of Greenwood
Lake measured on a line perpendicular to the closest opposite
shore, whichever is less.
(2) For the purpose of determining the exterior limits of boathouses
and mainwalks, any structure, including any type of anchors or
pilings placed or driven independently of the main structure, used
for the mooring of boats or the securing of the main structure, shall
be considered to be part of the boathouse or mainwalk.
(3) The top of any pier shall not be less than 14 inches from the high
water mark of 10.25 on the gauge at the Awosting Dam.
E. Supervision and maintenance. The owner and/or lessee of a boathouse
or marina shall provide for the proper supervision of such facility and to
maintain such facility in good condition, free of litter or refuse, so as not
to be offensive to surrounding lot owners or the general public. If such
facility is in danger of becoming a hazard to residents, visitors,
swimmers or boats, or adversely affecting navigation by reason of
structural members extending or floating into Greenwood Lake, then
§ 500-114 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-115
460:883
§ 500-116. Development controls for boathouses.
No boathouse shall be constructed, enlarged or extended and no building
permit shall be issued therefor except in compliance with the following
requirements:
§ 500-117. Development controls for marinas.
No marina shall be constructed, enlarged or extended and no building
permit shall be issued therefor except in compliance with the following
requirements:
the Construction Official shall notify and require the owner and/or
lessee to undertake repairs.
A. Boathouses shall be permitted in all zoning districts on lots that have
water frontage.
B. No boathouse shall be located closer to the side lot line than this
chapter permits for an accessory building in that zone.
C. Any combination of piers and boathouses shall not occupy more than
20% of the water lot area within the pierhead line. In no case shall a
boathouse alone exceed 15% of the water lot area within the pierhead
line.
D. There shall not be more than one boathouse for each water lot.
E. Boathouses shall be located over the water and shall abut the shoreline
of the waterway.
F. Ingress and egress for boats shall be perpendicular to the shoreline.
G. There shall be no living or sleeping accommodations, cooking or toilet
facilities provided in any boathouse.
A. Marinas shall be permitted only in those zoning districts wherein such
use is a permitted use, provided that no marina shall be located within
200 feet of a public or private beach or swimming area.
B. No dock, pier or mainwalk constituting part of a marina shall be located
within 16 feet of a side lot line, nor shall a pier, dock or mainwalk within
a marina be located closer than 30 feet from a private pier, dock or
mainwalk.
C. No marina shall occupy more than 30% of the water lot area within the
pierhead line.
D. No mainwalks shall be less than four feet in width and no catwalk shall
be less than two feet in width.
E. No more than one mainwalk or pier or dock shall be permitted on a
channel to open water less than 24 feet.
§ 500-115 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-117
460:884
§ 500-118. Technical requirements applying to waterfront
developments.
No dredging, filling or structures which may lower, raise or affect the
capacity of Greenwood Lake or the flow of water shall be permitted except
by permission of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
and/or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
F. In cases where piers, docks or mainwalks are covered, the maximum
height shall not exceed 12 feet above the high water mark.
§ 500-117 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-118
460:885

ARTICLE XII
Senior Congregate Care Zone
§ 500-119. Location. [Amended 10-4-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-14]
This zone will act as an overlay zone for the designated residential zones.
The standard zoning shall have precedence unless an applicant can
demonstrate the ability to comply with the intent and purpose of the Senior
Congregate Care (SCC) Zone. The following properties shall be included
within the overlay zone: Block 370, Lots 9 and 10 (new Block 5301, Lots 21
and 33).
§ 500-120. Purpose.
The purpose of the Senior Congregate Care (SCC) Zone is to provide
areas of the Township which encourage the design and development of a
multifaceted, relatively self-contained living environments for individuals
and families age 55 and over. Prepared by recognized professionals in
the field of senior life care facilities, the zone encourages the use of
contemporary land use planning and community development techniques
consistent with the objectives of the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law200
which will provide the creation of functional environments in an
environmentally acceptable way. This zone and its densities reflect the
desire to provide affordable housing to the Township's aging population.
§ 500-121. Required uses.
Because of the special nature of the zone, the following uses are required to
be included in any development proposal:
§ 500-122. Permitted accessory uses.
A. Nursing home (one).
B. Residential health care.
C. Adult multifamily dwelling units and/or attached patio homes and/or
attached townhouses.
D. Administrative, social and recreational buildings, structures and open
areas.
E. Neighborhood commercial uses, including service/retail and
professional offices planned, designed and constructed to serve the
needs of the SCC residents.
A. Supporting recreational facilities, including but not limited to
swimming pools, tennis courts, open field areas, passive sitting areas,
picnic facilities, walking trails, shuffleboard and bocci courts, etc.
200. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 500-119 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-122
460:887
§ 500-123. Minimum tract size.
The minimum tract size for each project in the Senior Congregate Care
Zone shall be 50 contiguous acres of land (prior to dedication of any land,
rights-of-way, parks, easements, etc.).
§ 500-124. Projects components.
In accordance with the required principal uses in the zone, each project
shall be comprised of the following:
Minimum
Percent of Total
Site Area
Project
Maximum
Nursing/residential health care
(total of both)
4% 10%
Adult multifamily residential
dwellings
20% 50%
Patio homes and/or townhouses 10% 40%
Recreation administration 3% 10%
Commercial 1% 3%
Office 1% 5%
Accessory uses 0.5% 2%
§ 500-125. Densities.
The maximum densities in the following project component shall be:
Project Component Gross Project Area
Nursing, etc. 50 beds per acre
Adult multifamily 10 units per acre
Townhouse/patio homes 6 units per acre
B. Off-street parking and private garage facilities.
C. Fences and walls.
D. Utility and maintenance structures.
E. Single-family dwelling unit to be utilized and occupied as a residence
exclusively for the director of the facility, administrator or other head of
operations whose presence on the site is essential for the effective
operation of the SCC facility.
F. Signs. (See Article XIV, Signs.)
§ 500-122 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-126
460:888
§ 500-126. Maximum impervious coverage.
The total amount of impervious coverage from buildings, roofs, roads,
parking areas, sidewalks, etc., shall not exceed 30% for the entire project.
§ 500-127. Area and buffer requirements.
The Senior Congregate Care Zone Area and Buffer Requirements Schedule
is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 500-128. Yard area setback requirements.
The Senior Congregate Care Zone Yard Area Setback Requirements
Schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 500-129. Open space.
A minimum of 50% of the total project area shall be set aside as open space.
This area may include buffer areas as prescribed above. Of the total amount
of open space, 15% shall be devoted to active and passive recreational
uses such as recreation and social gathering areas, walkways, sitting areas,
gardens and adjacent usable open space. The determination as to the extent
of recreational space shall be made by the Planning Board with the advice
of the Planning Director.
§ 500-130. Project phasing.
Project phasing for completion of nonresidential use components shall be
keyed to completion of basic residential use components in accordance with
the following schedules:
§ 500-131. Minimum buffer requirements.
A. When 50% of the housing units are complete:
(1) Fifty percent of the commercial center shall be completed.
(2) One hundred percent of the nursing/health care shall be
completed.
B. When 75% of the housing units are complete, 100% of the commercial
center must be complete.
C. When 100% of the housing units are complete, 100% of the office
facility must be complete.
A. Buffer areas may be included as part of the required setback areas. The
buffer area so required shall be preserved in its natural state and
supplemented with additional landscaping as necessary to achieve a full
and substantial screening effect when viewed from adjoining
properties.
§ 500-126 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-131
460:889
§ 500-132. Required purchasing and marketing sequence.
§ 500-133. Minimum off-street parking requirements.
B. Minimum buffers shall be in accordance with the schedule in
§ 500-127.201
A. Marketing preference requirements for implementation of the offering
shall be in accordance with the following schedule in ninety-day
increments:
(1) Head of household, 60 years old and older: West Milford residents
only.
(2) Head of household, 55 years old or older: West Milford residents
only.
(3) Head of household, 60 years old and older: no resident restrictions.
(4) Head of household, 55 years old and older: no resident restrictions.
B. A marketing plan shall be prepared by the applicant describing the
plan, advertising, market selection and implementation.
C. No one under 18 years of age shall be a permanent resident of the
Senior Congregate Care Zone. Implementation of this requirement
shall be through the rules and regulations of project association or
governing organization.
A. The Senior Congregate Care Zone permits several land use types, each
of which generates differing parking needs. The total number of
parking spaces provided on site shall be in accordance with the
following schedule:
Minimum Number of Spaces
Use Type Per Unit or Bed
One Space Per
Gross Square Feet
of Building Area
Patio homes/unit 2
Attached townhouses/
unit
2
Multiple adult dwelling
unit
1
Nursing home/bed 0.50
Residential health care
units
0.33
201. Editor's Note: The Senior Congregate Care Zone Area and Buffer Requirements Schedule
is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 500-131 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-133
460:890
§ 500-134. Special design regulations.
Minimum Number of Spaces
Use Type Per Unit or Bed
One Space Per
Gross Square Feet
of Building Area
Administrative/
recreation/ support uses
250 square feet
Neighborhood
community center
200 square feet
Professional office center 200 square feet
B. A minimum of one parking stall shall be provided in an attached parking
garage for each townhouse and patio home, of market value.
A. The design and layout of the site of the dwelling unit and all buildings
shall be planned for the convenience of the senior citizens and in
accordance with applicable codes and regulations.
B. Handicapped access to all buildings (except townhouses and patio
homes) and all floors within said buildings shall be provided.
Installation of ramps and elevators shall be in accordance with
applicable codes and regulations.
C. Each parking space shall be a minimum of nine by 20 feet with 4% of
the overall parking requirement reserved for handicapped parking
spaces with a minimum size of 12 feet by 20 feet.
D. Each townhouse building shall have no more than eight units per
building. Each patio home shall be attached to no more than one other
patio home.
E. Community sewerage and water facilities shall be required as part of
each project in conjunction with Planning Board and West Milford
Municipal Utilities Authority requirements.
F. Affordable housing. The project densities have been adjusted to provide
for affordable housing. To reflect the adjusted density permitted in this
zone, a 20% set-aside for affordable housing is required. All other
requirements of affordability are as outlined in Chapter 470, Article
XIII, Affordable Housing, of the Land Development Ordinance.
G. The development of the overall site plan must be in conformance with
the § 500-71, Natural features, of this chapter and all Township
ordinances.
H. The project is contingent upon receipt of both a certificate of need and a
certificate of authority from the New Jersey Department of Health and
Senior Services and the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
§ 500-133 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-134
460:891
§ 500-135. Wireless telecommunications facilities as principally
permitted uses. [Added 12-11-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-51]
Receipt of all approvals is required prior to preliminary Township
approval.
A. Residential component.
(1) Wireless telecommunications facilities are subject to the following:
(a) Area and height requirements.
[1] Minimum lot area: 25 acres.
[2] Minimum setback to any perimeter property line (setbacks
are taken from the outer limits of fencing around the
compound): 300 feet.
[3] Minimum setback to any building occupied or intended for
occupancy as a residential use (setbacks are taken from
the outer limits of fencing around the compound): 100
feet.
[4] Maximum height: not to exceed 10 feet above the
identified average of the tree height determined in the
following manner:
§ 500-134 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-135
460:892
§ 500-135 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-135
460:893
Explanations for Diagram and Tables
The Plan View Diagram depicts the two-hundred-fifty-foot
radius with seven profile lines distanced from each other
as shown. Within this radius, all trees with a diameter of
six inches or greater are to be located and the location
depicted on the Plan View Diagram. All trees surveyed
that fall along and within 10 feet of each side of the
profile lines are then to have their tree height surveyed
and recorded on Table A.
Table A is a compilation of the surveyed tree heights and
tree species as identified along the profiles in the Plan
View Diagram. The information will be exhibited by the
applicant on seven separate tables (Tables A1 through
A7), one for each profile line.
Table B is the final compilation of the average tree heights
and average anticipated tree heights for each of the seven
profile lines (as calculated in Tables A1 through A7) to
determine the maximum height of the proposed wireless
telecommunications facility.
The monopole and antennas shall be designed as a tree in
appearance to include branches and appropriate painting
or, if located in an open field area, the design shall be
a barn silo not to exceed 50 feet in height with the
equipment housed within a barn structure design.
(b) Property owned or leased by the Township of West Milford, any
Township Fire Company or First Aid Squad or the Township
Municipal Utilities Authority shall be exempt from the twentyfive-
acre minimum lot size requirement subject to the following
standards:
[1] Minimum lot area: 1.75 acres.
[2] Antennas shall either be affixed to the building within such
structural appurtenances as a bell tower, cupola, spire or
affixed to a flat roof with a mansard screen, or if a
monopole is proposed, it shall be designed as a flagpole or
a tree, to be determined by the Planning Board.
[3] Minimum front yard setback (setbacks are taken from the
outer limits of fencing around the compound): 50 feet or
the height of the structure, whichever is greater.
[4] Minimum rear yard setback (setbacks are taken from the
outer limits of fencing around the compound): 50 feet or
the height of the structure, whichever is greater.
§ 500-135 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-135
460:894
[5] Minimum side yard setback (setbacks are taken from the
outer limits of fencing around the compound): 50 feet or
the height of the structure, whichever is greater.
[6] Maximum height of structure: 90 feet.
(c) Maximum height of the compound security fence shall be six
feet.
(d) Antennas may be affixed to existing telephone poles, utility
stanchions, or streetlights either within public rights-of-way or
on properties identified in Subsection A(1)(b), and not
extending more than five feet above the existing height of the
pole or stanchion. The support equipment is subject to:
[1] Placement on the pole; or
[2] Placement at the base within the right-of-way; or
[3] Placement underground.
(e) Collocation is permitted on monopoles or lattice towers that
were approved by the Planning Board or Zoning Board prior to
the enactment of this § 500-135; however, the height of the
support structure shall not be extended.
(f) Driveways are subject to the requirements set forth in the
Engineering Department's Site Improvement Checklist.
(g) All electrical connections, wires and conduit from the antenna
structures to the ground structures shall be installed
underground.
(h) In the event such wireless telecommunications facilities are
abandoned or not operated for the use as approved for a period
of six months, the same shall be removed, at the option of the
Township, at the sole expense of the property owner.
B. Nonresidential component.
(1) Proposed antennas shall comply with the following criteria, as
applicable:
(a) Antennas being placed on streetlights, telephone poles and
utility stanchions, the height of the antennas shall not exceed
five feet above the existing pole or stanchion. The support
equipment is subject to:
[1] Placement on the pole; or
[2] Placement at the base within the right-of-way; or
[3] Placement underground.
§ 500-135 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-135
460:895
(b) Monopoles or lattice towers that were approved by the
Planning Board or Zoning Board prior to the enactment of this
§ 500-135, but not extending the height of the support
structure.
(c) Wireless telecommunications facilities disguised within new or
existing church steeples, freestanding clock towers,
freestanding flagpoles or decorative light stanchions, as
follows:
[1] The height of the structure shall not exceed 60 feet;
[2] Freestanding flagpoles, freestanding clock towers and
decorative light stanchions shall maintain the accessory
building setbacks and shall maintain a minimum front yard
setback of 10 feet;
[3] Freestanding flagpoles, freestanding clock towers and
decorative light stanchions shall not impede vehicular or
pedestrian traffic nor cause sight distance impediments
for vehicles entering or exiting a site.
(d) Roof structures, provided that no aspect of the wireless
telecommunications facility is visible from ground level when
viewed from street frontage.
(2) Equipment shelters to service antennas not located on telephone
poles or streetlights shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from all
property lines and shall be camouflaged in a structure that is
architecturally complementary to the antenna camouflage and the
surrounding buildings, or may be located on the roof, provided that
no aspect of the wireless telecommunications facility is visible from
ground level when viewed from street frontage.
(3) All facilities shall be suitably secured in accordance with § 500-68,
Fences, walls and sight triangles, of this chapter.
(4) Landscaping as screening shall be provided around the security
fencing.
(5) All electrical connections, wires and conduit from the antenna
structures to the ground structures shall be installed underground.
(6) In the event such wireless telecommunications facilities are
abandoned or not operated for the use as approved for a period of
six months, the same shall be removed, at the option of the
Township, at the sole expense of the property owner.
§ 500-135 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-135
460:896
ARTICLE XIII
Historic Preservation Commission
§ 500-136. Statutory authority, purpose and objectives.
§ 500-137. Establishment of Historic Preservation Commission;
procedures; powers and duties.
There is hereby created in and for the Township of West Milford a
Commission to be known as the "Historic Preservation Commission of the
Township of West Milford."
A. The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq., as amended, delegated the responsibility to local units of
government to adopt regulations designed to promote the protection of
certain architecturally, historically and archaeologically significant
structures, sites or districts for the general welfare of its citizenry.
B. Purpose and objectives. The Township of West Milford recognizes that it
has areas, places and structures of historic, archaeological and
architectural significance. It is in the interest of the general welfare to
preserve these areas, places and structures and to insure that new
development is compatible and relevant with these areas, places and
structures. This article will achieve these purposes and objectives and
will promote the preservation of the environment, promote a desirable
visual environment through creative development techniques and good
civic design and arrangements, prevent the degradation of the
environment through improper use of land, and promote the most
appropriate use of land in the Township.
A. Composition of the Historic Preservation Commission. The Historic
Preservation Commission shall be comprised of seven members, with
two alternates.
(1) Of the seven regular Commission members:
(a) Three shall be Class "A" or Class "B" members, said classes
being defined as:
[1] Class A: A person who is knowledgeable in building design
and construction or architectural history and who may
reside outside the Township; and
[2] Class B: A person who is knowledgeable in, or has a
demonstrated interest in, local history and who may reside
outside the Township.
(b) Four shall be Class "C" members, said class being defined as
citizens of the Township who shall hold no other Township
office, position or employment except for membership on the
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment.
§ 500-136 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-137
460:897
(c) To the extent available from within the Township of West
Milford, the Mayor shall appoint, with regard to Class "A" or
Class "B" members, trained individuals from the disciplines of
architecture, history, architectural history, prehistoric
archaeology, and historic archaeology who meet the
requirements as set forth in the 1980 amendments of the
National Historic Preservation Act. Should such individuals not
be available from within the Township, the Mayor shall have
the authority to appoint such individuals who reside outside of
the Township. In the event that the Mayor is unable to appoint
an individual with the appropriate credentials for the Class "A"
or Class "B" members of the Commission, then the State Office
of New Jersey Heritage may grant an exemption upon a filing
of a petition by the Mayor. Should such an exemption be
granted, then the Mayor may fill those positions with
individuals who meet the requirements for Class "C"
membership.
(2) Of the two alternate Commission members, both shall be Class "C"
members, as Class "C" is defined above. The two alternate
Commission members shall be respectively designated "Alternate
No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2."
B. Appointment of Historic Preservation Commission members.
(1) Regular members shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall serve
for four-year terms, except that Township Planning Board or Board
of Adjustment members shall serve during their incumbency in
office.
(2) The terms of the members first appointed under this article shall be
so determined that, to the greatest practicable extent, the
expiration of such terms shall be distributed, in the case of the
regular members, evenly over the first four years after their
appointment, and in the case of alternate members, evenly over the
first two years after their appointment; provided that the initial
term of no regular member shall exceed four years and that the
initial term of no alternate member shall exceed two years.
Vacancies shall be filled, within 60 days, in the same manner in
which the previous incumbent was appointed and such incumbent's
unexpired term.
C. Election of Chairman and Vice Chairman. The Historic Preservation
Commission shall elect from its membership a Chairman and a Vice
Chairman.
D. Establishment of rules and regulations. The Historic Preservation
Commission shall create rules and procedures for the transaction of its
business, subject to the following regulations:
(1) A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of four of the
Historic Preservation Commission's members, including the
§ 500-137 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-137
460:898
Chairman, or in his absence, the Vice Chairman, but not less than
a majority of the full authorized membership may grant or deny a
certificate of appropriateness.
(2) The Historic Preservation Commission shall appoint a Secretary,
who need not be a member of the Historic Preservation
Commission. The Secretary shall keep minutes and records of all
meetings and proceedings, including voting records, attendance,
resolutions, findings, determinations, and decisions. All such
material shall be public record.
(3) The Historic Preservation Commission shall prepare and adopt
rules of procedure which will be made available to the public, and
which include a specific section prohibiting conflicts of interest.
E. Compensation of Commission members. The members of the Historic
Preservation Commission shall serve without compensation.
F. Retention of professional assistance. Within the limits of funds that
have been appropriated for the performance of its work, grants and
gifts, the Historic Preservation Commission shall obtain the services of
qualified professional individuals to direct, advise and assist the
Historic Preservation Commission and may obtain the equipment,
supplies and other materials necessary to its effective operation. The
Commission shall obtain its legal counsel from the Township Attorney at
the rate of compensation determined by the Township Council. Further,
the Commission is responsible for ensuring that when a discipline is not
represented on the Commission, and the Commission considers an
action which is normally evaluated by a professional in a specific
discipline, the Commission shall obtain professional expertise before
rendering a decision.
G. Powers and duties. The Historic Preservation Commission shall have
the following powers and duties:
(1) Within 12 months of its organization, the Historic Preservation
Commission shall prepare and adopt, pursuant to § 500-138 et seq.
of this article, a Landmark and Historic Districts Designation List
and Official Landmarks Map which shall then be referred to the
Planning Board for inclusion in the Township Master Plan pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28(b) and to the Township Council of the
Township of West Milford for inclusion in the Land Development
Ordinance.
(2) Hear and decide applications for certificates of appropriateness
pursuant to § 500-140 of this chapter, for landmarks as designated
under § 500-138.
(3) Amend, from time to time, as circumstances warrant, the
Landmarks and Historic Districts Designation List and Official
Landmarks Map in the manner set forth in § 500-138.
§ 500-137 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-137
460:899
§ 500-138. Designation of landmarks and historic districts.
(4) Report at least annually to the Planning Board and the Township
Council of the Township of West Milford on the state of historic
preservation in the Township and to recommend measures to
improve same.
(5) Collect and disseminate material on the importance of historic
preservation and specific techniques for achieving same.
(6) Advise all Township agencies regarding goals and techniques of
historic preservation.
(7) Adopt and promulgate such regulations and procedures not
inconsistent with this chapter as are necessary and proper for the
effective and efficient performance of the duties herein assigned.
(8) Review all proposed National Register nominations for properties
that come within the jurisdiction of the Commission, as established
by the criteria of the 1980 amendments of the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1966.
H. Meetings. The Historic Preservation Commission shall meet on a
regular basis, but at a minimum of four times a year. All meetings shall
comply with the Open Public Meetings Act (N.J.S.A. 10:4-7 et seq.).
I. Conflicts of interest. No member of the Historic Preservation
Commission of West Milford Township shall be permitted to act on any
matter coming before the Commission in which he or she has, either
directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
J. Emergency meetings of Commission. In the event that there arises a
need for an emergency meeting of the Historic Preservation
Commission, the Commission Chairman shall convene a meeting of the
Commission after having given due and appropriate notice in
accordance with the State Open Public Meetings Act. The Commission
Chairman shall instruct the Secretary to personally or telephonically
contact the Commission members to inform them of the time, date and
location of the emergency meeting and the purpose of the emergency
meeting. Emergency meetings shall be convened for such instances as
pending demolition permits to designated historic sites in the Township
or such other circumstances that warrant the immediate action of the
Commission. In the case of any emergency meetings, all of the
requirements for the transaction of business during a regularly
scheduled meeting shall apply.
A. Preparation of a survey. The Historic Preservation Commission shall
make a comprehensive survey of the Township of West Milford for the
purpose of identifying historic districts and sites which are worthy of
protection and preservation. Such survey shall be based upon an
identification process approved by the State Office of New Jersey
Heritage, Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 500-137 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-138
460:900
B. Documentation and notification. Based on the survey or upon
recommendation of concerned citizens, the Historic Preservation
Commission shall document the importance and historical significance
to the Township, state and nation of each landmark designation in
terms of the purpose and criteria set forth in this article. Thereafter, the
Historic Preservation Commission, by certified mail, shall:
(1) Notify each owner that his property has been tentatively
designated a historic landmark.
(2) Advise each owner of the significance and consequences of such
tentative designation, and advise him of his opportunities and
rights to challenge or contest such designation.
(3) Invite each owner to consent voluntarily to final designation
without the need for public hearing or other protection.
C. Final decision by Commission. After full consideration of the evidence
brought forth at the special hearing, the Historic Preservation
Commission shall make its final decisions on the designations and shall
issue its final report to the public stating reasons in support of its
actions with respect to each landmark and historic district designation.
D. Submission of list to Township Clerk and Planning Board. The list of
landmarks and historic districts shall be submitted thereafter to the
Secretary of the Township Planning Board and to the Township Clerk of
the Township of West Milford. Prior to adoption of the ordinance
adopting the Designation List, the Township Council shall refer same to
the Planning Board for recommendations. The Township Council shall
then consider whether to adopt the Designation List and Landmark
Map by ordinance. Once adopted, the Designation List and Landmark
Map may be amended in the same manner in which it was initially
adopted.
E. Distribution of Landmarks and Historic Districts Designation List and
Official Landmarks Map. Copies of the Landmarks and Historic
Districts Designation List and Official Landmarks Map, as adopted,
shall be made public and distributed to all Township agencies reviewing
development applications and all building and housing permits. A
certificate of designation shall be served by certified mail upon the
owner of each site included in the final list, and a true copy thereof shall
be filed with the Passaic County Clerk and Registrar of Deeds for
recording in the same manner as certificates of lien upon real property.
F. Placement of plaques. Each designated historic district or landmark
may be marked by an appropriate plaque, in such form as the Historic
Preservation Commission shall promulgate by regulation.
G. Criteria for designation of a landmark or historic district. In considering
an individual site, building or structure or a district for becoming
designated as historically, architecturally or archaeologically
§ 500-138 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-138
460:901
significant, the Historic Preservation Commission shall give
consideration to the following criteria:
(1) That it is associated with events that have made a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of our history; or
(2) That it is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
or
(3) That it embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or
method of construction, or that it represents the work of a master,
or that possess high artistic values, or that represent a significant
and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual
distinction; or
(4) That have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important
in prehistory or history.
(5) Ordinarily cemeteries, birthplaces or graves of historical figures,
properties owned by religious institutions or used for religious
purposes, structures that have been moved from their original
locations, reconstructed historic buildings, properties primarily
commemorative in nature, and properties that have achieved
significance within the past 50 years shall not be considered
eligible for the National Register. However, such properties will
qualify if they are integral parts of districts that do meet the
criteria or if they fall within the following categories:
(a) A religious property deriving primary significance from
architectural or artistic distinction or historical importance; or
(b) A building or structure removed from its original location but
which is significant primarily for architectural value, or which
is the surviving structure most importantly associated with an
historic person or event; or
(c) A birthplace or grave of an historical figure of outstanding
importance if there is no other appropriate site or building
directly associated with his productive life; or
(d) A cemetery that derives its primary significance from graves of
persons of transcendent importance, from age, from distinctive
design features, or from association with historic events; or
(e) A reconstructed building when accurately executed in a
suitable environment and presented in a dignified manner as
part of a restoration master plan, and when no other building
or structure with the same association has survived; or
(f) A property primarily commemorative in intent if design, age,
tradition, or symbolic value has invested it with its own
historical significance; or
§ 500-138 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-138
460:902
§ 500-139. Certificate of appropriateness; when required;
exceptions.
(g) A property achieving significance within the past 50 years if it
is of exceptional importance.
A. Actions requiring a certificate of appropriateness. A certificate of
appropriateness issued by the Historic Preservation Commission shall
be required before a permit is issued by any of the following, or, in the
event no other type of permit is otherwise required, before any work
can commence on any of the following activities on the property of any
landmark or within any historic district:
(1) Demolition of an historic landmark or of any improvement within
any historic district.
(2) Relocation of any historic landmark or of any improvement within
any historic district.
(3) Change in the exterior appearance of any existing landmark of any
improvement within any historic district by addition, alteration or
replacement.
(4) Any new construction of a principal or accessory structure.
(5) Changes in or addition of new signs or exterior lighting, except that
no certificate of appropriateness shall be required for one unlit sign
per premises if the surface area of such sign does not exceed 1 1/2
square feet.
B. Exceptions.
(1) A certificate of appropriateness shall not be required for any
repainting, repair or exact replacement of any existing
improvement. In the event that the color or exterior surface
material or the improvement shall be changed as a result of such
repainting, repair or exact replacement, a certificate of
appropriateness shall not be required if the new exterior surface is
one that has been previously approved by regulations duly
promulgated by the Historic Preservation Commission for similar
improvement in that district or as to that particular historic
landmark. In the event that the repainting, repair or exact
replacement does not conform to the said regulations, a certificate
of appropriateness shall be required.
(2) In terms of an exact replacement of finishes, materials or
architectural elements, it is understood that the Historic
Preservation Commission would prefer an applicant to maintain,
stabilize and repair the original or existing finishes, materials, or
architectural elements before considering the replacement of
same. However, should the original or existing finishes, materials
or architectural elements be of such a deteriorated condition as to
§ 500-138 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-139
460:903
§ 500-140. Applications for certificates of appropriateness.
require replacement, the new finishes, materials or architectural
elements should be designed and installed to replicate the
material, color, size, contour, configuration and design of that
which is being replaced, provided that such materials are available
at a reasonable cost.
A. Application procedure. Application for a certificate of appropriateness
shall be made on forms available from either the Township Clerk or the
Secretary of the Historic Preservation Commission. Completed
applications shall be delivered to the Secretary of the Historic
Preservation Commission at the West Milford Township Municipal
Building, 1480 Union Valley Road, West Milford, New Jersey, 07480.
B. Application information and supporting documents. Applications for a
certificate of appropriateness shall include the following:
(1) All forms completed by the applicant.
(2) The following exhibits:
(a) Where new construction is proposed, an overall site plan
layout, at a scale of one inch equals 20 feet, showing the
location of all adjacent properties.
(b) Sufficient color photographs of all adjacent properties and
buildings within a minimum of 60 feet of the landmark
property lines. Each photograph shall be properly identified
and referenced on the site plan.
(c) Elevation drawings may be optional at the Commission's
request. All building elevations required shall be at a minimum
scale of 1/8 inch equals one foot.
(d) Applicants should be prepared to furnish the Commission with
manufacturer's photos and/or cuts as well as specifications for
products to be used.
C. Time frame of decision by Commission.
(1) The Historic Preservation Commission shall reach a decision on the
application within 45 days after the Secretary has declared an
application to be complete; otherwise the application shall be
deemed to have been approved. Nothing herein shall prohibit an
extension of time by mutual agreement of the applicant and the
Historic Preservation Commission. The Historic Preservation
Commission may advise the applicant and make recommendations
in regard to the appropriateness of proposed action, and may grant
approval upon such conditions as it deems appropriate within the
intent and purpose of this section of this article.
§ 500-139 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-140
460:904
§ 500-141. Standards of consideration.
In making its determinations and recommendations, the Historic
Preservation Commission shall take into consideration specific standards,
as set forth below:
(2) If an application is approved, the Historic Preservation Commission
shall forthwith issue a certificate of appropriateness. If the Historic
Preservation Commission disapproves an application, the Historic
Preservation Commission shall state its reasons in writing in
resolution form within 10 days of such a decision. In case of
disapproval, the Historic Preservation Commission shall notify the
applicant, in writing, of such resolution of disapproval, and reasons
therefor, and provide the applicant with a certified copy thereof. A
summary of the Historic Preservation Commission's action shall be
published in the official newspaper within 10 days of such action.
(3) The Secretary of the Historic Preservation Commission shall
forward a copy of the Commission's written action, on an
application, to the Construction Official and the Township Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment if either body is also reviewing the
application within 10 days of the Commissions decision.
D. Appeal to Commission of hardship. In the event that the applicant
alleges that compliance with the requirements of this section of this
article would be an unreasonable hardship and that the nature of his
application is such that the change sought neither justifies the time and
expense of the plenary proceeding nor will impact negatively on the
public good nor specifically on the historic qualities sought to be
preserved, the Historic Preservation Commission, by a two-thirds
affirmative vote of its full authorized membership, may grant such relief
from the requirements of this section of this article as it deems
consistent with the public good and the purposes of this article.
E. Request for certificate of appropriateness for alteration creating
negligible impact. An applicant may allege that a certificate of
appropriateness should be granted without the fulfilling of all the
application requirements set forth herein because the addition or
alteration contemplated will not be visible from any place to which the
public normally has access and, therefore, that the said addition or
alteration cannot adversely affect the public interest and cannot affect
an architecturally significant elevation. In that event the Historic
Preservation Commission, by a majority vote of its full authorized
membership, upon a finding that the applicant's claim is accurate, may
forthwith grant a certificate of appropriateness on that basis.
A. Demolitions. In regard to an application to demolish an historic
landmark or any improvement within an historic district, the following
matters shall be considered:
§ 500-140 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-141
460:905
(1) Its historic, architectural, archaeological, and/or aesthetic
significance.
(2) Its use.
(3) Its importance to the Township and the extent to which its
historical, architectural or archaeological value is such that its
removal would be detrimental to the public interest.
(4) The extent to which it is of such old, unusual or uncommon design,
craftsmanship, texture or material that it could not be reproduced
or could be reproduced only with great difficulty.
(5) The extent to which its retention would promote the general
welfare by maintaining real estate values, generating business,
creating new jobs, attracting tourists, students, writers, historians,
artists and artisans, attracting new residents, encouraging study
and interest in American history, stimulating interest and study in
architecture and design, educating citizens in American culture
and heritage, or making the Township a more attractive and
desirable place in which to live.
(6) If it is within an historic district, the probable impact of its removal
upon the ambience of the historic district.
B. Removals out of the Township. In regard to an application to move an
historic landmark to a location outside of the Township, the following
matters shall be considered:
(1) The historic loss to the site of the original location.
(2) The compelling reasons for not retaining the landmark or structure
at its present location.
(3) The proximity of the proposed new location to the Township,
including the accessibility to the residents of the Township and
other citizens.
(4) The probability of significant damage to the landmark or structure
itself, as a result of the move.
(5) The applicable matters set forth in Subsection A of this section.
C. Removals within the Township. In regard to an application to move an
historic landmark or any structure in an historic district to a new
location within the Township, the following matters shall be considered
in addition to the matters set forth in Subsection B of this section:
(1) The compatibility, nature and character of the current and of the
proposed surrounding areas as they relate to the intent and
purposes of this article.
(2) If the proposed new location is within an historic district, the visual
compatibility factors as set forth in Subsection G of this section.
§ 500-141 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-141
460:906
D. Visual compatibility considered for additions or removals. In regard to
an application to move a landmark or structure into, or to construct a
new structure or add to or alter an existing structure within an historic
district, or a landmark, the visual compatibility of the proposed
structure with the structures and surroundings to which it would be
visually related shall be considered in terms of the visual compatibility
factors as set forth in Subsection G of this section.
E. Considerations on other actions. In regard to an application for
approval of any proposed action, as set forth in Subsection G of this
section, the following matters shall be considered:
(1) If an historic landmark or a structure in an historic district is
involved:
(a) The impact of the proposed change on its historic and
architectural character.
(b) Its importance to the Township and the extent to which its
historic or architectural interest would be adversely affected to
the detriment of the public interest.
(c) The extent to which there would be involvement of textures
and materials that could not be reproduced or could be
reproduced only with great difficulty.
(2) The use of any structure involved.
(3) The extent to which the proposed action would adversely affect the
public's view of a landmark or structure within an historic district
from a public street.
(4) If the application deals with a structure within an historic district,
the impact the proposed change would have on the character and
ambience of the historic district and the structure's visual
compatibility with the buildings, places and structures to which it
would be visually related in terms of the visual compatibility factors
set forth in Subsection G of this section.
F. Additional matters considered. In regard to all applications, additional
pertinent matters may be considered, but in no instance shall interior
arrangement be considered.
G. Visual compatibility factors. The following factors shall be used in
determining the visual compatibility of a building, structure or
appurtenance thereof with the buildings and places to which they are
visually related and shall be known as "visual compatibility factors:"
(1) Height. The height of the proposed building shall be visually
compatible with adjacent buildings.
(2) Proportion of the building's front facade. The relationship of the
width of the building to the height of the front elevation shall be
§ 500-141 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-141
460:907
§ 500-142. Effect of certificate of appropriateness approval; denial;
appeal.
visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
(3) Proportion of openings within the facility. The relationship of the
width of the windows to the height of the windows in a building
shall be visually compatible with the buildings and places to which
it is visually related.
(4) Rhythm of solids to voids on front facade. The relationship of solids
to voids in the front facade of a building shall be visually
compatible with the buildings and places to which it is visually
related.
(5) Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. The relationship of the
building to the open space between it and the adjoining buildings
shall be visually compatible with the buildings and places to which
it is visually related.
(6) Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projections. The relationship of
the entrance or entrances and the porch projections to the street
shall be visually compatible with the buildings and places to which
it is visually related.
(7) Relationship of materials, texture and color. The relationship of
materials, texture and color of the facade and roof of a building
shall be visually compatible with the predominant materials used in
the buildings to which it is visually related.
(8) Roof shapes. The roof shapes of a building shall be visually
compatible with the buildings to which it is visually related.
(9) Walls of continuity. Appurtenances of a building, such as walls,
open-type fencing, evergreen landscape masses, shall form
cohesive walls of enclosure along a street, to the extent necessary
to maintain visual compatibility of the building with the buildings
and places to which it is visually related.
(10) Scale of building. The size of a building, the mass of a building in
relation to open spaces, the windows, door openings, porches and
balconies shall be visually compatible with the buildings and places
to which it is visually related.
(11) Directional expression of front facade. A building shall be visually
compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually related
in its directional character, whether this be vertical character,
horizontal character or nondirectional character.
A. Approved certificate of appropriateness deemed positive
recommendation.
§ 500-141 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-142
460:908
§ 500-143. Notice of violation; violations and penalties; injunctive
relief.
Any person who shall undertake any activity in relation to a landmark
or improvement within an historic district without first having obtained a
certificate of appropriateness shall be deemed to be in violation of this
article.
(1) If a certificate of appropriateness has been issued for an
application that requires approval of the Planning Board or the
Board of Adjustment, the certificate of appropriateness shall be
deemed to be a positive recommendation to the Planning Board or
the Board of Adjustment as to the historic preservation aspects of
the matter before the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment.
(2) The Planning Board or Board of Adjustment may, nevertheless,
affirm or deny the application based on the entire record before it,
notwithstanding the certificate of appropriateness as to the historic
preservation aspects.
B. Denials of certificate of appropriateness.
(1) When the Preservation Commission denies certification on a
development application, notice of such action and a full report on
the reasons for the decision shall be sent to either the Board of
Adjustment or the Planning Board, depending on which Board is
hearing the application. The applicant shall have the right to appeal
the denial to the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment.
(2) All other denials of a certificate of appropriateness shall be to the
Planning Board.
C. Right of judicial review. Nothing herein shall be deemed to limit the
right of judicial review of the Township action after an appeal is
concluded by the Township Council of the Township of West Milford.
A. Service of notice of violation. Upon learning of the violation, the
Construction Official shall personally serve upon the owner of the lot
whereon the violation is occurring a notice describing the violation in
detail and giving the owner 10 days to abate the violation by restoring
the landmark or improvement to its status quo ante. If the owner cannot
be personally served within the Township with the said notice, a copy of
same shall be posted on the site in question and a copy be sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner at his last known
address, as it appears on the Township tax rolls.
B. Issuance of summons and complaint. In the event that the violation is
not abated within the specified ten-day period following service and/or
posting on the site in question, whichever is earlier, the Construction
Official shall cause to be issued a summons and complaint, returnable
in the West Milford Township Court, charging violation of this article.
§ 500-142 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-143
460:909
§ 500-144. Preventative maintenance.
Recognizing the need for preventive maintenance to insure the continued
useful life of landmarks and structures in historic districts, the Township
Council of the Township of West Milford hereby declares that code
enforcement in relation to landmarks and structures in historic districts is a
high Township priority.
Each separate day the violation exists shall be deemed to be a new and
separate violation of this article.
C. Penalties. The penalty for violations shall be as follows:
(1) For each day, up to 10 days, not more than $25 per day.
(2) For each day, 11 to 25 days, not more than $50 per day.
(3) For each day beyond 25 days, not more than $75 per day.
D. Injunctive relief. In the event that any action which would permanently
and/or adversely change the landmark or historic district, such as
demolition or removal, is about to occur without a certificate of
appropriateness having been issued, the Construction Official is hereby
authorized to apply to the Superior Court of New Jersey for such
injunctive relief as is necessary to prevent the destruction of any
landmark.
A. Deterioration and service of notice of violation. In the event that any
landmark or improvement in an historic district deteriorates to the
point that, in the best estimate of the Township Construction Official,
the cost of correcting the outstanding code violations equals more than
25% of the cost of replacing the entire improvement on which the
violations occur, the Construction Official shall serve personally or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice on the owner of the
landmark listing the violations, the estimate for their abatement, and
the replacement cost of the improvement and stating that, if the owner
does not take all necessary remedial action within 90 days, or such
extensions of time as the Construction Official shall for good cause
grant, the Township may at the expiration of the ninety-day period,
enter upon the property in question and abate the violations itself and
cause the cost thereof to become a lien on the property.
B. Request for hearing by property owner.
(1) Upon receipt of such notice from the Township Construction
Official, the owner may, within 10 days after such a receipt, notify
the Construction Official of his wish to have a hearing as to the
allegations and estimates set forth in the Construction Official's
notice. Such hearing shall be conducted by the Planning Board and
shall, so far as possible, be a formal adversary proceeding in which
the Planning Board shall establish the matters alleged in the notice
by a preponderance of the evidence.
§ 500-143 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-144
460:910
§ 500-145. Permit review.
It shall be the duty of all Township officials reviewing all permit applications
involving real property or improvements thereon to determine whether such
applications involve any activity which should also be the subject of an
application for a certificate of appropriateness, and if it should, to inform, in
writing, both the Secretary of the Commission and the applicant in a timely
fashion.
§ 500-146. Landmarks and Historic Districts Designation List and
Official Landmarks Map.
(2) If the owner does not request a hearing, the procedures set forth in
Subsection A of this section shall pertain. If a hearing is requested,
the Construction Official will, within 10 days following the hearing,
serve on the owner an opinion of the Planning Board, in writing,
setting forth the conclusions and the reasons therefor. Such opinion
shall be deemed to be a first notice pursuant to Subsection A of this
section.
C. Violation abatement by Township.
(1) Thereafter, if the owner of the property in question does not
comply, the Construction Official may enter onto the premises and,
by use of Township labor or outside contractors, or both, perform
such work as is necessary to abate all violations.
(2) The Construction Official shall then certify to the Township Council
of the Township of West Milford the cost of such work, plus all
administrative, clerical and legal costs and overhead attributable
thereto, and shall present same to the Township Council of the
Township of West Milford.
(3) The Township Council of the Township of West Milford may, by
resolution, vote to cause the sum so certified to become a lien upon
the landmark property in question, payable with the next quarter's
property taxes and, if not paid, bearing interest at the same rate as
delinquent taxes.
A. The properties hereinafter set forth are the designated list of landmarks
and historic sites established by the Historic Preservation Commission
of the Township of West Milford pursuant to § 500-138 of this chapter.
(1) Idylease Inn, 124 Union Valley Road, Newfoundland.
(2) New City, New City Road, West Milford.
(3) Town Hall Annex, Union Valley Road, West Milford.
(4) Wallisch Homestead. [Added 5-18-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-19]
(5) Apple Acres (Block 9901, Lot 14), 1064 Union Valley Road. [Added
7-5-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-20]
§ 500-144 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-146
460:911
§ 500-147. Adaptive reuses. [Added 4-3-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-6]
(6) Vreeland Store (Block 9501, Lot 12), 1383-1385 Macopin Road.
[Added 12-6-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-29]
(7) Morse/Carpignano House (Block 4701, Lot 38.01), 370 Morsetown
Road. [Added 2-19-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-1]
(8) Reid House (Block 5302, Lot 2), 1778 Macopin Road. [Added
6-4-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-8]
(9) Bayer House (Block 9402, Lot 15), 1299 Macopin Road. [Added
4-4-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-9]
(10) Vreeland House (Block 9401, Lot 3), 1349 Macopin Road. [Added
4-4-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-9]
(11) Tichenor House (Block 2902, Lot 3), 22 Warwick Turnpike. [Added
9-5-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-26]
(12) Cahill House (The Parrot Homestead, Block 9501, Lot 3), 1453
Macopin Road. [Added 2-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-2]
(13) Long Pond Ironworks (Block 4502, Lot 2), Greenwood Lake
Turnpike. [Added 5-1-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-12]
B. Map depicting the aforesaid designated list of landmarks and historic
sites is that map entitled "Historic Sites" as approved by the West
Milford Historic Preservation Commission, a copy of which shall be
maintained in the Municipal Clerk's office for public inspection. Said
map may be revised, from time to time, pursuant to ordinance, to
include additional landmarks and historic districts.
A. Purpose. One means of implementing historic preservation is to allow
for the adaptive reuse of the building. In an effort to promote historic
preservation, adaptive reuses of the locally designated building shall be
permitted as provided for in this section.
B. Permitted adaptive reuses.
(1) Country stores engaged in general retail sale of goods, without
specialization. The ancillary sale of prepared foods shall be
permitted, with up to 10% of the retail area (square feet) for
counter stools to enable on-site consumption of said food by
customers.
(2) Country inns providing rooms for transient guests and which may
include a restaurant open to the public.
(3) Bed-and-breakfasts as an individual use.
(4) Antique stores.
C. General requirements.
§ 500-146 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-147
460:912
(1) Parking provisions.
(a) Stores shall provide parking at the ratio of one space per 300
square feet of gross floor area.
(b) Restaurants, including counter service, shall provide parking
at the ratio of one space per four seats.
(c) Country inns shall provide parking at the ratio of 1.5 spaces
per guest room.
(d) Bed-and-breakfasts shall provide parking at the ratio of one
space per guest room plus two spaces for the permanent
residents of the bed-and-breakfast.
(e) When more than one land use occurs on-site, the total number
of required parking spaces shall be determined by individually
computing the parking requirements for each specific land use,
pursuant to Subsection C(1)(a) through (d) herein, and adding
the resulting numbers.
(2) Parking lots shall be, at a minimum, of quarry process stone (QPS)
or alternate base, suitable to the Township Engineer.
(3) Parking lots shall be located such that they are innocuous to the
surrounding properties, and the location shall, in every case, be
subject to review.
D. Applications made in accordance with this section shall be made
pursuant to § 470-4 of the Land Development Ordinance.
E. Nothing in this section shall preclude the use of the property as it is
zoned.
§ 500-147 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-147
460:913

ARTICLE XIV
Signs
§ 500-148. Purposes; authority.
§ 500-149. Applicability; effect.
A. The purposes of these sign regulations are to:
(1) Encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication
in the Township;
(2) Maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the
Township's ability to attract sources of economic development and
growth;
(3) Improve pedestrian and traffic safety;
(4) Minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and
private property; and
(5) Enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign
restrictions.
B. This Article XIV, Signs, is adopted under the zoning authority of the
Township in furtherance of the more general purposes set forth in this
chapter.
A. A sign may be erected, placed, established, painted, created, or
maintained in the Township only in conformance with the standards,
procedures, exemptions, and other requirements of this article.
B. The effect of this article, as more specifically set forth herein, is:
(1) To establish a permit system to allow a variety of types of signs in
commercial and industrial zones, and a more limited variety of
signs in other zones, subject to the standards and the permit
procedures of this article.
(2) To allow certain signs that are small, unobtrusive, and incidental to
the principal use of the respective lots on which they are located,
subject to the substantive requirements of this article, but without
a requirement for permits.
(3) To provide for off-site signs without commercial messages in
limited circumstances.
(4) To prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this article.
(5) To provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this article.
§ 500-148 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-150
460:915
§ 500-150. Computations.
The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign
height:
A. Computation of area of individual signs. The area of a sign face (which
is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face) shall
be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle,
triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits
of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with
any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the
display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure
against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework,
bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise
meets zoning ordinance regulations and is clearly incidental to the
display itself.
B. Computation of area of multifaced signs. The sign area for a sign with
more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all
sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical sign faces are
placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point
at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign
structure and are not more than 42 inches apart, the sign area shall be
computed by that of only one face. It shall be that of the largest face if
the two faces are not the same.
C. Computation of height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the
distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the
highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be
construed to be the lower of existing grade prior to construction, or the
newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling,
berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the
sign. In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be
determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the
elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the
elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the
grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on
the lot, whichever is lower.
D. Computation of maximum total permitted sign area for a lot. The
permitted sum of the area of all individual signs on a lot shall be
computed as permitted in Sign Table B for the zoning district in which
the lot is located. Lots fronting on two or more streets are allowed the
permitted sign area for each lot frontage. However, the total sign area
that is oriented toward a particular street may not exceed the portion of
the lot's total sign area allocation that is derived from the lot, building,
or wall area frontage on that street.
§ 500-150 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-151
460:916
§ 500-151. Definitions. [Added 7-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-013202]
ANIMATED SIGN — Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to
depict action or create a special effect or scene.
BANNER — Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is
permanently mounted to a pole or a building by a permanent frame at one
or more edges. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of
any institution or business shall not be considered banners. Banners shall
be considered temporary signs and regulated as same.
BILLBOARD — Any structure or portion thereof on which lettered or
pictorial matter is displayed for advertising purposes other than that on a
building or its grounds.
BUILDING MARKER — Any sign indicating the name of a building and date
and incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a
masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material.
BUILDING SIGN — Any sign attached to any part of a building, as
contrasted to a freestanding sign.
CANOPY SIGN — Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy,
or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance,
window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN — A sign or portion thereof with characters,
letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering
the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the message changes
more than eight times per day shall be considered an animated sign and not
a changeable copy sign for purposes of this Land Development Ordinance.
A sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical
indication of time or temperature shall be considered a time-andtemperature
portion of a sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes
of this Land Development Ordinance.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE — Any sign wording, logo, or other
representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls
attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER — A variable-message sign that utilizes
computer-generated messages or some other electronic means of changing
copy.
FLAG — Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors,
patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political
subdivision, or other entity.
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any sign supported by structures or supports that
are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from
any building or other structure.
202. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 500-151, Signs allowed on private
property with and without permits; sign tables.
§ 500-151 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-151
460:917
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign providing the name and occupant of
premises.
INCIDENTAL SIGN — A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose
secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as "no parking,"
"entrance," "loading only," "telephone," and other similar directives. No sign
with a commercial message legible from a position off the lot on which the
sign is located shall be considered incidental.
MARQUEE SIGN — Any sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of
a marquee.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign lawfully existing on the effective date
of this chapter, or any amendment to it rendering such sign nonconforming,
which does not comply with all of the standards and regulations of this
chapter or any amendment hereto.
PENNANT — Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether
or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or
string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or
other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including,
but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels;
signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons
used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or
painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless
said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business.
Portable signs are not to be classified as temporary signs.
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a
manner that its leading edge extends more than six inches beyond the
surface of such building or wall.
RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATION AND LAKE COMMUNITY
ORGANIZATION IDENTIFICATION SIGN — Any sign in conformance with
the standards set forth in this chapter which serves to identify a residential
neighborhood or a lake community organization in West Milford.
RESIDENTIAL SIGN — Any sign located in a district zoned for residential
uses that contains no commercial message except advertising for goods or
services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located, if offering
such service at such location conforms to all requirements of this Land
Development Ordinance.
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the
roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically
above the highest portion of the roof.
ROOF SIGN, INTEGRAL — Any sign erected or constructed as an integral
or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such
that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the
roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof
by a space of more than six inches.
§ 500-151 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-151
460:918
SIGN — A device on any building or structure or portion thereof on which
any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, or
insignia used to advertise or promote the interest of any person or product
when the same is placed in view of the general public.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed, assembled, or erected which
requires location on the ground or attachment to something having such
location on the ground, including buildings, fences, tanks, towers, signs,
advertising devices and swimming pools. For purposes of Chapter 500,
Article XIII, Historic Preservation Commission, a combination of materials
to form a construction for occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether
installed on, above, or below the surface of a parcel of land.
SUSPENDED SIGN — A sign that is suspended from the underside of a
horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface.
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign that is used only temporarily and is not
permanently mounted and permitted for limited duration pursuant to this
chapter. Banners shall be considered as temporary signs and regulated as
such. Portable signs are not to be classified as temporary signs.
WALL SIGN — Any sign attached parallel to, but within six inches of, a wall,
painted on the wall surface of or erected and confined within the limits of
an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall
or building, and which displays only one sign surface.
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign, picture, symbol, or combination thereof
designed to communicate information about an activity, business,
commodity, event, sale, or service that is placed inside a window or upon
the windowpanes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
§ 500-152. Permits required.
A. If a sign requiring a permit under the provision of this article is to be
placed, constructed, erected, or modified on a lot, the owner of the lot
shall secure a sign permit prior to the construction, placement,
erection, or modification of such a sign in accordance with the
requirements of § 500-159.
B. Upon adoption of this chapter, no sign permit of any kind shall be issued
for a proposed sign unless such sign is consistent with the requirements
of this chapter in every respect and with the Master Signage Plan or
Common Signage Plan in effect for the property.
C. Permits shall not be required for the following signs: building marker,
identification, incidental, window, flag, political organization,
community organization, local nonprofit organization, and applicants
who have received a permit in accordance with § 500-36.1 of the
Township Code. [Added 7-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-013; amended
3-16-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-004]
§ 500-151 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-153
460:919
§ 500-153. Design, construction and maintenance.
All signs shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with
the following standards:
§ 500-154. Plan requirements for sign permit.
A. All signs shall comply with applicable provisions of the Uniform
Construction Code.203
B. Except for banners, flags, temporary signs, and window signs
conforming in all respects to the requirements of this article, all signs
shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently
attached to the ground, a building, or another structure by direct
attachment to a rigid wall, frame, or structure. No signs other than "No
Trespassing" signs not exceeding one square foot in size shall be
attached to trees, fence posts, utility poles or other signs.
C. All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition, in compliance
with all applicable codes, and in conformance with this chapter, at all
times.
A. When applying for a new sign, with the exception of Subsection B
below, the following information shall be provided to the Construction
Code Official or Zoning Officer: [Amended 7-20-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-013]
(1) Freestanding signs. A plot plan prepared by a licensed professional
and drawn to scale shall be submitted indicating property lines of
the subject site and the location of buildings, parking areas and
driveways on site, with the location of the proposed sign(s) clearly
designated. For properties on which a current professionally
prepared site plan exists, said plan shall be suitable on which to
identify proposed signs. A rendering of the sign(s) specifying
exterior dimensions shall be included along with a maximum
height.
(2) Building signs. A rendering of the building to which the sign(s)
shall be attached shall be submitted indicating the location of the
sign(s), and the exterior dimensions of the sign(s) shall be shown
thereon.
B. Master signage plan. For sign modification, change, or addition to a
preexisting developed or otherwise occupied lot, the applicant shall
submit a master signage site plan indicating the location, size and
height of all existing and proposed signs on the site. For properties for
which a current professionally prepared site plan exists, said plan shall
be suitable on which to identify proposed signs. Such site plan shall be
prepared by a licensed professional, drawn to scale, indicating the
following:
203. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 110, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 500-153 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-154
460:920
(1) Location of buildings, parking lots and driveways on such lot.
(2) The location of existing freestanding signs on-site.
(3) The existing total sign area of all freestanding and building signs
and the height and numbers of any freestanding signs.
C. Common signage plan. If the owners of two or more contiguous lots or
the owner of a single lot with more than one building (not including any
accessory building) submit a common signage plan conforming to the
provisions of this section, a 25% increase in the maximum total sign
area shall be allowed for each included lot. This bonus shall be
allocated within each lot as the owner(s) elects. The common signage
plan shall contain all of the information required under Subsection A of
this section and shall also specify standards for consistency among all
signs on the lots affected by the plan with regard to:
(1) Color scheme.
(2) Lettering or graphic style.
(3) Lighting.
(4) Location of each sign on the buildings and on the sites.
(5) Material.
(6) Sign proportions.
D. Limit on number of freestanding signs under common signage plan. The
common signage plan, for all lots with multiple uses or multiple users,
shall limit the number of freestanding signs to a total of one for each
street on which the lots included in the plan have frontage and shall
provide for shared or common usage of such signs.
E. Consent. The master or common signage plan shall be signed by all
owners or their authorized agent.
F. Amendment. A master or common signage plan may be amended by
filing a new master or common signage plan that conforms to all
requirements of this chapter then in effect.
G. Existing signs not conforming to common signage plan. If any new or
amended common signage plan is filed for a property on which existing
signs are located, it shall include a schedule for bringing into
conformance, within three years, all signs not conforming to the
proposed amended plan or to the requirements of this chapter in effect
on the date of submission.
H. Binding effect. After approval of a master or common signage plan, no
sign shall be erected, placed, painted, or maintained, except in
conformance with such plan, and such plan may be enforced in the
same way as any provision of this chapter.
§ 500-154 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-155
460:921
§ 500-155. Off-site signs.
No off-site signs shall be allowed except for the following:
§ 500-156. Exempt signs.
The following signs shall be exempt from regulation under this chapter:
A. Permanent signs as follows:
(1) Public signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to post
legal notices, identify public property, convey public information,
and direct or regulate pedestrians or vehicular traffic, and bus stop
signs erected by a public transit company.
(2) Informational signs of a public utility regarding its poles, lines,
pipes, or facilities.
(3) Awning, projecting, and suspended signs projecting over a public
right-of-way in conformity with the conditions of § 500-162.
[Amended 7-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-013]
B. Emergency signs. Emergency warning signs erected by a governmental
agency, a public utility company or a contractor doing authorized or
permitted work within the public right-of-way.
C. Political signs and community organization signs. Only political and
community organization signs, temporarily giving notice of political
campaigns or community functions, shall be permitted off-site. No
political or community organization sign shall exceed 16 square feet in
area. Signs shall be permitted within 60 days prior to any municipal,
school, county, state or national election or community function, and
shall be removed within 10 days after the election or function. The
exception to area and setback requirements shall be banners hung over
roadways. All such signs do not need a construction permit.
D. Other signs forfeited. Any sign installed or placed on public property,
except for those signs specifically exempted, shall be forfeited to the
public and subject to confiscation. In addition to other remedies
hereunder, the Township shall have the right to recover from the owner
or person placing such a sign the full costs of removal and disposal of
such sign.
E. Real estate signs for residential sales in all residential zones not to
exceed four square feet.
F. Billboard signs in conformity with the conditions of § 500-162.
[Amended 7-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-013]
G. Residential neighborhood and lake community organization
identification signs in conformity with the conditions of § 500-162.
[Added 7-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-013]
§ 500-155 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-156
460:922
§ 500-157. Prohibited signs.
All signs not expressly permitted under this chapter or exempt from
regulation hereunder in accordance with the previous section are
prohibited in the Township.
§ 500-158. General permit procedures.
The following procedures shall govern the application for and issuance of all
sign permits under this chapter and the submission and review of common
signage plans and master signage plans:
A. Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable federal,
state, or local law, regulation, or ordinance.
B. Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door, that is not
legible from a distance of more than three feet beyond the lot line of the
lot or parcel on which such sign is located.
C. Works of art that do not include a commercial message.
D. Traffic control signs on private property, such as stop, yield, and similar
signs, the face of which meet Department of Transportation standards
and which contain no commercial message of any sort.
A. Applications. All applications for sign permits of any kind and for
approval of a master or common signage plan shall be submitted to the
Construction Official or designee.
B. Fees. Each application for a sign permit or for approval of a master or
common signage plan shall be accompanied by the applicable fees,
which shall be established by the Township Council and amended by it
from time to time by ordinance.204
C. Completeness. Within 10 days of receiving an application for a sign
permit, the Construction Official or designee shall review it for
completeness. If the Construction Official or designee finds that it is
complete, the application shall then be processed. If the Construction
Official or designee finds that it is incomplete, the Construction Official
or designee shall, within such ten-day period, send to the applicant a
notice of the specific ways in which the application is deficient, with
appropriate references to the applicable sections of this chapter.
D. Action. Within 15 days of the submission of a complete application for a
sign permit, the Construction Official or designee shall either:
(1) Issue the sign permit; or
(2) Reject the sign permit if the application fails in any way to conform
to the requirements of this chapter or the applicable master or
common signage plan, specifying the section or sections of this
204. Editor's Note: See Ch. 135, Fees and Costs.
§ 500-156 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-158
460:923
§ 500-159. Permits to construct or modify signs. [Amended
7-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-013]
Signs shall be erected, installed, or created only in accordance with the duly
issued and valid sign construction permit from the Construction Official.
Such permits shall be issued only in accordance with the following
requirements and procedures:
§ 500-160. Temporary sign permits (private property).
Temporary signs on private property shall be allowed only upon the
issuance of a temporary sign permit, which shall be subject to the following
requirements:
chapter or applicable plan with which the sign(s) is inconsistent.
The applicant may correct the plans and resubmit the corrected
plan.
A. Permit for new sign or sign modification. An application for
construction, creation, or installation of a new sign or for modification
of an existing sign shall be accompanied by detailed drawings to show
the dimensions, design, structure, and location of each particular sign,
to the extent that such details are not contained on a master signage
plan or common signage plan then in effect for the lot. One application
and permit may include multiple signs on the same lot.
B. Inspection.
(1) The applicant shall request an inspection of the lot for which each
permit for a new sign or for modification of an existing sign is
issued within one year of permit issuance. If the sign has not been
erected within one year of the issuance date, the permit shall lapse
and become void.
(2) If the construction is complete and in full compliance with this
chapter and with the Uniform Construction Code, the Construction
Official shall issue a certificate of compliance.
A. Term. A temporary sign permit shall allow the use of a temporary sign
for a specified thirty-day period.
B. Number. Only two temporary sign permits shall be issued to the same
business license holder on the same lot in any calendar year.
C. Size. Temporary signs are subject to the maximum sign size for the zone
in which the property is located.205
205. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Other conditions, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 7-20-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-013.
§ 500-158 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-161
460:924
§ 500-161. Time of compliance; nonconforming signs and signs
without permits.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the owner of any lot or other premises
on which exists a sign that does not conform to the requirements of this
chapter or for which there is no current and valid sign permit shall be in
violation of this chapter.
§ 500-162. Zone district signage standards. [Added 7-20-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-013]
Signs shall be permitted in the applicable zone districts subject to the
specific standards set forth in Subsections A through Q.
A. Signs existing on effective date.
(1) For any sign existing in the Township, as of the effective date of this
chapter, an application may be submitted to the Construction
Official by January 1, 1994, for a nonconforming sign permit
subject to review and approval of the sign review committee
established by the Planning Board. Signs that are the subject of
applications received after the applicable date set forth in this
section shall be subject to all of the terms and conditions of this
chapter.
(2) Such permit shall allow the sign(s) subject to such permit, which
were made nonconforming by the adoption of this chapter, to
remain in place and be maintained, provided that no action is taken
which increases the degree or extent of the nonconformity.
A. Projecting sign. Projecting signs shall be permitted in VC, NC, LC, CC,
LMI, SED, OR and HC Zone Districts, subject to the following
standards:
(1) Maximum number: one.
(2) Maximum sign area: 20 square feet.
(3) Placement requirements:
(a) Where a projecting sign extends over a designated pedestrian
walkway including both public and private sidewalks, there
shall be a minimum vertical clearance of nine feet between
finished grade and base of the sign.
(b) Projecting signs shall not be permitted to extend into the rightof-
way of a public street or within the paved cartway of a
private lane or driveway.
(c) Projecting signs shall maintain a minimum distance of five feet
to all property boundaries.
§ 500-161 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-162
460:925
B. Freestanding sign. Freestanding signs shall be permitted in VC, NC, LC,
PN, CC, OT, LMI, SED, OR and HC Zone Districts, subject to the
following standards:
(1) Maximum number per lot: one sign.
(2) Maximum height:
(a) VC, NC, LC and PN Zones: six feet.
(b) CC Zone: 12 feet.
(c) OT, LMI, and SED Zones: five feet.
(d) OR Zone: 10 feet.
(e) HC zone: 15 feet.
(3) Maximum sign area:
(a) VC, NC, LC, PN and OT Zones: 20 square feet.
(b) CC, OR, LMI and SED Zones: 50 square feet.
(c) HC Zone: 60 square feet (single use); 75 square feet (two or
more uses).
(4) Front yard setback:
(a) VC, NC, LC and PN Zones: six feet.
(b) CC, HC, OR, OT, LMI, SED Zone: 12 feet.
C. Canopy sign. Canopy signs shall be permitted in VC, NC, LC, PN, CC,
OT, LMI, SED, OR and HC Zone Districts, subject to the following
standard:
(1) Maximum sign area: 20% of the total surface area of the canopy.
D. Suspended sign. Suspended signs shall be permitted in VC, NC, LC, PN,
CC, OT, LMI, SED, OR and HC Zone Districts, subject to the following
standard:
(1) One per entrance.
(2) Maximum sign area:
(a) VC, NC, CC, LC, HC, PN and OT: 10 square feet.
(b) OR, LMI and SED: 15 square feet.
(3) Placement requirements:
(a) Where a projecting sign extends over a designated pedestrian
walkway including both public and private sidewalks, there
§ 500-162 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-162
460:926
shall be a minimum vertical clearance of nine feet between
finished grade and base of the sign.
E. Wall signs. Wall signs shall be permitted in VC, NC, LC, PN, CC, OT,
LMI, SED, OR and HC Zone Districts, subject to the following
standards:
(1) Aggregate total not to exceed 5% of that portion of the face of the
building upon which sign(s) is affixed in the VC, NC, CC, LC and OR
Zone Districts.
(2) Aggregate total not to exceed 10% of that portion of the face of the
building upon which sign(s) is affixed in the HC, LMI and SED Zone
Districts.
(3) Aggregate total not to exceed 2% of that portion of the face of the
building upon which sign(s) is affixed in the OT and PN Zone
Districts.
F. Window sign. Window signs shall be permitted in VC, NC, LC, CC, LMI,
SED, OR and HC Zone Districts, subject to the following standards:
(1) Maximum sign area:
(a) VC and NC zones: not to exceed 20% of the glass area.
(b) CC, LC, HC, OR, LMI and SED Zones: not to exceed 40% of the
glass area.
G. Portable sign. Portable signs shall be permitted in VC, NC, LC, CC, LMI,
SED, OR and HC Zone Districts, subject to the following standards:
(1) Maximum sign area: nine square feet.
(2) Maximum height: four feet.
(3) Number of signs per lot: one sign per business.
(4) Placement requirement. Where a site is permitted two or more
signs based on multiple businesses on one lot, there shall be a
minimum distance of 15 feet between each portable sign.
(5) Design requirement:
(a) Where a site is permitted two or more signs based on multiple
businesses on one lot, the signs shall be uniform with respect
to material, size, and color scheme.
H. Home occupation and home professional office.
(1) Signs for home occupation and home professional offices in all
residential zone districts, subject to approval pursuant to §§ 500-20
and 500-21, shall not exceed four square feet.
§ 500-162 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-162
460:927
I. Residential Neighborhood Association and Lake Community
Organization identification sign.
(1) Maximum sign area: 20 square feet.
(2) Maximum height: six feet.
(3) Placement requirement. Signs may be located on a residential lot
or upon common property of the association or community
organization subject to the restriction regarding placement within
a "sight easement at intersection" as defined in Chapter 420, Land
Use Procedures.
J. Temporary signs shall be permitted in all zone districts in accordance
with the standards set forth in § 500-160.
K. Banners shall be permitted in all zone districts in accordance with the
following standards:
(1) Maximum sign area: 75 square feet.
(2) Maximum number: one banner per building.
(3) Compliance with the standards set forth in § 500-160.
L. Building marker signs shall be permitted in all zone districts in
accordance with the following standards:
(1) Maximum sign area: four square feet.
(2) Maximum number: one per building.
M. Identification signs shall be permitted in all zone districts in accordance
with the following standards:
(1) Maximum sign area: four square feet.
(2) Maximum number: one per building.
N. Incidental signs shall be permitted in all zone districts.
O. Roof integral signs shall be permitted in the VC, NC, CC, LC, HC, OR,
LMI and SED Zone Districts subject to the following standard:
(1) Maximum number: one sign per lot frontage.
P. Pennants shall be permitted in LC, HC and LMI Zone Districts subject to
the following standard:
(1) Compliance with the standards set forth in § 500-160.
Q. Billboards shall be permitted in the HC Zone District subject to the
following standards:
(1) Maximum sign dimensions: 12 feet in height; 24 feet in length.
§ 500-162 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-162
460:928
(2) Minimum distance between signs: 0.5 mile (2,640 feet).
§ 500-162 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-162
460:929

ARTICLE XV
Highlands Preservation Area Exemption Standards
[Added 9-18-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-018]
§ 500-163. Purpose and authority.
The purpose of this article is to set forth the procedural and substantive
requirements by which the municipality will issue Highlands Act exemption
determinations. Such determinations pertain only to Highlands Act
Exemptions 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8. Highlands Act exemption determinations
indicate whether proposed activities, improvements or development
projects affecting lands located within the Township Highlands Area are
exempt from the Highlands Water Protection and Planning Act ("Highlands
Act," N.J.S.A. 13:20-1 et seq.), and are therefore exempt from the Highlands
Water Protection and Planning Council's ("Highlands Council") Regional
Master Plan, the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's
("NJDEP") Highlands Water Protection and Planning Act Rules
("Preservation Area Rules," N.J.A.C. 7:38-1.1 et seq.), and from any
amendments to the Township's Master Plan, development regulations, or
other regulations adopted pursuant to the approval of the Township's
petition for plan conformance by the Highlands Council.
§ 500-164. Scope and applicability.
The provisions of this article pertain to activities, improvements and
development projects involving lands located within the Township of West
Milford, which is located entirely within the Highlands Preservation Area
for which the applicable provisions of the Township Master Plan, land
use ordinances and other pertinent regulations have been deemed by the
Highlands Council to be in conformance with the Highlands Regional
Master Plan. The provisions of this article shall not be construed to alleviate
any person or entity from the provisions and requirements of any other
applicable ordinances, rules, or regulations of the municipality, or from
any other applicable law, regulation, or requirement of any county, state,
or federal authority having jurisdiction; nor shall the provisions of this
article deprive any person or entity from seeking a Highlands exemption
determination from the NJDEP.
§ 500-165. Definitions.
For purposes of the Highlands Preservation Area exemption review and
determination process, the following definitions shall apply:
AGRICULTURAL IMPERVIOUS COVER — Agricultural or horticultural
buildings, structures or facilities, with or without flooring, residential
buildings and paved areas, but not meaning temporary coverings. (N.J.S.A.
13:20-3.)
AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT — Construction
for the purposes of supporting common farmsite activities, including, but
not limited to, the production, harvesting, storage, grading, packaging,
§ 500-163 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-165
460:931
processing, and the wholesale and retail marketing of crops, plants,
animals, and other related commodities and the use and application of
techniques and methods of soil preparation and management, fertilization,
weed, disease, and pest control, disposal of farm waste, irrigation, drainage
and water management, and grazing. (N.J.S.A. 13:20-3.)
AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL USE — The use of land for common
farmsite activities, including, but not limited to, the production, harvesting,
storage, grading, packaging, processing, and the wholesale and retail
marketing of crops, plants, animals, and other related commodities and
the use and application of techniques and methods of soil preparation and
management, fertilization, weed, disease, and pest control, disposal of farm
waste, irrigation, drainage and water management, and grazing. (N.J.S.A.
13:20-3.)
APPLICANT — Any entity applying to the Board of Health, Planning Board,
Zoning Board of Adjustment, Zoning Officer, Construction Official or other
applicable authority of the municipality for permission or approval to
engage in an activity that is regulated by the provisions of this article.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance, or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to Section 25 or
Section 27 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (C. 40:55D-34 or C. 40:55D-36).206
BUILDING PERMIT — Used interchangeably with the term "construction
permit", see definition below.
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code, Chapter 23 of Title 5 of the New Jersey
Administrative Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23-1.1 et seq.), providing authorization to
begin work subject to the conditions and requirements established under
the provisions therein.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any building or other structure, or of any
mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, for which
permission may be required pursuant to the MLUL. (N.J.S.A. 13:20-3;
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4.)
DISTURBANCE — The placement of impervious surface, the exposure or
movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation. (N.J.S.A. 13:20-3.)
DISTURBANCE, ULTIMATE — The total existing or proposed area of
disturbance of a lot, parcel, or other legally designated (or otherwise legally
recognized) tract or subdivision of land, for the purpose of, and in
connection with, any human activity, property improvement, or
development, including the surface area of all buildings and structures,
206. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
§ 500-165 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-165
460:932
all impervious surfaces, and all associated land disturbances such as
excavated, filled, and graded areas, and all lawn and landscape areas.
Ultimate disturbance shall not include areas of prior land disturbance which
at the time of evaluation: a) contain no known man-made structures
(whether above or below the surface of the ground) other than such features
as old stone rows or farm field fencing; and b) consist of exposed rock
outcroppings, or areas which, through exposure to natural processes (such
as weathering, erosion, siltation, deposition, fire, flood, growth of trees
or other vegetation) are no longer impervious or visually obvious, or
ecologically restored areas which will henceforth be preserved as natural
areas under conservation restrictions.
ENVIRONMENTAL LAND USE OR WATER PERMIT — A permit, approval,
or other authorization issued by the Department of Environmental
Protection pursuant to the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act, P.L. 1987,
c. 156 (C.13:9B-1 et seq.),207 the Water Supply Management Act, P.L. 1981,
c. 262 (C. 58:1A-1 et seq.),208 the Water Pollution Control Act, P.L. 1977, c.
74(C. 58:10A-1 et seq.),209 the Realty Improvement Sewerage and Facilities
Act (1954), P.L. 1954, c. 199 (C. 58:11-23 et seq.),210 the Water Quality
Planning Act, P.L. 1977, c. 75 (C. 58:11A-1 et seq.),211 the Safe Drinking
Water Act, P.L. 1977, c. 224 (C. 58:12A-1 et seq.),212 or the Flood Hazard
Area Control Act, P.L. 1962, c. 19 (C. 58:16A-50 et seq.).213 (N.J.S.A.
13:20-3.)
FARM MANAGEMENT UNIT — A parcel or parcels of land, whether
contiguous or noncontiguous, together with agricultural or horticultural
buildings, structures and facilities, producing agricultural or horticultural
products, and operated as a single enterprise. (N.J.S.A. 13:20-3.)
FARMSITE — A farm management unit as defined above.
FOREST MANAGEMENT PLAN — A written guidance document describing
the forest resources present on a property, the landowner's management
goals and objectives, and the recommended practices or activities to be
carried out over time on the land. This tool is used to evaluate a forestland's
current state and provide a management process which, over time, meets
the landowner's objectives, while maintaining health and vigor of the
resource. Forest management plans are typically written for a ten-year
period. (RMP, Glossary.)
HIGHLANDS APPLICABILITY DETERMINATION — A determination made
by the NJDEP (pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:38-2.4) indicating whether a project
proposed for the Preservation Area is a major Highlands development,
whether any such major Highlands development is exempt from the
207. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.
208. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:1A-1 et seq.
209. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.
210. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq.
211. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:11A-1 et seq.
212. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:12A-1 et seq.
213. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq.
§ 500-165 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-165
460:933
Highlands Act, and whether the project is consistent with the applicable
Area-Wide Water Quality Management Plan.
HIGHLANDS AREA — That portion of the municipality for which the land
use planning and regulations are in conformance with, or are intended or
proposed to be in conformance with, the Highlands RMP.
HIGHLANDS PRESERVATION AREA APPROVAL (HPAA) — An approval
issued by the NJDEP, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:38-6.1 et seq., pertinent to
a regulated activity in the Highlands Preservation Area, and including an
HPAA that contains a waiver pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:20-33b.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER — A spouse, child, parent, sibling, aunt,
uncle, niece, nephew, first cousin, grandparent, grandchild, father-in-law,
mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, stepparent, stepchild,
stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, or half sister, whether the individual is
related by blood, marriage, or adoption. (N.J.S.A. 13:20-3.)
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any structure, surface, or improvement that
reduces or prevents absorption of stormwater into land, including, but
not limited to, porous paving, paver blocks, gravel, crushed stone, decks,
patios, elevated structures, and other similar structures, surfaces, or
improvements. (N.J.S.A. 13:20-3.)
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES, CUMULATIVE — The total area of all existing or
proposed impervious surfaces situated or proposed to be situated within the
boundary lines of a lot, parcel, or other legally recognized subdivision of
land, expressed either as a measure of land area such as acreage or square
feet, or as a percentage of the total lot or parcel area.
MAJOR HIGHLANDS DEVELOPMENT — Except as otherwise provided
pursuant to Subsection a of Section 30 of the Highlands Act
("Exemptions").214 1) any nonresidential development in the Preservation
Area; 2) any residential development in the Preservation Area that requires
an environmental land use or water permit [from the NJDEP (see definition
above)], or that results in the ultimate disturbance of one acre or more of
land or a cumulative increase in impervious surface by 1/4 acre or more;
3) any activity undertaken or engaged in the Preservation Area that is
not a development but results in the ultimate disturbance of 1/4 acre or
more of forested area or that results in a cumulative increase in impervious
surface by 1/4 acre or more on a lot; or 4) any capital or other project
of a state entity or local government unit in the Preservation Area that
requires an environmental land use or water permit [from the NJDEP (see
definition above)], or that results in the ultimate disturbance of one acre or
more of land or a cumulative increase in impervious surface by 1/4 acre or
more. "Major Highlands Development" shall not include any agricultural or
horticultural development or agricultural or horticultural use. Solar panels
shall not be included in any calculation of impervious surface (as defined by
the Highlands Act, N.J.S.A., 13:20-1 et seq., as amended).
214. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:20-30a.
§ 500-165 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-165
460:934
MASTER PLAN — For purposes of this article, all references to the
"Township Master Plan," "master plan," or "Master Plan" refer to the
municipal Master Plan, as defined in the MLUL (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-5), as
adopted by the Township Planning Board.
MASTER PLAN, HIGHLANDS REGIONAL (RMP) — For purposes of this
article, all references to the Highlands Regional Master Plan (RMP), shall
be by use of the words "Highlands Regional Master Plan," "Highlands RMP,"
"Regional Master Plan," or "RMP."
MUNICIPAL LAND USE LAW (MLUL) — The New Jersey Municipal Land
Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
NJDEP — New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
NJDEP PRESERVATION AREA RULES — The regulations established by the
NJDEP to implement requirements of the Highlands Act, titled "Highlands
Water Protection and Planning Act Rules," and codified at N.J.A.C. 7:38-1.1
et seq.
PRESERVATION AREA — Lands within the Highlands Region that are
located in that portion designated by the Highlands Act as the "Preservation
Area" (see metes and bounds description at N.J.S.A. 13:20-7b). For purposes
of this article, this terminology shall also be used to refer to Preservation
Area lands located solely within the Township.
SOLAR PANEL — An elevated panel or plate, or a canopy or array thereof,
that captures and converts solar radiation to produce power, and includes
flat plate, focusing solar collectors, or photovoltaic solar cells and excludes
the base or foundation of the panel, plate, canopy, or array. (N.J.S.A.
13:20-3.)
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above, or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
§ 500-166. Highlands Act exemption determinations.
A. Section 30 of the Highlands Act215 identifies as exempt specific
activities, improvements and development projects affecting lands
within the Highlands Region. Such activities, improvements and
projects may be proposed as a component of any type of land use
application submitted to the municipality for approval, including but
not limited to zoning permit applications, building permit applications,
and applications for development. Any such qualifying activity,
improvement or development project is exempt, with regard specifically
to that activity, improvement or development project, from the
requirements of the Highlands Act, the Highlands RMP, the NJDEP
Preservation Area Rules, and any amendments to the Township's
Master Plan, development regulations, or other regulations adopted
215. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:20-30.
§ 500-165 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-166
460:935
§ 500-167. State agency exemption determination.
State agency exemption determinations shall consist of a Highlands
applicability determination issued by the NJDEP. State agency
determinations may be requested with regard to any Highlands Act
exemption; however, for applications involving any exemption not identified
herein, a state agency exemption determination is required. Any applicant
seeking a formal exemption determination for a capital or other project of
any state entity or local government unit, or for any other publicly owned
or controlled land or facility, also must request a state agency exemption
determination.
§ 500-168. Municipal exemption determination.
For an application involving any of the specific exemptions listed herein, the
applicant may request a municipal exemption determination. The applicant
may rely upon the findings of a municipal exemption determination to the
same extent as would apply to an exemption determination issued by the
NJDEP.
§ 500-169. Highlands Act exemptions eligible for municipal
determination.
Effective as of the date on which the municipality receives written
authorization from the Highlands Council to proceed, an applicant may seek
a municipal exemption determination for the Highlands Act exemptions
listed hereunder.
pursuant to the approval of Township's petition for plan conformance
by the Highlands Council.
B. Where any application submitted to the municipality for approval
proposes to rely upon a Highlands Act exemption, the applicant must,
as a condition of application completeness, and prior to review or
approval of the application by the applicable municipal authority,
provide sufficient evidence that the proposed activity, improvement, or
development project in fact qualifies as a Highlands Act exemption.
Such evidence shall consist of either a state agency exemption
determination or a municipal exemption determination indicating that
the proposed activity, improvement, or development project qualifies
for a Highlands Act exemption.
A. Exemption 1. The construction of a single-family dwelling, for an
individual's own use or the use of an immediate family member, on a lot
owned by the individual on the date of enactment of the Highlands Act
(August 10, 2004) or on a lot for which the individual entered into a
binding contract of sale to purchase on or before May 17, 2004.
B. Exemption 2. The construction of a single-family dwelling on a lot in
existence on the date of enactment of the Highlands Act (August 10,
2004), provided that the construction does not result in the ultimate
§ 500-166 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-169
460:936
disturbance of one acre or more of land or a cumulative increase in
impervious surface by 1/4 acre or more.
(1) A Municipal exemption determination indicating that an applicant
qualifies under Highlands Act Exemption 2 shall require approval
and filing of a deed notice along with a site plan delineating the
total exempt area and the extent of the disturbance recognized in
the municipal exemption determination. Municipal exemption
determinations in such instances shall not take effect until the
applicant has provided proof of filing of the approved deed notice.
C. Exemption 4. The reconstruction of any building or structure for any
reason within 125% of the footprint of the lawfully existing impervious
surfaces on the site, provided that the reconstruction does not increase
the lawfully existing impervious surface by 1/4 acre or more. This
exemption shall not apply to the reconstruction of any agricultural or
horticultural building or structure for a nonagricultural or
nonhorticultural use.
(1) For purposes of this article, this exemption shall not be construed
to permit multiple footprint expansions of 125% but rather, to
permit one or more reconstruction activities cumulatively resulting
in a maximum increase of 125% in the footprint of the impervious
surfaces lawfully existing on the site, provided they do not
cumulatively exceed the 1/4 acre limitation. Any determination of
whether the expansion of impervious cover meets the statutory
criteria for the exemption must account for the preexisting
impervious cover, and such expansion must be contiguous to the
location of the existing impervious cover. See In re August 16, 2007
Determination of NJDEP ex rel. Christ Church, 414 N.J. Super. 592
(App. Div. 2010), certif. denied, 205 N.J. 16 (2010).
(2) The applicable date of lawful existence shall be August 10, 2004,
the date of enactment of the Highlands Act.
D. Exemption 5. Any improvement to a single-family dwelling in existence
on the date of enactment of the Highlands Act (August 10, 2004),
including but not limited to an addition, garage, shed, driveway, porch,
deck, patio, swimming pool or septic system.
E. Exemption 6. Any improvement, for nonresidential purposes, to a place
of worship owned by a nonprofit entity, society or association, or
association organized primarily for religious purposes, or a public or
private school, or a hospital, in existence on the date of enactment of
the Highlands Act (August 10, 2004), including but not limited to new
structures, an addition to an existing building or structure, a site
improvement, or a sanitary facility.
F. Exemption 7. An activity conducted in accordance with an approved
woodland management plan pursuant to Section 3 of the Farmland
Assessment Act. P.L. 1964, c. 48 (C. 54:4-23.3)216 or a forest
stewardship plan approved pursuant to Section 31 of P.L. 2009, c. 256
§ 500-169 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-169
460:937
§ 500-170. Exemption designees.
Municipal exemption determinations regarding Highlands Act exemptions
shall be issued by the Township Engineer, Zoning Officer, Construction
Code Official or planning consultant. The exemption designees shall be
authorized to issue municipal exemption determinations on behalf of the
municipality, and shall only begin to do so, after satisfactory completion of
a Highlands Council training class for which the individuals have received
formal certification from the Highlands Council.
§ 500-171. Updates to training certification.
In the event of programmatic changes, updated information, or
modifications to procedures, updated training certification may be required
of exemption designees in order to maintain qualifications for providing
municipal exemption determinations. The Highlands Council will provide
training modules on an as-needed basis, to provide base training to new
employees, and/or to further the expertise of already-certified individuals.
Exemption designees and the municipalities they serve will be advised of
any need for upgraded training, which will be provided and funded by the
Highlands Council.
§ 500-172. Interim determinations.
For the duration of any period during which the municipality is without
a qualified exemption designee due to changes in personnel or other
extenuating circumstances, applicants seeking Highlands Act exemption
determinations shall be referred to the NJDEP for a state agency
determination.
§ 500-173. Application procedures.
(the State Park and Forestry Resources Act, C. 13:1L-31),217 or the
normal harvesting of forest products in accordance with a forest
management plan or forest stewardship plan approved by the State
Forester.
G. Exemption 8. The construction or extension of trails with
nonimpervious surfaces on publicly owned lands or on privately owned
lands where a conservation or recreational use easement has been
established.
A. Municipal exemption applications. Requests for municipal exemption
determination shall be submitted on forms provided by the Planning
Department and shall be accompanied by sufficient information and
documentary evidence to demonstrate whether the proposed activity,
improvement or development project qualifies for the applicable
216. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.3.
217. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1L-31.
§ 500-169 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-173
460:938
exemption in accordance with the required submission materials
applicable to each exemption as set forth herein.
B. Completeness determination. The exemption designee shall review the
application and all accompanying materials to determine whether
sufficient information has been submitted to make a determination on
the application. In the event of a finding that the application is
incomplete, the exemption designee shall, within 45 calendar days of
receipt, issue such findings in writing to the applicant, indicating what
information is required to properly consider the application.
C. Time for determination. The exemption designee shall issue municipal
exemption determinations within 45 calendar days of receipt of a
complete application. The exemption designee may consult with the
NJDEP or the Executive Director (or applicable designee) of the
Highlands Council as needed in making any exemption determination,
however. In such circumstance, the exemption designee shall seek such
assistance within the forty-five-day period and shall issue the
determination within at least 10 calendar days of receiving the
requested guidance. In no case shall failure to meet this date constitute
approval of the exemption.
D. Determinations. All municipal exemption determinations shall be
provided in writing, shall certify to the applicability or inapplicability of
the exemption, and shall include a statement of the rationale for the
decision. Any municipal exemption determination certifying to the
applicability of Highlands Act Exemption No. 2 shall be contingent upon
submission of proof of filing of the required deed notice, pursuant to
Subsection F.
E. Notice of determination required. The exemption designee shall
provide copies of all municipal exemption determinations, including a
copy of the full application, to the Highlands Council and to the NJDEP
within 10 business days of issuance.
F. Deed notice for Exemption No. 2. Any municipal exemption
determination that certifies to the applicability of Highlands Act
Exemption No. 2 shall be issued conditionally, pending fulfillment of the
requirement that a deed notice be recorded in the office of the County
Clerk or Register, as applicable, indicating the extent of the exemption
that has been consumed. The deed notice shall incorporate each of the
components listed below, and the applicant shall provide a copy of the
filed deed notice to the Highlands Council within five business days of
filing.
(1) Clear identification of the name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s)
in fee of the property;
(2) Designated tax block and lot number(s), street address(es),
municipality and county of location of the property;
§ 500-173 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-173
460:939
§ 500-174. Appeal of municipal exemption determination.
A municipal exemption determination may be appealed by any affected
person/entity by filing a notice of appeal within 20 calendar days of issuance
or receipt of said determination, whichever is later, specifying the grounds
therefor. Appeals must be filed with the NJDEP. All appeals shall be copied
to the exemption designee, who shall immediately transmit to the NJDEP
copies of the notice of appeal, the municipal exemption determination
application, and all supplemental materials constituting the record that
the exemption designee relied upon in issuing the municipal exemption
determination. Where the municipal exemption determination deems an
activity, improvement or development project exempt, the filing of an appeal
to the NJDEP shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of its approval by the
municipality.
§ 500-175. Effect of certified exemption.
Issuance of a municipal exemption determination that certifies to the
applicability of a Highlands Act exemption shall recognize the applicant's
exemption from the provisions of the Highlands Regional Master Plan,
NJDEP Preservation Area Rules, and any municipal ordinances and
requirements adopted under the authority of the Highlands Act to achieve
Highlands Plan conformance. The exemption is restricted solely to the
extent of the specified activity, improvement, or development project as
described in the language of the Highlands Act exemption, or to any lesser
activity, improvement, or development project as proposed and certified
through a municipal exemption determination application. Any activity,
improvement, or development project, or any part thereof, that is not
specifically listed as an exemption or that exceeds the limits of an exemption
(3) Reference to the municipal exemption determination (by date,
numbering if applicable) issued and under which the deed notice is
being filed;
(4) Description of the approved area of ultimate disturbance and the
impervious surface area, with verification that these remain below
the statutory limits;
(5) For properties of one acre or more in area, metes and bounds
delineation indicating the portion of the property for which the
ultimate disturbance has been authorized;
(6) Agreement to abide by the ultimate disturbance and impervious
surface limits imposed, any furtherance thereof rendering the
municipal exemption determination null and void; and
(7) Notice that the owner(s) and subsequent owner(s) and lessees shall
cause all leases, grants, and other written transfers of interest in
the property to contain provisions expressly requiring all holders
thereof to take the property subject to the limitations therein set
forth.
§ 500-173 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-175
460:940
remains subject to all of the above regulatory programs to the full extent
of the respective applicability of each. Issuance of a highlands exemption
determination shall not relieve the applicant from securing all other
required federal, state, or local approvals.
§ 500-176. Submission requirements.
All applications shall be accompanied by the municipal exemption
determination application form, the applicable fees, and the information
listed below, as applicable to the particular exemption or exemptions being
sought by the applicant. All references to professional preparers indicated
herein shall be construed to include any and all qualified individuals
licensed, certified, or otherwise eligible and authorized to complete such
work, in accordance with the applicable laws and legal requirements of
the State of New Jersey, including but not limited to the MLUL (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.) and Title 13 of the New Jersey Administrative Code, Law
and Public Safety. Where the exemption designee finds that any submission
item is not necessary to address the evidentiary requirements that must
be satisfied for issuance of an exemption determination, either because
alternate items have been provided by the applicant, or the relevant
information is readily available through records, maps, or any other
documents on file in the offices of the municipality, the exemption designee
may waive the applicant's obligation to submit such information.
A. Exemption 1.
(1) A copy of a deed, closing or settlement statement, title policy, tax
record, mortgage statement or any other official document showing
that the lot was legally owned by the applicant on or before August
10, 2004, and indicating the lot and block as designated by the
municipal tax mapping, the municipality and county in which the
lot is located, and the street address;
(2) If the applicant did not own the lot, a copy of the binding contract
of sale executed by the seller and the applicant on or before May
17, 2004, for the lot on which the house is to be constructed; and
(3) A certification by the applicant stating that the single-family
dwelling proposed for construction on the lot specified and
described therein by tax lot and block, municipality and county of
location, and street address, is intended for the applicant's own use
or the use of an immediate family member as identified therein by
name and relationship to the applicant.
B. Exemption 2.
(1) A copy of the recorded deed or plat showing that the lot was
created on or before August 10, 2004, or proof of subdivision
approval on or before August 10, 2004;
§ 500-175 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-176
460:941
(2) A property survey certified by a licensed New Jersey professional
land surveyor indicating the property boundary lines and overall lot
size, and showing what structures currently exist on the lot, if any;
(3) A parcel plan certified by a licensed New Jersey professional
engineer showing all existing and proposed development, including
all structures, grading, clearing, impervious surface and
disturbance, and including the calculations supporting the claim
that impervious surfaces and areas of disturbance are within the
limits necessary for Exemption 2; and
(4) A metes and bounds description of the area of the lot to be
disturbed, limited to less than one acre, and a draft conservation
restriction or deed notice to cover the balance of the lot.
C. Exemption 4.
(1) A parcel plan certified by a licensed New Jersey professional
engineer depicting:
(a) All existing property improvements, including all structures,
grading, clearing, impervious surfaces and limits of
disturbance lawfully existing on the site as of August 10, 2004;
and
(b) All proposed development, including all structures, impervious
surfaces, clearing limits, and limits of disturbance, including
grading; and
(2) A copy of any official documentation of the original date of
construction of the building or otherwise establishing the
lawfulness of existing impervious surfaces.
D. Exemption 5.
(1) A copy of any official documentation proving the single-family
dwelling was in existence on August 10, 2004;
(2) A description of the proposed improvement; and
(3) A certification from the applicant that the property and all
improvements will continue to be used for single-family dwelling
purposes.
E. Exemption 6.
(1) A copy of any official documentation indicating that the place of
worship, public or private school or hospital was in existence on
August 10, 2004;
(2) For improvements to a place of worship, documentation showing
that the entity, society or association, or association organized
primarily for religious purposes has nonprofit status;
§ 500-176 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-176
460:942
(3) A site plan certified by a licensed New Jersey professional engineer
depicting:
(a) All existing property improvements, including all structures,
grading, clearing, impervious surfaces and limits of
disturbance existing on the site on August 10, 2004; and
(b) All proposed development, including all structures, impervious
surfaces, clearing limits, and limits of disturbance, including
grading.
F. Exemption 7.
(1) For a private landowner with an approved woodland management
plan or forest stewardship plan:
(a) A copy of the applicant's tax bill showing that the site has
farmland assessment tax status under the New Jersey
Farmland Assessment Act, N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq., if
applicable;
(b) A brief description of the total area of woodlands that is the
subject of the approved woodland management plan or forest
stewardship plan;
(c) A brief description of the length of time that the area to be
managed has been in use for woodland management or forest
stewardship plan; and
(d) A copy of the approved woodland management plan or forest
stewardship plan.
(2) For the normal harvesting of forest products in accordance with a
forest management plan or forest stewardship plan approved by
the State Forester:
(a) A brief description of the total area where the normal
harvesting of forest products occurs;
(b) A brief description of the length of time that the area to be
managed has been in use for normal harvesting of forest
products; and
(c) A copy of a forest management plan or forest stewardship plan
approved by the State Forester.
G. Exemption 8.
(1) A site plan certified by a licensed New Jersey professional engineer
showing the proposed trail construction with details, including the
location and width of existing and proposed trails and those off-site
trails to which they connect, if any;
§ 500-176 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-176
460:943
(2) A written description of the nonimpervious materials to be used;
and
(3) For privately owned property, a copy of a deed for the property and
the conservation or recreational use easement on the property.
§ 500-176 WEST MILFORD CODE § 500-176
460:944
Appendix
Chapter A520
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ 500-176 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § 500-176
460:945

ARTICLE I
Grant of Franchise; Regulations
[Adopted 11-10-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-014218]
§ A520-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the terms defined above shall have the
meanings there indicated, and the following additional terms shall have the
following meanings:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — That statute of the State of New Jersey
relating to cable television, known as the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A.
48:5A1 et seq.
APPLICATION — Cablevision's application for renewal of municipal
consent, which application is on file in the Township Clerk's office and
is incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof, except as
modified, changed, limited or altered by this ordinance.
BOARD — The Board of Public Utilities of the State of New Jersey or its
successor agency.
COMPANY — Cablevision of Warwick, LLC ("Cablevision"), the grantee of
rights under this ordinance.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FEDERAL ACT — That federal statute relating to cable communications
commonly known as the "Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984," 47
U.S.C. § 521 et seq., and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, or as those
statutes may be amended.
FEDERAL REGULATIONS — Those federal regulations relating to cable
television services, 47 CFR § 76.1 et seq. (and, to the extent applicable, any
other federal rules and regulations relating to cable television, including but
not limited to, those described in 47 CFR § 76.3), or as such regulations may
be amended.
STANDARD INSTALLATION — The installation of drop cable to a customer's
premises where the distance from the point of entry into the building being
served is less than 150 feet from the active cable television system plant.
STATE — The State of New Jersey.
STATE REGULATIONS — Those regulations of the State of New Jersey
Board of Public Utilities relating to cable television, N.J.A.C. 14:171.1 et seq.
and N.J.A.C. 14:181 et seq., or as such regulations may be amended.
TOWNSHIP — The governing body of the Township of West Milford in the
County of Passaic and the State of New Jersey.
218. Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Ch. A520, Cable Television Franchise,
adopted 2-1-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-3.
§ A520-1 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § A520-2
460:947
§ A520-2. Statement of findings.
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to Cablevision was
held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the
Act. Said hearing having been held and fully open to the public, and the
municipality having received all comments regarding the qualifications of
Cablevision to receive this consent, the Township hereby finds Cablevision
possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other
qualifications to support municipal consent, and that Cablevision's
operating and construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A520-3. Grant of authority.
The Township hereby grants to Cablevision its nonexclusive consent to
place in, upon, along, across, above, over, and under its highways, streets,
alleys, sidewalks, public ways, and public places in the municipality poles,
wires, cables, and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in
the Township of a cable television system or other communications facility,
and for the provision of any communication service over such facilities as
may be authorized by federal or state regulatory agencies. Operation and
construction, pursuant to said consent, is conditioned upon prior approval
of the Board of Public Utilities.
§ A520-4. Duration of franchise.
This consent granted herein shall be nonexclusive and shall be for a term of
15 years from the date of issuance of a certificate of approval by the Board.
§ A520-5. Expiration and subsequent renewal.
If Cablevision seeks successive consent, it shall, prior to the expiration of
this consent, apply for a municipal consent and certificate of approval in
accordance with N.J.S.A 48:5A16, and applicable state and federal rules and
regulations. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A25.1, both the Township and
Cablevision shall be bound by the terms of this municipal consent until such
time as Cablevision converts the municipal consent (and any certificate of
approval) into a systemwide franchise.
§ A520-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance to Cablevision shall apply to the
entirety of the Township and any property hereafter annexed.
§ A520-7. Service area.
Cablevision shall be required to proffer video programming service along
any public right-of-way to any person's residence within the portion of the
franchise territory, as described in the application for municipal consent, at
Cablevision's schedule of rates for standard and nonstandard installation.
§ A520-2 WEST MILFORD CODE § A520-8
460:948
§ A520-8. Extension of service.
Cablevision shall extend service along any public right-of-way outside its
service area to those residences within the franchise territory which are
located in areas that have a residential density of 25 homes per mile or
greater, or areas with less than 25 homes per mile where residents agree
to share the costs of such extension in accordance with the line extension
formula as provided by the company in its application for municipal consent.
§ A520-9. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Cable Television Act,
Cablevision shall pay to the Township, as an annual franchise fee, a sum
equal to 2% of the actual gross revenues received from all recurring
charges in the nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for its cable
television reception services in the Township. In the event applicable law
hereinafter permits a larger franchise fee to be collected, but does not fix
the amount thereof, the Township and Cablevision shall negotiate in good
faith with respect to the amount thereof; provided, however, that nothing
herein shall be construed to permit the Township to require payment of a
franchise fee by Cablevision that is higher than the fee paid by all other
cable television service providers offering service in the municipality.
§ A520-10. Free service.
§ A520-11. Construction/system requirements.
Cablevision shall perform construction and installation of its plant and
facilities in accordance with applicable state and federal law. The company
A. Cablevision shall, upon written request, provide, free of charge, one
standard installation and monthly cable television reception service to
all state or locally accredited public schools and all municipal public
libraries, as well as municipal buildings located within the Township.
B. Upon written request from the Township, the company shall provide to
state and locally accredited elementary and secondary schools and
municipal public libraries in the Township, without charge, the
following: 1) one standard installation per school or library; 2) one
cable modem per installation; and 3) basic cable modem service for the
term of this ordinance for each installation. This offer shall be subject to
the terms, conditions and use policies of the company, as those policies
may exist from time to time.
C. Upon written request from the Township, the company shall provide to
a municipally owned facility, without charge at one designated location,
the following: 1) one standard installation; 2) one cable modem; and 3)
basic cable modem service for the term of this ordinance. This offer
shall be subject to the terms, conditions and use policies of the company
as those policies may exist from time to time.
§ A520-8 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § A520-11
460:949
shall be subject to the following additional construction requirements with
respect to the installation of its cable plant and facilities in the Township:
§ A520-12. Technical and customer service standards.
Cablevision shall comply with the technical and customer service standards
established for the cable industry under applicable federal and state laws,
rules and regulations.
§ A520-13. Local office or agent.
Cablevision shall establish and maintain during the entire term of this
consent a local area business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigating and resolving complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Said office shall be open daily
during normal business hours, and in no event less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, with the exception of holidays.
§ A520-14. Designation of complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the Township pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26. All
complaints shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.5.
A. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb any pavement,
street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces, the company
shall, at its sole expense, restore and replace such disturbances in as
good a condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. If at any time during the period of this consent the municipality shall
alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place, the
company, upon reasonable notice by the Township, shall remove or
relocate its equipment, at its own expense.
C. Upon request of a person holding a building or moving permit issued by
the Township, the company shall temporarily move or remove
appropriate parts of its facilities so as to permit the moving or erection
of buildings or for the performance of other work. The expense of any
such temporary removal or relocation shall be paid in advance to the
company by the person requesting the same. In such cases, the
company shall be given not less than 14 days' prior written notice in
order to arrange for the changes required.
D. During the exercise of its rights and privileges under this consent, the
company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the Township so as to
prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the
wires, cables, conduits and fixtures of the company. Such trimming
shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper clearance for
the company's facilities.
§ A520-11 WEST MILFORD CODE § A520-15
460:950
§ A520-15. Liability insurance.
Cablevision agrees to maintain and keep in force and effect, at its sole cost,
at all times during the term of this consent, sufficient liability insurance
naming the Township as an additional insured and insuring against loss
by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand in the minimum
amounts of $500,000 for bodily injury or death to one person, and
$1,000,000 for bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident or
occurrence stemming from or arising out of the company's exercise of its
rights hereunder. Cablevision will maintain an umbrella liability insurance
policy in limits of at least $5,000,000 per occurrence.
§ A520-16. Performance bond.
Cablevision shall obtain and maintain, at its sole cost and expense, during
the entire term of this agreement, a bond to the municipality in the amount
of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful performance of its
obligations as provided in this franchise.
§ A520-17. Rates.
The rates of the company for cable television services shall be subject to
regulation to the extent permitted by federal and state law.
§ A520-18. Emergency uses.
Cablevision shall be required to have the capability to override the audio
portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting of emergency
messages by the Township pursuant to state and federal requirements.
The Company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by
the Township or any other person, during an emergency, if for any reason
the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television system
as contemplated herein. The Township shall utilize the state-approved
procedures for such emergency uses.
§ A520-19. Equitable terms.
A. In the event that the service of another multichannel video program
provider not subject to the Township's regulatory authority within the
Township creates a significant competitive disadvantage to Cablevision,
the company shall have the right to request from the Township lawful
amendments to its franchise that relieve it of burdens which create the
unfair competitive situation. Should the company seek such
amendments to its franchise, the parties agree to negotiate in good
faith appropriate changes to the franchise in order to relieve the
company of such competitive disadvantages. If the parties can reach an
agreement on such terms, the Township agrees to support the
company's petition to the Board for modification of the consent in
accordance with N.J.S.A 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
§ A520-15 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § A520-19
460:951
§ A520-20. Removal of facilities.
Upon expiration, termination or revocation of this ordinance, Cablevision, at
its sole cost and expense and upon direction of the Board, shall remove the
cables and appurtenant devices constructed or maintained in connection
with the cable services authorized herein, unless Cablevision, its affiliated
entities or assignees should, within six months after such expiration,
termination or revocation, obtain certification from the FCC to operate an
open video system or any other federal or state certification to provide
telecommunications.
§ A520-21. Public, educational, and governmental access.
B. If the parties are unable to reach an agreement on appropriate
amendments to the franchise, the Township acknowledges that the
company shall have the right to petition the Board directly for such
amendments in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.7; provided, however, the Township shall be under no obligation
to support Cablevision's request for such relief from the Board.
C. In any subsequent municipal consent, the Township shall require, at a
minimum, the same terms and conditions of any other provider of
multichannel video programming subject to the Town's regulatory
authority as those contained in the instant consent. In the event such
subsequent consent does not contain the same terms and conditions as
the instant consent, the Township agrees to support the company's
petition to the Board for modification of the consent in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7 to relieve the company of
competitive disadvantages identified in the company's petition.
A. Cablevision shall continue to make available noncommercial public,
educational and governmental (PEG) access services available to the
residents of the Township as described in the application for municipal
consent. All Cablevision support for PEG access shall be for the
exclusive benefit of Cablevision's subscribers.
B. The Township agrees that Cablevision shall retain the right to use the
PEG access channel, or portion thereof, for non-PEG access
programming during times when the Township is not utilizing the
channel for purposes of providing PEG access programming. In the
event that the company uses said PEG access channel for the
presentation of such other programming, the PEG programming shall
remain the priority use, and the company's rights with respect to using
the channel for non-PEG programming shall be subordinate to the
Township's provision of PEG access programming on such channel.
C. Cablevision shall have discretion to determine the format and method
of transmission of the PEG access programming provided for in this
§ A520-21.
§ A520-19 WEST MILFORD CODE § A520-21
460:952
§ A520-22. Incorporation of application.
All of the commitments contained in the application and any amendment
thereto submitted in writing to the Township by the company, except as
modified herein, are binding upon Cablevision as terms and conditions of
this consent. The application and any other written amendments thereto
submitted by Cablevision in connection with this consent are incorporated
in this ordinance by reference and made a part hereof, except as specifically
modified, changed, limited, or altered by this ordinance, or to the extent
that they conflict with state or federal law.
§ A520-23. Consistency with applicable laws.
This consent shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable
federal, State and local laws; as such laws, rules and regulations may be
amended from time to time.
§ A520-24. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portion thereof.
D. Cablevision shall provide the Township with a onetime technology grant
of $90,000. Cablevision shall provide an initial grant payment of
$22,800 within 90 days of the issuance of the certificate of approval by
the Board of Public Utilities. The remaining grant of $67,200 shall be
provided in annual installments of $4,800, within 90 days of receipt of
the written request by the Township (the "annual grant"). The Township
may utilize the grant for any cable and/or other telecommunications
purposes, provided a) such uses are lawful and consistent with the
terms of this ordinance and b) if used to purchase communications
services, the Township shall seek to purchase such services from the
company or its affiliates, if offered. Cablevision shall not be obligated to
make any additional payments beyond year 15 of the franchise. The
annual grant shall be payable to the Township within 60 days from
receipt of the Township's written request. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, should Cablevision apply for a systemwide certification or
otherwise convert its municipal consent to a systemwide certification in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-25.1, it shall be relieved of any
payments due and owing after the date of such conversion or award of a
systemwide franchise.
E. Upon written request from the Township, Cablevision will install a fiber
access return feed to a municipally designated building, provided it is a
standard installation, to allow for the origination of PEG access
programming from the Township.
§ A520-21 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § A520-25
460:953
§ A520-25. Notice.
Notices required under this ordinance shall in writing and shall be mailed,
first class, postage prepaid, to the addresses below. Either party may
change the place where notice is to be given by providing such change in
writing at least 30 days prior to the time such change becomes effective.
The time to respond to notices under this ordinance shall run from receipt
of such written notice.
§ A520-26. When effective; Board of Public Utility approval.
This ordinance shall take effect upon issuance of a certificate of approval as
issued by the Board of Public Utilities that incorporates the material terms
of this ordinance. Nothing herein shall alter the right of the company to
seek modification of this ordinance in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and
N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
A. Notices to the company shall be mailed to Cablevision, 40 Potash Road,
Oakland, NJ 07436, Attention: Gary Shaw, Director of Government
Affairs, with a copy to Cablevision of Warwick, 1111 Stewart Avenue,
Bethpage, NY 11714, Attention: Legal Department.
B. Notices to the Township shall be mailed to Township of West Milford,
1480 Union Valley Road, West Milford, New Jersey 07480, Attention:
Township Clerk.
§ A520-25 WEST MILFORD CODE § A520-26
460:954
ARTICLE II
Public, Educational and Governmental Television Station Policies
and Procedures
[Adopted 10-21-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-014]
§ A520-27. Mission.
This policy is adopted to afford fair and equal opportunities for the
dissemination of municipal information and events through the Township
of West Milford's (hereinafter referred to as the "Township") public,
educational and governmental access cable channel, West Milford TV 77
(hereinafter referred to as "WM77"). The Township will assist and facilitate
programming for WM77. WM77 will broadcast noncommercial
programming designed to celebrate the diversity of its residents and to
educate them on topics of local interest. The purpose of WM77 is to help the
Township's residents identify and bond with the community, its governing
institutions, and each other.
§ A520-28. Goals.
In order to fulfill this mission, the following goals are established for WM77:
§ A520-29. Commission established.
There shall be a West Milford PEG Television Commission (hereinafter
referred to as the "Commission") hereby established and appointed by the
Township Council.
A. Develop educational, nonprofit, and governmental noncommercial
programming to address the needs, concerns, and interests of Township
residents;
B. Broadcast high-quality noncommercial programs which conform to
Township and community standards;
C. Promote a cooperative effort between the Township, the Township's
public schools, community, area businesses, and institutions; along with
resources on projects that serve the needs, concerns, and interests of
residents and the general public;
D. Encourage Township public school students and residents and the
general public to be involved in the production and broadcasting of
innovative, community-driven, noncommercial programming;
E. Provide, maintain, and update a bulletin board, which displays notices
from government agencies and nonprofit organizations in the Township
that are of interest and service to Township residents; and
F. WMTV will broadcast numerous Township, governmental, public
school, area educational, and nonprofit activities and events, in order to
ensure that residents with disabilities or those who have difficulty
leaving their homes remain an integral part of the community.
§ A520-27 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § A520-29
460:955
§ A520-30. Commission officers.
The members of the Commission shall annually choose a Chairperson and
such other officers as it may deem necessary from among its members. All
members shall have equal voting privileges.
§ A520-31. Meetings.
§ A520-32. Commission powers and duties.
The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A. The Commission shall be comprised of nine members as follows:
(1) Two members of the Council of the Township of West Milford, one
of whom shall act as a liaison to the Commission and to the
Township Council. The Council members shall each serve a term of
one year.
(2) Seven at-large members from the Township community who shall
serve the following terms:
(a) Two members: three-year initial terms following appointment;
(b) Two members: two-year initial terms following appointment;
and
(c) Three members: one-year initial terms following appointment.
B. After the initial terms, each member appointed will serve a three-year
term.
A. A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum
for the conduct of business.
B. The Commission shall annually establish a meeting schedule, and
written notice of the time, date and place of all meetings shall be
advertised and made publicly available sufficiently in advance thereof.
The schedule and notices shall be provided to the office of the Township
Clerk.
C. The Commission shall be considered a "public body" for the purpose of
complying with the provisions of the Open Public Meetings Act, N.J.S.A.
10:4-6 et seq. The meetings shall be held at the Township Municipal
Building and shall be open to the public unless closed to the public by
the Commission pursuant to an exception under the Open Public
Meetings Act.
D. Minutes of each meeting shall be produced and approved by the
Commission at a subsequent meeting. At the conclusion of each
meeting, the Chairman (or Secretary if one is appointed) shall in a
timely manner forward to the Township Clerk a copy of the approved
minutes.
§ A520-29 WEST MILFORD CODE § A520-32
460:956
§ A520-33. Editorial control.
§ A520-34. Program content guidelines.
A. The Township Council shall adopt policies and procedures for WM77
(hereinafter referred to as "Polices and Procedures"), and the
Commission shall promulgate such Policies and Procedures and comply
with same for the fair operation and administration of WM77.
B. Maintain and regularly update an inventory of the television equipment
owned by the Township and file a copy with the Township Administrator.
C. Submit a proposed budget to the Township Administrator on or before
November 1 for the following fiscal year.
D. The Commission shall not expend any funds without the approval of the
Township Administrator, and all expenditures shall be effectuated
through the purchasing policies and procedures of the Township
Administration.
E. Submit to the Township Clerk a written report of the programs and
activities of WM77 and the Commission undertaken during the prior
year. This said written report shall be submitted on or before January 31
of the following year.
F. Seek grants to support WM77 and, through the Township
Administrator, seek Township Council authorization to submit such
grant applications.
G. Assign tasks to the Commission members for the operation of WM77.
A. Final decisions concerning the editing and broadcasting of a program
rest with the Commission for all programs and all sources, subject to
program content guidelines.
B. WM77 is not obligated to broadcast material submitted by any source
or to broadcast production or bulletin board submissions in their
entirety.
C. The Commission will not conduct the actual editing of programming but
shall provide guidance and direction to submittals.
A. The Commission has the right to reject any program or announcement
submission deemed in violation of the Policies and Procedures or which
is, for any reason, deemed unsuitable or not in conformance with the
mission of WM77. The Commission will not knowingly permit the
broadcasting of a bulletin board announcement or a portion of a
program containing material which violates the law or the Program
Content Guidelines set forth in the Policies and Procedures.
B. The Township Administrator shall have authority to instruct the
Commission and/or its members to remove any program, bulletin or
§ A520-32 SOIL REMOVAL AND SOIL FILL § A520-34
460:957
§ A520-35. Cable productions.
anything aired on WMTV at his sole discretion, and the Commission
shall comply with such instruction.
A. Air time is available solely for the purpose of educational,
governmental, and community, noncommercial programming that is in
conformance with the procedures set forth in this policy and the
mission of the WM77.
B. Educational programming is programming from any governmental,
educational, or nonprofit source designed to inform or instruct viewers
about matters that fall within the purview of the WM77 mission and
objectives.
C. Community programming is programming featuring an activity of a unit
of the Township government, the Township's public schools, or an event
sponsored by a Township or area nonprofit organization that is
requested for broadcasting in order to inform, educate, or entertain
Township residents on matters that may be of local interest.
§ A520-34 WEST MILFORD CODE § A520-35
460:958
Chapter A525
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
§ A525-1. Statutory authority; permitted acts.
§ A525-2. Location of poles, posts and related equipment.
All poles, posts, pedestals, cabinets, or other facilities hereafter to be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, located, relocated, maintained,
repaired, or operated shall be located and placed back of the curblines
where shown on the official map(s) of the Township; the poles and posts,
however, shall be located within 18 inches of the face of such curbline or as
may otherwise be mutually agreed by both parties, or at the points or places
now occupied by the poles, posts, pedestals, cabinets, or other facilities of
the company, its successors and assigns, and where there are no curblines,
at other convenient points or places in, upon, along, adjacent, or across the
A. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:17-10, N.J.S.A. 48:17-11, and
N.J.S.A. 48:17-12 and subject to the provisions of § A525-4 hereof,
permission and consent is hereby granted to New Jersey Bell Telephone
Company (hereinafter referred to as "company"), its successors and
assigns, to erect, construct, reconstruct, remove, locate, relocate,
replace, inspect, maintain, repair and operate its communications
facilities and other transmission or process equipment, including
underground facilities such as conduits, manholes, cables, wires, and
all other facilities appurtenant thereto, and aerial and aboveground
facilities, such as cables, wires, antennas, poles, posts, supports, guys,
pedestals, cable termination and distribution cabinets and all other
facilities appurtenant thereto, in, through, upon, along, over, under, and
across all of the various public ways, sidewalks, streets, roads, avenues,
highways, bridges, waterways, and other public places, and parts
thereof, throughout their entire length, and to effect the necessary
street openings and lateral connections to curb poles, property lines
and other facilities in the Township of West Milford (hereinafter
referred to as "Township") for said company's local and through lines
and other communications facilities in connection with the transaction
of its business.
B. All of the public ways, including, by way of illustration and not of
limitation, the various sidewalks, streets, roads, avenues, highways,
bridges and waterways, and other public places, and parts thereof,
throughout their entire length located in this municipality are hereby
designated and prescribed for the uses and purposes of said company
as aforementioned.
C. In the event that any public street or way where the company has
facilities is vacated by the Township, the municipality agrees to reserve
unto said company the rights granted the company by the present
ordinance.
§ A520-35 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES § A525-2
A525:959
public ways, streets, roads, avenues, highways, or other public places as
may be mutually agreed upon between the parties.
§ A525-3. Burying of equipment.
§ A525-4. Notice and permits required.
Before proceeding with any new construction or relocation work in an
area covered by this ordinance, the company shall give prior notice in
writing thereof to the Township, through its designated representative,
of its intention to perform such work, including therewith a map or plan
showing the location and size of such facilities. Such maps or plans are
for the information of the municipality only and shall not be considered as
construction specifications upon which the municipality or any third party
may rely for subsequent excavation or other work. Prior to the opening or
excavating of any public ways, sidewalks, streets, roads, avenues, highways,
or other public places, or parts thereof, for the purposes of installing,
maintaining, or operating its underground systems as aforementioned, the
company shall only be required to first obtain such street opening or
excavation permits and pay such reasonable fees therefor as may be
lawfully required to cover the cost of administration and inspection, as
provided by any ordinances regulating such openings or excavations. No
building permits or zoning variances shall be required for the facilities
covered by this ordinance.
A. The company may bury its local and through communications faculties
such as cables, conduit, manholes and associated equipment, fixtures,
process equipment and appurtenances within the right-of-way of the
various public ways, sidewalks, streets, roads, avenues, highways, and
other public places and parts thereof, and at such locations as shall be
mutually agreed upon by the parties for said company's local and
through lines and communications facilities.
B. Underground conduits and associated facilities, as aforementioned,
shall be placed at least 18 inches below the surface of said public ways,
sidewalks, streets, roads, avenues, highways, and other public places
and parts thereof, and with the exception of lateral branches to curb
poles and property lines and other facilities, the same shall generally
not be constructed more than 10 feet from the curbline, unless
obstructions make it necessary to deviate from such course or unless
the parties mutually agree to another location.
C. Manholes shall be located at such points along the line of underground
conduits as may be necessary or convenient for placing, maintaining,
and operating the facilities, as aforementioned, which the company may
from time to time use in connection with its underground conduit
system and shall be so constructed as to conform to the cross-sectional
and longitudinal grade of the surface so as not to interfere with the
safety or convenience of persons or vehicles.
§ A525-2 WEST MILFORD CODE § A525-5
A525:960
§ A525-5. Restoration of roads and other surfaces.
The surface of the public ways, sidewalks, streets, avenues, highways,
and other public places, and any pavement or surface and/or planting
disturbed by the company in constructing its facilities, shall be restored
to as good condition as it was before the commencement of work thereon.
No highways or other public ways shall be encumbered for a period longer
than shall be necessary to execute the work. Such restoration shall be
subject to the approval of the Township after an inspection by its authorized
representative upon completion of the work.
§ A525-6. Indemnification of Township.
The company agrees to indemnify and save harmless the Township from and
against all claims and liabilities resulting from any loss of life or property,
or injury or damage to the person or property of any person, firm or
corporation caused by or arising out of road conditions resulting from any
negligent or faulty excavations, installation or maintenance connected with
the work or equipment of said company, or both, when not attributable to
the fault, failure or negligence of the Township, except that if such loss,
injury or damage shall be caused by the joint or concurring negligence or
fault of the company and the Township, the same shall be borne by them to
the extent of their respective fault or negligence.
§ A525-7. Relocation of curblines and facilities.
Whenever a curbline shall be established on streets where one does not
now exist or where an established curbline shall be relocated in order to
widen an existing street or highway in conjunction with road construction
being performed by the Township, the company shall change the location
of its aboveground facilities, covered by this ordinance, so that the same
shall be back of, and adjacent to, the new curbline so established, upon
receipt of notice that the curbline has been so established, so long as
the municipality has acted with reasonable care in establishing the new
curbline and providing notice thereof.
§ A525-8. Joint use of poles, posts and related equipment.
Any company or corporation having legal authority to erect and maintain
poles, posts, or pedestals upon any of the public ways, sidewalks, streets,
roads, avenues, highways, or other public places in the Township may
jointly use the company's poles, posts, pedestals or other structures for
all lawful purposes, provided the company consents to such use, on terms
and conditions acceptable to the company and not inconsistent with the
provisions of the present ordinance.
§ A525-9. Township, county or state use of poles.
A. The company shall provide space, to the extent available, on its poles so
long as said poles are occupied by the company and space, to the extent
available, in its main conduits existing on the date of passage of this
§ A525-5 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES § A525-9
A525:961
§ A525-10. Indemnification of company.
The Township agrees to indemnify, save harmless and in the event of
suit to defend said company from and against all claims and liabilities
for damages arising out of or caused or alleged to have been caused in
any manner by the Township's use or enjoyment of the company's plant
or facilities provided under § A525-9, including all suits of every kind or
description brought against the company, either individually or jointly with
the Township, or another, including those brought by employees of said
municipality, for or on account of any damage or injury to any persons or
property caused or occasioned or alleged to have been caused by or on
account of the acts, omissions, fault or willful conduct of the Township or its
employees, agents or representatives or in connection with the installation,
maintenance, removal or use of any wires, cables, electrical conductors or
other equipment or facilities attached to or located in said company's plant
or facilities.
ordinance, but not exceeding one duct of standard size, for the sole
benefit of the Township during the pendency of this ordinance. Such
space shall be provided for the exclusive use of the Township which use
shall be limited to accommodating the wires or electrical conductors
required for one-way signal control in connection with municipal police
patrol, fire alarm signal control and traffic signal control systems only;
but for no other uses or purposes, either alone or in conjunction
therewith, nor for circuits for the supply of electrical energy for traffic
or other signals; nor for wires, conductors, cable or the equivalent
which provide a means of transmitting any signal to a private,
commercial or residential location, and which is normally provided by
a nongovernmental supplier; provided, further, that no such use or
attachment by the Township shall interfere with the plant or facilities
of or the use thereof by the company. All costs or expenses incurred
by the company in connection therewith shall be paid by the Township.
It shall be the obligation of the Township to attach its wires to the
poles or place its electric conductors in the conduits or manholes of the
company, provided that, before proceeding with said work, either by
itself or by a person, firm or corporation engaged to perform such work,
the Township shall give the company 30 days' prior notice in writing. All
such work shall be performed under the supervision of said company.
B. If any or all of the said streets or highways are later taken over by the
Board of Chosen Freeholders of the County of Passaic or the State of
New Jersey, Department of Transportation, such Board of Chosen
Freeholders or Department of Transportation shall have such rights
and privileges and be subject to the same terms, conditions and
limitations of use as herein granted by this ordinance to the Township;
provided, however, that satisfactory prior arrangements as may be
necessary are made with the Township and the company for the full
protection of the respective interest of each.
§ A525-9 WEST MILFORD CODE § A525-11
A525:962
§ A525-11. No exclusive rights.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to grant unto said company,
its successors and assigns an exclusive right or to prevent the granting of
permission and consent to other companies for like purposes on any of the
streets, roads, avenues or highways of the Township.
§ A525-12. Defined terms.
The term "Township" as used in this ordinance shall be held to apply to and
include any form of municipality or government into which the Township
or any part thereof may at any time hereafter be changed, annexed, or
merged, and the term "Mayor and Council" or any other term herein used
in referring to the governing body of the Township shall be held to apply to
and include the governing body of such other form of municipality.
§ A525-13. Scope of consent.
The permission and consent hereby granted shall apply to and cover all
communications facilities of the company existing at any time, and related
structures, process equipment, and appurtenances heretofore or hereafter
erected, constructed, reconstructed, removed, located, relocated, replaced,
maintained, or operated by the company, its predecessors, successors, or
assigns within the Township.
§ A525-14. Advertising costs.
The company shall pay the expenses incurred for advertising required in
connection with the passage of this ordinance, after the date of its first
reading, within 30 days after the company has received a bill for such
advertising from the publisher.
§ A525-15. Severability.
In the event that any one or more of the provisions contained herein shall
for any reason be illegal or unenforceable in any respect under applicable
law, such illegality or unenforceability shall not affect any other provisions
of this ordinance, and this ordinance shall then be construed as if such
illegal or unenforceable provision(s) had never been contained herein.
§ A525-16. Term; maintenance of property.
A. This ordinance shall continue in full force and effect for a period of 50
years from the date it becomes effective subject to the right of the
company to seek such changes herein as it may deem necessary and
reasonable from time to time prior to the expiration of said period.
B. Throughout the full term of this ordinance, the company for itself, its
successors and assigns agrees to maintain its property within the
Township in good order and shall furnish safe, adequate and proper
service within the Township at just and reasonable rates. At and after
§ A525-11 COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES § A525-16
A525:963
Chapter A537
VIDEO SERVICES
§ A537-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this ordinance, the terms defined above219 shall have the
meanings there indicated, and the following additional terms shall have the
following meanings:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — That statute of the State of New Jersey
relating to cable television, known as the "Cable Television Act," N.J.S.A.
48:5A-15 et seq.
BOARD — The Board of Public Utilities of the State of New Jersey.
FEDERAL ACT — That federal statute relating to cable communications
commonly known as the "Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984," 47
U.S.C. § 521 et seq., or as that statute may be amended, and the
Communications Act of 1934 as amended by the Telecommunications Act of
1996.
FEDERAL REGULATIONS — Those federal regulations relating to the
Communications Act of 1934 as amended by the Telecommunications Act of
1996 and cable televisions service, 47 CFR Section 76.1 et seq. (and to the
extent applicable, any other federal rules and regulations relating to cable
television, including, but not limited to, those described in 47 CFR Section
76.31), or as such regulations may be amended.
FRANCHISEE — The grantee of rights under this ordinance and is known
as "Hometown Online, Inc.," a wholly owned subsidiary of Warwick Valley
Telephone Company, its lawful successors and assignees.
STATE REGULATIONS — Those regulations of the State of New Jersey
Board of Public Utilities relating to cable television, N.J.A.C. 14:17-1.1 et
seq., and 14:18-1.1 et seq., or as such regulations may be amended.
expiration of the term of this ordinance, the company shall safeguard
the public interest in continuous and uninterrupted service within the
Township.
C. Following final passage of this ordinance, the Township Clerk shall
provide the company with written notice thereof by certified mail. As
provided by applicable law, this ordinance shall not become effective
until acceptance thereof by the company and approval thereof by the
Board of Public Utilities.
D. This ordinance shall cancel and supersede all prior consent ordinances
between the Township and the company regarding the subject matter
hereof.
219. Editor's Note: The preamble to Ord. No. 2002-7 defined Hometown Online, Inc., as the
"franchisee."
§ A525-16 WEST MILFORD CODE § A537-1
A537:964
TOWNSHIP — The Township of West Milford in the County of Passaic and
State of New Jersey.
§ A537-2. Statement of findings.
It is hereby found and determined that the franchisee possesses the
necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other qualifications to
comply with all requirements and that the franchisee's operating and
construction arrangements are adequate and feasible. It is accordingly
ordained that pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey and the
rules and regulations established by the Board, a nonexclusive consent and
permission is hereby granted to the franchisee to use new and existing
communications facilities to provide video services within certain areas of
the Township of West Milford subject to the following rules and regulations.
§ A537-3. Duration of franchise.
The consent herein granted shall expire 10 years from the effective date
of the Certificate of Approval granted by the Board for the franchisee to
provide service in West Milford.
§ A537-4. Franchise expiration and renewal.
The consent granted herein may be renewed upon application pursuant to
the Federal Act and Cable Television Act.
§ A537-5. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the franchise shall, during
each year of operation under the consent herein, pay to the Township 2% of
the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the nature of subscription
fees paid by subscribers to its cable television reception service in the
Township. This fee shall be payable on or before the 25th day of January of
each year accompanied by a statement of receipts. Franchisee shall provide
a yearly audit to the Township when completed by the franchisee auditor.
§ A537-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted herein to the franchisee for the provision of video
services shall apply to that portion of the Township that currently or in the
future receives franchised telecommunications services from the Warwick
Valley Telephone Company as an incumbent local exchange or that:
A. In the future receives franchised telecommunications services from the
Warwick Valley Telephone Company as a competitive local exchange
carrier; and
B. Is within 4,100 feet, as measured by run of wire, from either Warwick
Valley Telephone Company central office or remote office switching
facilities, or is within 4,100 feet, as measured by run of wire, from a
§ A537-1 VIDEO SERVICES § A537-6
A537:965
§ A537-7. Implementation.
The construction timetable shall commence on a date when the franchisee
has received in writing a certificate of approval from the Board (the
"approval date"). The franchisee shall meet the following construction
timetable for provision of service:
§ A537-8. Extension of system.
Any additional extension of the system which is necessary in the future
but not contemplated in the application shall be made in accordance with
the rules and regulations set by the Board and complied with by Warwick
Valley Telephone Company in the provision of its regulated communications
services. Any such extension shall be governed by the provisions of this
ordinance.
§ A537-9. Restoration.
In the event that the franchisee or its agent shall disturb any pavement,
street surfaces, sidewalk, driveways, or other surfaces in the natural
topography, the franchisee shall, at its sole expense, restore and replace
such places or things so disturbed in as good condition as existed prior to
the commencement of said work. Said restoration shall be to the extent
of the damage done in the area specifically concerned which has been
disturbed.
next generation digital loop carrier that is installed on the Warwick
Valley Telephone Company network; and
C. Hometown Online obtains approval from Warwick Valley Telephone
Company to serve via the use of Warwick Valley Telephone Company's
network.
A. By no later than two years from the approval date, 100% of that portion
of the franchise territory identified as "Area A" in Exhibit 1220 annexed
to this ordinance; and
B. By no later than three years from the approval date, 100% of that
portion of the franchise territory identified as "Area B" in Exhibit 1
annexed to this ordinance; provided that the franchisee reserves the
right to suspend the construction timetable with respect to Area B if the
franchisee does not experience a significant subscription rate on or
before two years from the approval date. A "significant subscription
rate" means that 30% or more of all potential subscribers have
subscribed to franchisee's video services. The term "potential
subscribers" means the aggregate number of access lines deployed by
the Warwick Valley Telephone Company in the areas where the
franchisee provides or has the capability to provide cable service.
220. Editor's Note: Exhibit 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ A537-6 WEST MILFORD CODE § A537-10
A537:966
§ A537-10. Relocation.
If at any time during the period of this consent the Township shall alter or
change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place, the franchisee,
upon reasonable notice by the Township, shall remove, re-lay and relocate
its equipment in accordance with existing procedures adhered to in the
provision of existing communications services provided by Warwick Valley
Telephone Company.
§ A537-11. Temporary removal of cables.
The franchisee, shall, upon request of the Township, at the franchise's
expense, temporarily raise, lower or remove its lines in order to facilitate
the moving of buildings or machinery or other like circumstances in
accordance with existing procedures adhered to in the provision of existing
communications services provided by Warwick Valley Telephone Company.
§ A537-12. Removal or trimming of trees.
During exercise of its rights and privileges under this franchise, the
franchisee shall have the authority to trim trees upon the overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the Township so as to prevent
the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and
cables of the franchisee. Such trimming will be conducted by Warwick
Valley Telephone in accordance with existing procedures adhered to in
the provision of existing communications services provided by Warwick
Valley Telephone Company. Any work to be performed under this provision
requires 48 hours' notice to the Township unless the matter is an
emergency.
§ A537-13. Local office.
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the franchisee
shall maintain a local business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigating and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Such local business office
shall be open during the hours set by Warwick Valley Telephone Company
and in no event less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
A telephone number, local to the Township, shall be provided by the
franchisee.
§ A537-14. Local origination programming.
Franchisee will provide local origination programming during the term of
this agreement and any extensions of it on one or more channels. Such
channels shall be bundled with basic cable services. The franchisee will
acquire the necessary equipment so that 1/2 inch VHS tapes may be aired in
order to provide such programming over any such channels during the term
of this agreement and any extensions of it. The franchisee retains discretion
over whether to air tapes submitted to it.
§ A537-10 VIDEO SERVICES § A537-15
A537:967
§ A537-15. Local programming.
The Township recognizes that it is not permitted to require any particular
programming. However, the Township recommends in the strongest term
possible without requiring same, that franchisee provide additional local
programming, including local news and sporting events.
§ A537-16. Public emergency broadcast capabilities.
Franchisee will make best efforts to provide public emergency broadcast
capabilities whereby notification of a public emergency deemed to have an
effect on the Township and its residents may be superimposed on or scrolled
cross all channels with details pertaining to said public emergency to be
conveyed visually and/or audibly on a predesignated channel. Franchisee
shall be on-line with this capability no later than 90 days after the State of
New Jersey's proposed emergency alert system is operational.
§ A537-17. Broadcast of governmental meetings upon request.
A. Franchisee shall broadcast within 48 hours West Milford Township
Council meetings, West Milford Township Planning Board meetings,
West Milford Township Zoning Board of Adjustment meetings, West
Milford Township Board of Education meetings, and meetings of other
West Milford Township governmental bodies upon request any of those
above listed governmental bodies upon reasonable prior notice to
franchisee. Notice at least five days prior notice but not more than one
year prior to the meeting shall be considered reasonable prior notice.
Franchisee shall use its best efforts to broadcast such meetings within
48 hours and shall under any circumstances broadcast such meetings
within 96 hours of the completion of such meetings. In addition,
franchisee shall provide an employee or agent to tape such meetings, or
in the alternative, provide necessary equipment, training and advisory
personnel to tape such meetings. Franchisee may coordinate use of
personnel and facilities with others also under an obligation to cover
such meeting in complying with its obligation under this section. The
franchisee shall provide the following basic cable service, including
service drop and one residential gateway which can simultaneously
serve up to three televisions, to the following public facilities to the
extent such facility is within an area receiving service from franchisee
and is government owned:
(1) Hillcrest School.
B. Franchisee shall, upon written request, also provide such service on the
same terms to the Town Hall, Public Library and any other public school
at such time as the areas where franchisee provides video service under
this consent includes such buildings.
§ A537-15 WEST MILFORD CODE § A537-18
A537:968
§ A537-18. Most favored municipality.
Within 18 months of the final adoption of this ordinance, should franchisee
enter a franchise agreement with any municipality within New Jersey and
the other municipality acquires more favorable terms than West Milford
Township, then the franchisee shall offer the same terms to West Milford
Township.
§ A537-19. Meetings with general public and Township Cable
Oversight Committee.
Franchisee shall appear at a public meeting of the West Milford Township
Council at least one time per year if requested by the Township Council in
writing. At this meeting, franchisee shall report on the past year's service
record. This meeting shall be open to the public and shall provide an
opportunity for the public to comment on or question the performance
of franchisee. Franchisee shall further agree to meet with the Township
Cable Oversight Committee at least one time per year, on no less than 14
days' notice, to discuss any and all issues relating to video service of the
franchisee being provided to the Township and its residents.
§ A537-20. Municipal complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the municipality, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b). All complaints shall
be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5.
§ A537-21. Bond or surety.
To the extent required by N.J.S.A. 48:5A-28(d), franchisee shall maintain
a bond or commitment in the penal sum of not less than $25,000 for the
faithful performance of all undertakings by the franchisee represented in
the application.
§ A537-22. Insurance.
A. The franchisee agrees to maintain and keep in full force and effect at its
sole expense at all times during the term of this consent, upon approval
by the Board of Public Utilities, liability insurance naming the Township
of West Milford as an additional insured and insuring against loss by
any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand as follows:
(1) Comprehensive general liability insurance for bodily injury or
property damage with a $500,000 combined single limit of liability
per occurrence; and
(2) Automobile insurance liability for bodily injury or property damage
in the amount of a $500,000 combined single limit of liability,
including coverage for hired and nonownership automobile liability.
B. Said liability insurance shall also include insurance in compliance with
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-28(f). Franchisee shall also maintain all workers'
§ A537-18 VIDEO SERVICES § A537-22
A537:969
§ A537-23. Township remedies.
In the event that franchisee breaches its responsibilities herein, the
Township reserves the right to seek redress administratively through the
Board of Public Utilities or at law in a court of competent jurisdiction,
as permitted by law. In the event the franchisee fails to complete the
implementation and the extension of service in the Township as set forth
herein, then the Township shall have the right to apply to the Board of
Public Utilities for relief, including, without limitation, revocation of the
franchise.
§ A537-24. Incorporation of application.
Any portion of the application, which is in conflict with the provisions of the
Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq., the Cable Communications
Policy Act, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., the Communications Act of 1934, as
amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and/or FCC Rules and
Regulations, 76.1 et seq., as amended, or any other applicable law, is
not to be construed as effective under the terms of this ordinance. All
of the commitments and statements contained in the application and any
amendment thereto submitted in writing to the Township by the franchisee,
except as modified herein, are binding upon the franchisee as terms and
conditions of this consent. The application and any other relevant writings
submitted by the franchisee shall be annexed hereto and made a part hereof
by reference as long as they do not conflict with state or federal law.
§ A537-25. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
or federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
§ A537-26. Amended or successor statutes and regulations.
Any reference in any provision of this ordinance to any federal or state
statute or regulation shall be deemed to be a reference to such statute or
regulation as it may be amended in the future and to any successor statute
or regulation governing the same subject matter.
§ A537-27. Effective date.
This municipal consent shall become effective as of the date upon which
the Township received written notification that franchisee accepts the
provisions of this ordinance, after adoption by the Township Council.
compensation and employer's liability insurance that is required by
statute.
§ A537-22 WEST MILFORD CODE § A537-28
A537:970
§ A537-28. Senior rates.
The franchisee shall provide, when permitted by law, reduced rates for basic
cable service to senior citizen residents of the Township.
§ A537-29. Rates regulation authority.
In the event rate regulation legislation is changed in the future to provide
for regulation by the Township, the Township shall be the rate regulation
authority.
§ A537-30. Filing of construction plans with Township.
The franchisee shall cause all construction plans related to work involving
Township property or rights-of-way to be filed with the Township Engineer
and Township Administrator at least 10 days prior to the commencement of
the work. Technical specifications should conform to Board and New Jersey
Office of Cable Television guidelines for picture quality and dependability.
Nothing herein shall eliminate the requirements of the franchisee to comply
with all federal, state and local statutes, ordinances, or regulations.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2007-026 10-10-2007 Hiring of attorneys for
legal services
Ch. 31, Art. I
2007-027 10-10-2007 Acquisition of property NCM
2007-028 11-7-2007 Subdivision of land and
site plan review
amendment
Ch. 470
2007-029 11-7-2007 Subdivision of land and
site plan review
amendment
Ch. 470
2007-030 12-5-2007 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
2007-031 Dissolution of Sewerage
Authority
Tabled
2007-032 12-5-2007 Salaries NCM
2008-001 1-23-2008 Acceptance of easement NCM
2008-002 2-13-2008 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 158
§ A537-28 VIDEO SERVICES § DL-1
A537:971
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2008-003 3-5-2008 Acceptance of easement NCM
2008-004 3-5-2008 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 15
2008-005 3-26-2008 Fees and costs
amendment
Ch. 135
2008-006 3-26-2008 Subdivision of land and
site plan review
amendment
Ch. 470
2008-007 3-26-2008 Fire insurance claims Ch. 151
2008-008 Traffic amendment Not adopted
2008-009 3-26-2008 Numbering of buildings
amendment
Ch. 90
2008-010 3-26-2008 Taxicabs, autocabs and
limousines
Ch. 353
2008-011 Administration of
government amendment
Defeated
2008-012 3-26-2008 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 15
2008-013 3-26-2008 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 152
2008-014 4-9-2008 Salaries NCM
2008-015 4-9-2008 Loitering repealer Ch. 212, reference
only
2008-016 4-9-2008 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 15
2008-017 7-9-2008 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 15
2008-018 5-7-2008 Land development fees
amendment
Ch. 414
2008-019 5-7-2008 Uniform constructions
codes amendment
Ch. 110
2008-020 5-7-2008 Fees and costs
amendment
Ch. 135
2008-021 Tabled
2008-022 5-7-2008 Bond amendment NCM
2008-023 5-7-2008 Subdivision of land and
site plan review
amendment
Ch. 470
§ DL-1 WEST MILFORD CODE § DL-1
A537:972
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2008-024 5-28-2008 Fees and costs
amendment; solid waste;
recycling: compost site
amendment
Chs. 135; 321, Art.
IV
2008-025 5-28-2008 Capital account balance
transfer
NCM
2008-026 5-28-2008 Capital account balance
transfer
NCM
2008-027 5-28-2008 Capital account balance
cancellation
NCM
2008-028 6-4-2008 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 15
2008-029 Right-of-way vacation Defeated
2008-030 5-28-2008 Salaries NCM
2008-031 7-9-2008 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 15
2008-032 7-9-2008 Street acceptance NCM
2008-033 7-9-2008 Property acquisition NCM
2008-034 7-9-2008 Property acquisition NCM
2008-035 Tabled
2008-036 8-6-2008 Fees and costs
amendment
Ch. 135
2008-037 8-6-2008 Subdivision of land and
site plan review
amendment
Ch. 470
2008-038 8-20-2008 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2008-039 8-20-2008 2008 budget examination NCM
2008-040 9-3-2008 Bond NCM
2008-041 9-3-2008 Appropriation NCM
2008-042 Noise Tabled
2008-043 9-3-2008 Salaries NCM
2008-044 9-3-2008 Street acceptance NCM
2008-045 9-24-2008 Bond NCM
2008-046 Number not used
2008-047 10-8-2008 Defined Contribution
Retirement Program
Ch. 38, Art. I
§ DL-1 VIDEO SERVICES § DL-1
A537:973
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2008-048 10-8-2008 Subdivision of land and
site plan review
amendment
Ch. 470
2008-049 10-8-2008 Bond NCM
2008-050 12-3-2008 Individual subsurface
sewage disposal system
management
Ch. 300, Art. VI
2009-001 2-11-2009 Personnel amendment Ch. 33
2009-002 Salaries Defeated
2009-003 3-4-2009 Street acceptance NCM
2009-004 Certificate of habitability Defeated
2009-005 5-6-2009 Land development fees
amendment
Ch. 414
2009-006 5-6-2009 Personnel amendment Ch. 33
2009-007 5-6-2009 Land development fees
amendment; land use
procedures amendment;
subdivision and site plan
review amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 414; 420;
470; 500
2009-008 5-6-2009 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2009-009 5-27-2009 Utility easement
agreement
NCM
2009-010 6-24-2009 Subdivision of land and
site plan review
amendment
Ch. 470
2009-011 6-24-2009 Land development fees
amendment
Ch. 414
2009-012 7-22-2009 Charitable clothing bins Ch. 101
2009-013 8-26-2009 Bicycles, skates,
skateboards and
scooters: Mt. Laurel
Skate Park
Ch. 84, Art. II
2009-014 Number not used
2009-015 7-22-2009 Street vacation NCM
2009-016 7-22-2009 Land development fees
amendment; land use
procedures amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 414; 420;
500
2009-017 8-26-2009 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 WEST MILFORD CODE § DL-1
A537:974
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2009-018 8-26-2009 Appropriation NCM
2009-019 8-26-2009 Individual subsurface
sewage disposal system
management amendment
Ch. 300, Art. VI
2009-020 8-26-2009 Salaries NCM
2009-021 9-23-2009 Numbering of buildings
amendment
Ch. 90
2009-022 9-23-2009 Application of fertilizers
amendment
Ch. 138
2009-023 9-23-2009 Sex offender residency
repealer
Ch. 305, reference
only
2009-024 9-23-2009 Acquisition of property NCM
2009-025 10-21-2009 Street vacation NCM
2009-026 12-16-2009 Licensing and regulation
of dogs and cats
amendment; feral cat
trap-neuter-return
program
Ch. 71, Arts. I and
IV
2009-027 12-16-2009 Fees and costs
amendment; compost
site amendment
Chs. 135; 321, Art.
IV
2009-028 12-16-2009 Easement acceptance NCM
2009-029 12-16-2009 Street acceptance NCM
2009-030 12-16-2009 Fees and costs
amendment; towing and
storage of vehicles
amendment
Chs. 135; 366
2009-031 12-16-2009 Property lease
agreement
NCM
2009-032 12-16-2009 Acquisition of property NCM
2009-033 12-16-2009 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 15
2010-001 3-17-2010 Dealers in secondhand
precious metals
Ch. 297
2010-002 4-21-2010 Fees and costs
amendment
Ch. 135
2010-003 6-16-2010 Private storm drain inlet
retrofitting
Ch. 325, Art. III
2010-004 6-16-2010 Refuse containers and
dumpsters
Ch. 321, Art. V
§ DL-1 VIDEO SERVICES § DL-1
A537:975
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2010-005 6-16-2010 Fees and costs
amendment; land
development fees
amendment
Chs. 135; 414
2010-006 6-16-2010 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2010-007 8-18-2010 Sidewalk easement NCM
2010-008 9-15-2010 Street acceptance NCM
2010-009 10-6-2010 Drainage easement
acceptance
NCM
2010-010 10-6-2010 Drainage easement
acceptance
NCM
2010-011 10-20-2010 Snow and ice removal
from sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 332, Art. V
2010-012 Garbage and rubbish
collection amendment
Defeated
2010-013 10-20-2010 Parks, recreation areas
and open spaces
amendment
Ch. 256
2010-014 11-10-2010 Cable television
franchise
Ch. A520
2010-015 12-15-2010 Fees and costs
amendment
Ch. 135
2010-016 12-15-2010 Bond NCM
2010-017 12-15-2010 Appropriation NCM
2010-018 12-15-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 500
2011-001 3-16-2011 Emergency appropriation NCM
2011-002 4-20-2011 Garbage and rubbish
collection amendment
Ch. 321, Art. I
2011-003 4-20-2011 Acceptance of easement NCM
2011-004 4-20-2011 Bond NCM
2011-005 4-20-2011 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2011-006 4-20-2011 Waterfowl Ch. 71, Art. V
2011-007 5-18-2011 Bond NCM
2011-008 5-18-2011 Acquisition of property NCM
2011-009 5-18-2011 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 15
2011-010 5-18-2011 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 15
§ DL-1 WEST MILFORD CODE § DL-1
A537:976
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2011-011 5-18-2011 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 15
2011-012 5-18-2011 Rules of Council
amendment
Ch. 42
2011-013 7-20-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 500
2011-014 7-20-2011 Appropriation NCM
2011-015 8-17-2011 Bond NCM
2011-016 12-7-2011 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 110
2011-017 12-7-2011 Individual subsurface
sewage disposal systems
amendment
Ch. 300, Art. I
2011-018 10-19-2011 Consent for private
water system
NCM
2011-019 11-9-2011 Appropriation NCM
2011-020 11-9-2011 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 152
2011-021 11-9-2011 Acquisition of property NCM
2012-001 2-22-2012 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 15
2012-002 2-22-2012 Traffic amendment Ch. 10
2012-003 3-21-2012 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 15
2012-004 3-21-2012 Acceptance of easement NCM
2012-005 4-18-2012 Fees and costs
amendment
Ch. 135
2012-006 4-18-2012 Traffic amendment Ch. 10
2012-007 4-18-2012 Conveyance of property NCM
2012-008 6-27-2012 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 15
2012-009 6-27-2012 Open Space, Recreation,
and Farmland and
Historic Preservation
Trust Fund amendment
Ch. 239
2012-010 6-27-2012 Appropriation NCM
2012-011 6-27-2012 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2012-012 7-18-2012 Subdivision of land and
site plan review
amendment
Ch. 470
§ DL-1 VIDEO SERVICES § DL-1
A537:977
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012-013 7-18-2012 Transfer of property NCM
2012-014 Withdrawn
2012-015 8-15-2012 Bond NCM
2012-016 9-19-2012 Salaries NCM
2012-017 9-19-2012 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 15
2012-018 12-19-2012 Street acceptance NCM
2012-019 12-19-2012 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 15
2013-001 2-20-2013 Police services charges
amendment
Ch. 271
2013-002 3-6-2013 Fees and costs
amendment
Ch. 135
2013-003 2-20-2013 Salaries NCM
2013-004 2-20-2013 Salaries NCM
2013-005 3-6-2013 Fees and costs
amendment
Ch. 135
2013-006 3-20-2013 Street acceptance NCM
2013-007 3-20-2013 Traffic amendment Ch. 10
2013-008 4-17-2013 Acceptance of easement NCM
2013-009 4-17-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2013-010 4-17-2013 Bond NCM
2013-011 5-22-2013 Land development fees
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 414; 500
2013-012 6-5-2013 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 15
2013-013 6-19-2013 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 15
2013-014 6-19-2013 Grant of conservation
restriction/easement
NCM
2013-015 9-18-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 500
2013-016 9-18-2013 Chicken hens on less
than one acre of land
Ch. 71, Art. VI
2013-017 8-21-2013 Street vacation NCM
2013-018 9-18-2013 Land development fees
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 414; 500
§ DL-1 WEST MILFORD CODE § DL-1
A537:978
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2013-019 9-18-2013 Subdivision of land and
site plan review
amendment
Ch. 470
2013-020 10-23-2013 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 15
2013-021 10-23-2013 Right-of-way vacation NCM
2013-022 11-13-2013 Fees and costs
amendment
Ch. 135
2013-023 11-13-2013 Chicken hens on less
than one acre of land
amendment
Ch. 71, Art. VI
2014-001 2-19-2014 Open Space, Recreation,
and Farmland and
Historic Preservation
Trust Fund amendment
Ch. 239
2014-002 4-23-2014 Grant of conservation
restriction/easement
NCM
2014-003 5-21-2014 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 15
2014-004 6-4-2014 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2014-005 6-25-2014 Bond NCM
2014-006 6-25-2014 Bond NCM
2014-007 9-17-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 500
2014-008 Not adopted
2014-009 10-22-2014 Execution of deed for
right-of-way
NCM
2014-010 11-12-2014 Garage sales amendment Ch. 174
2014-011 Not adopted
2014-012 12-17-2014 Salaries NCM
2015-001 2-18-2015 Noise amendment Ch. 226
2015-002 3-18-2015 Fees and costs
amendment
Ch. 135
2015-003 4-22-2015 Traffic amendment Ch. 10
2015-004 4-22-2015 Salaries NCM
2015-005 4-22-2015 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2015-006 Not adopted
2015-007 6-17-2015 Bond NCM
2015-008 6-30-2015 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 VIDEO SERVICES § DL-1
A537:979
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2015-009 7-15-2015 Fees and costs
amendment
Ch. 135
2015-010 8-12-2015 Games of chance
amendment
Ch. 169
2015-011 8-12-2015 Exchange of certain
property with City of
Newark
NCM
2015-012 9-2-2015 Fees and costs
amendment
Ch. 135
2015-013 9-2-2015 Bond NCM
2015-014 10-21-2015 Public, educational and
governmental television
station policies and
procedures
Ch. A520, Art. II
2015-015 10-21-2015 Fees and costs
amendment
Ch. 135
2015-016 Not adopted
2015-017 12-16-2015 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 15
2016-001 2-17-2016 Noise amendment Ch. 226
2016-002 2-17-2016 Fees and costs
amendment
Ch. 135
2016-003 2-17-2016 Appropriation NCM
2016-004 3-16-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 500
2016-005 3-16-2016 Appropriation NCM
2016-006 4-20-2016 Salaries NCM
2016-007 4-20-2016 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2016-008 5-4-2016 Bond NCM
2016-009 6-22-2016 Traffic amendment Ch. 10
2016-010 Not adopted
2016-011 7-13-2016 Traffic amendment Ch. 10
2016-012 9-21-2016 Street vacation NCM
2016-013 10-19-2016 Salaries NCM
2016-014 10-19-2016 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 15
2016-015 10-19-2016 Salaries NCM
2016-016 10-19-2016 Salaries NCM
2017-001 Not adopted
§ DL-1 WEST MILFORD CODE § DL-1
A537:980
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2017-002 2-15-2017 Street acceptance NCM
2017-003 2-15-2017 Street closure NCM
2017-004 2-15-2017 Fees and costs
amendment
Ch. 135
2017-005 2-15-2017 Garage sales amendment Ch. 174
2017-006 4-5-2017 Bond NCM
2017-007 4-19-2017 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2017-008 8-16-2017 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing; regulations
amendment; fees and
costs amendment
Ch. 63, Art. III;
Ch. 135
2017-009 8-16-2017 Approval of agreement;
authorization of ballot
proposal
NCM
2017-010 9-6-2017 Peddling and soliciting:
charitable roadway
solicitations
Ch. 263, Art. III
2017-011 12-06-2017 Dissolution of West
Milford Municipal Utility
Authority
NCM
2017-012 9-20-2017 Fees and costs
amendment
Ch. 135
2017-013 10-18-2017 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 285
2017-014 12-20-2017 Sewer Franchise
Expansion
NCM
2017-015 Not adopted
2017-016 12-20-2017 Administration of
Government Amendment
Ch. 15
2017-017 12-20-2017 Subdivision of land site
plan review amendment
Ch. 470
2017-018 12-20-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 500
2018-001 2-21-2018 Amusements: Coin-
Operated Amusement
Devices Repealer; Fees
and Costs Amendment;
Poolrooms and Billiard
Rooms Repealer
Ch. 67, Art. I; Ch.
135; Ch. 274
2018-002 3-26-2018 Fees and Costs
Amendment
Ch. 135
§ DL-1 VIDEO SERVICES § DL-1
A537:981
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018-003 4-18-2018 Alcoholic Beverages:
Licensing; Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 63, Art. II
2018-004 4-18-2018 Bond NCM
2018-005 6-13-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM
2018-006 9-19-2018 Salaries NCM
2018-007 8-15-2018 Bond NCM
2018-008 9-5-2018 Peddling and Soliciting:
Restrictions
Ch. 263, Art. IV
2018-009 11-7-2018 Traffic Amendment Ch. 10
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
2018-010 12-5-2018 Alcoholic
Beverages:
Licensing;
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 63, Art.
II, footnote
only
14
2019-001 3-6-2019 Administration of
Government
Amendment
Ch. 15 14
2019-002 3-6-2019 Fees and Costs
Amendment
Ch. 135 14
2019-003 3-20-2019 Salaries NCM 14
2019-004 4-24-2019 Bond NCM 14
2019-005 4-24-2019 Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 10 14
2019-006 Not adopted 14
2019-007 5-1-2019 Alcoholic
Beverages:
Licensing;
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 63, Art. II 14
2019-008 5-1-2019 Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 10 14
2019-009 6-12-2019 Bond NCM 14
2019-010 6-12-2019 Exceed Budget;
Cap Bank
NCM 14
§ DL-1 WEST MILFORD CODE § DL-1
A537:982
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
2019-011 6-12-2019 Renaming of
Athletic Field
NCM 14
2019-012 7-10-2019 Street Acceptance NCM 14
2019-013 8-14-2019 Bond NCM 14
2019-014 9-18-2019 Special
Assessment for
Repayment of
Loan Monies
NCM 14
2019-015 9-18-2019 Special
Assessment for
Repayment of
Loan Monies
NCM 14
2019-016 9-18-2019 Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 10 14
2019-017 10-16-2019 Administration of
Government
Amendment
Ch. 15 14
2019-018 11-6-2019 Fees and Costs
Amendment
Ch. 135 14
2019-019 11-6-2019 Personnel
Amendment
Ch. 33 14
§ DL-1 VIDEO SERVICES § DL-1
A537:983