Part I, Adminstrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
General Penalty
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 3-1 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 1-1. Maximum penalty; repeated offenses.
§ 1-2. Separate violations.
Except as otherwise provided, every day in which a violation of any
provision of this chapter, or any other chapter of this Code, or any other
ordinance of the Township exists shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 1-3. Appropriateness of maximum penalty.
The maximum penalty stated in this article is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for every violation. Any lesser penalty, including a
nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a particular
case or violation.
A. Maximum penalty. For violation of any provision of this Code, or any
other ordinance of the Township where no specific penalty is provided,
the maximum penalty, upon conviction, shall be a fine not exceeding the
maximum fine permitted under New Jersey State law for the violation of
a municipal ordinance, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:49-5 or
imprisonment for a period not exceeding the maximum time permitted
under New Jersey State law for the violation of a municipal ordinance,
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, or both. In any case where the
penalty is an amount greater than $1,250 upon an owner for violations
of housing or zoning codes, the owner shall be provided a thirty-day
period in which the owner shall be afforded the opportunity to cure or
abate the condition and shall also be afforded an opportunity for a
hearing before a court of competent jurisdiction for an independent
determination concerning the violation. Subsequent to the expiration of
the thirty-day period, a fine greater than $1,250 may be imposed if a
court has not determined otherwise or, upon reinspection of the
property, it is determined that the abatement has not been substantially
completed. [Amended 6-10-2009 by Ord. No. 15-2009; 10-24-2018
by Ord. No. 15-2018]
B. The additional fine for repeated offenses established by N.J.S.A. 40:49-5
be and the same is hereby waived, and the penalty to be imposed for
repeated violation of Township ordinances shall be determined in the
sound discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 1-2003]
§ 1-4. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of Wall of a
general and permanent nature adopted by the Township Committee of the
Township of Wall, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and
sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1
through 139 and Chapters 141 through 222, together with an Appendix,
are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the
Township of Wall," hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
Chapter 140, "Land Use and Development Regulations," will be codified and
adopted by a separate ordinance.1
§ 1-5. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede the 1977 Revised General
Ordinances and all other general and permanent ordinances enacted prior
to the enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are hereinafter
expressly saved from repeal or continued in force.
§ 1-6. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-7. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Township Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Township
of Wall by impressing thereon the Seal of the Township, as provided by law,
and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of the
Township, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-8. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of Wall" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
1. Editor's Note: Chapter 140, Land Use and Development Regulations, was adopted
12-10-2003 by Ord. No. 38-2003. Said ordinance was codified as Ch. 139, Land Use and
Development Regulations: General Provisions, and included in a separate volume along
with Ch. 140.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:5
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-9. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Township of Wall, pursuant to law, shall cause this Adopting
Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be
maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public at all times
during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of this Adopting
Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-10. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in the Clerk's office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-11. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased
from the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a
fee to be set by the Township Committee. The Clerk may also arrange for
procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-12. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township
of Wall to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or any
part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more of
the following: a fine of not more than $1,250, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-13. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
§ 1-8 WALL CODE § 1-13
1:6
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-14. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-15. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Township of Wall which is not
in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full
force and effect.
§ 1-16. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-15 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to December 11, 2002.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Township's indebtedness.
§ 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:7
§ 1-17. Definitions.
For the purpose of the Code, and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require:
CLERK or TOWNSHIP CLERK — The Municipal Clerk duly appointed
pursuant to law.
DEPARTMENT — An organizational unit of the government established
or designated by ordinance or the Code as a department, together with
any agency or instrumentality of the government assigned to such
organizational unit by the Township Committee.
LICENSED — Licensed in accordance with the appropriate section or
chapter of the Code.
MONTH — A calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided.
OATH — Shall be construed to include an affirmation where an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath. In such cases the words "swear" and
"sworn" shall be construed to be equivalent to the words "affirm" and
"affirmed."
OCCUPANT — See "tenant."
OFFICER or OFFICIAL AND THE TITLE OF AN OFFICER OR OFFICIAL —
Shall be construed as if the words "of the Township of Wall" followed it.
ORDINANCE — Any act of local legislation heretofore or hereafter adopted,
and including the Code, so long as it is adopted by the procedure required
for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it remains in force and effect
pursuant to law.
OWNER — Any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in
partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part
of a building or land.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Land Use and Development
Regulations, Schedule or Zoning Map.
M. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees, or a Length of Service Award Program for
volunteer first aid squad members.
§ 1-16 WALL CODE § 1-17
1:8
PERSON — Any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint ventures,
societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Goods and chattels, rights and credits, moneys
and effects, evidences of debt, chooses in action and all written instruments
by which any right to, interest in, or lien or encumbrances upon, property
or any debt or financial obligation as created, acknowledged, evidenced,
transferred, discharged or defeated, in whole or in part, and every thing,
except real property as herein defined, which may be the subject of
ownership.
PRECEDING and FOLLOWING — Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY — Real and personal property.
PUBLIC GROUNDS, PUBLIC PLACE or PUBLIC PLACES — Shall severally
be construed to mean any and every public ground, public park or other
public place within the Township.
REAL PROPERTY — Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments, all rights
thereto and interests therein.
SIDEWALK — Any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.
STREET — Includes a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk, and crosswalk, and every class of
road, square, place or municipal parking area used by the general public.
TENANT or OCCUPANT — Applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Wall in the County of Monmouth and State
of New Jersey.
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE or COMMITTEE — The Township Committee of
the Township of Wall, Monmouth County, New Jersey.
WEEK — Seven days.
YEAR — A calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-18. Construction.
For the purposes of the Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
A. The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future,
the present.
B. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:9
§ 1-19. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
C. The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
D. "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
E. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first and including the last day, and if the last day be a
Sunday, a legal holiday, or a day on which the offices of the Township
are closed, that day shall be excluded.
F. "Writing" and "written" shall include printing, typewriting and any
other mode of communication using paper or similar material which is
in general use, as well as legible handwriting.
G. "And" may be construed as meaning "or," and "or" as "and," if the sense
requires and indicates such meaning.
H. Whenever a specific time is used in the Code, it shall mean the
prevailing and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey
during any day in any year.
I. Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in the Code shall
be deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as amended,
whether or not such designation is included in the citation.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Township Committee that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following revisions have been made throughout the
Code:
(1) Statutory references have been amended to consistently use the
N.J.S.A. citation form and to update repealed or superseded
citations as appropriate by changing them or adding them to the
text or footnoting the new statute.
(2) References to the "Revised General Ordinances" or to "this
Revision" have been changed to the "Code of the Township of Wall"
or "this Code."
(3) The references to the Department of Environmental Protection and
Energy (DEPE) have been changed to Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP).
§ 1-18 WALL CODE § 1-19
1:10
ARTICLE III
Returned Check Fee
[Adopted 4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 13-2005]
§ 1-20. Returned check service fee.
The Chief Financial Officer or his/her designee shall collect a fee in the
amount of $20 from any payer of fees, taxes or other charges paid pursuant
to any ordinance of the Township of Wall whose check to the Township of
Wall has been returned unpaid. Said fee shall be collected for any check
returned whether by stop payment, insufficient funds, uncollected funds or
other reason. Said fees shall be collected for any returned check tendered
to any department of the Township of Wall.
§ 1-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:11
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Court — See Ch. 14. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 42.
§ 2-1. Township Administrator.
A. Findings. The business transacted by the Township Committee has
increased greatly in recent years in both volume and complexity; and
the Township because of its continued and expected growth should
coordinate the activities of the various departments to the end of
efficient and economical operation thereof; and the residents, citizens
and taxpayers of the Township can best be served by the creation of the
position of Township Administrator; and the Township Committee
deems it desirable and necessary to create the position of Township
Administrator in order to assist the Township Committee and its
members in the continued efficient operation of the Township.
B. Creation. The office of Township Administrator is hereby created and
established in and for the Township pursuant to the provisions of this
section and the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-136 et seq.
C. Appointment; term. The Township Administrator shall be appointed by
the Township Committee. The term of office of the Township
Administrator shall be at the pleasure of the Township Committee.
D. Compensation. The Township Administrator shall receive such
compensation as shall be fixed by the General Salary Ordinance of the
Township.
E. Removal from office. The Township Administrator may be removed by a
2/3 vote of the Township Committee. The resolution of removal shall
become effective pursuant to state law.
F. Qualifications and requirements.
(1) The Township Administrator shall be chosen by the Township
Committee on the basis of his executive, administrative and
technical qualifications, with special reference to education,
training and experience in local government.
(2) At the time of appointment, the Township Administrator need not
be a resident of the Township or state, but must become a resident
of the Township within six months of the date of appointment and
must remain a resident of the Township during his term of
appointment as Township Administrator.
§ 1-20 WALL CODE § 2-1
1:12
(3) The Township Committee may grant the Township Administrator
such six-month extensions as are necessary to become a resident of
the Township in cases where exceptional circumstances have
caused a substantial hardship on the Township Administrator.
Substantial hardship includes but is not limited to an illness of the
Township Administrator or family member or economic conditions
which have an impact on the real estate market. [Added
4-24-2013 by Ord. No. 10-2013]
G. Duties and responsibilities.
(1) The Township Administrator shall be the chief administrative
officer of the Township and shall be responsible to the Township
Committee for the proper and efficient administration of the
business affairs of the Township and shall have such powers and
perform such duties other than those required by law to be
exercised by the Township Committee or by another officer, board,
body, or department of the Township.
(2) The Township Administrator shall supervise and direct the
administration of all departments, officers, employees and agents
of the Township, and shall issue any regulations or directives
necessary to that end unless otherwise provided by law.
(3) The Township Administrator shall serve as the personnel officer of
the Township and shall be responsible for the conduct of interviews
with all prospective applicants for either employment or promotion
and shall make recommendations to be acted upon by the Township
Committee with regard to appointment and promotions. The
Township Administrator shall exercise all appropriate authority of
the Township when dealing with personnel matters, including
disciplinary actions with reference to Township employees.
(4) The Township Administrator shall be responsible for the
preparation of the payroll.
(5) The Township Administrator shall be the purchasing agent of the
Township with authority to purchase as contracting agent of the
Township of Wall and in accordance with the provisions of the 1971
Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq., all materials,
supplies, services and equipment required to be purchased on
behalf of the Township and the various heads of departments and
other offices of the Township. The Township Administrator as
purchasing agent shall prepare with the assistance of the
appropriate Township officials the public advertisements for bids
and bid specifications and shall receive the bids at the time
appointed therefor in the notice to bidders and shall review the
bids and make recommendations with regard thereto to the
Township Committee.
§ 2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-1
1:13
§ 2-2. Township Auditor.
There is hereby created and established in the Township the position of
Township auditor pursuant to the provisions of this section and the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-9 and 40A:5-4.
H. Additional responsibilities. The Township Administrator shall have the
following further responsibilities:
(1) Direct the finances, the preparation of the budget and the
compilation and analysis of budget costs and estimates. After the
adoption of the budget, the Township Administrator shall be
responsible for the administration and implementation of all
programs contained therein.
(2) Attend all executive, special and regular meetings of the Township
Committee.
(3) Prepare agenda for and arrange meetings of the Township
Committee, implement actions of the Mayor and Township
Committee by correspondence, review of minutes, personal
conferences and administrative directions.
(4) Study the governmental and administrative operations and needs
of the Township government as he may deem appropriate and
prepare and recommend to the Township Committee the necessary
and desirable plans and programs with respect thereto.
(5) Perform such other duties as may be specifically assigned by
resolution or ordinance by the Mayor and members of the Township
Committee.
I. Infringement. The duties and responsibilities of the Township
Administrator shall be such that they shall not infringe upon such duties
and responsibilities as are assigned by law to other Township officials.
A. Term. The Township auditor shall be appointed by the Township
Committee for a term of one year from January 1 in the year of his
appointment until his successor has been appointed and has qualified.
B. Qualifications. The person to be appointed to the position of Township
auditor shall hold a license as a registered municipal accountant of the
State of New Jersey.
C. Functions and duties. The Township auditor shall make the annual audit
and shall have the powers and perform the duties prescribed by law and
the rules and regulations of the Division of Local Finance in the
Department of Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey. He shall
also perform such duties and render such services as may from time to
time be requested of him by the Township Administrator, the Chief
Financial Officer or the Township Committee.
§ 2-1 WALL CODE § 2-2
1:14
§ 2-3. Township Attorney.
There is hereby created and established in the Township the position of
Township Attorney pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance and the
provisions of N.J.S.A 40A:9-139 and 40A:63-6.
D. Compensation. For the performance of the services prescribed herein,
the Township auditor shall be paid such fees as are deemed reasonable
and proper by the Township Committee for services actually rendered
and set forth in vouchers properly executed and furnished to the
Township Clerk.
A. Term. The Township Attorney shall be appointed by the Township
Committee for a term of one year from January 1 in the year of his
appointment until his successor has been appointed and has qualified.
B. Qualifications. The person to be appointed to the position of Township
Attorney shall have been duly admitted to the practice of law in the
State of New Jersey, and must be a member in good standing of the Bar
of the State of New Jersey at the time of his appointment and during the
term of his office.
C. Functions and duties. The Township Attorney shall:
(1) Serve as legal advisor to the Township Committee, Township
Administrator, Board of Health, Water and Sewer Utility, and the
various departments of the Township.
(2) Attend meetings of the Township Committee including regular,
special and executive meetings as requested by the Township
Committee.
(3) Examine and approve as to form and sufficiency all performance
bonds, insurance certificates and maintenance bonds submitted by
the contractors as required by the Township and its ordinances.
(4) Draft or approve as to form and sufficiency all resolutions and
ordinances as requested by the Township Committee.
(5) Prepare, review and approve all contracts, deeds, documents and
instruments prior to execution thereof by or on behalf of the
Township.
(6) Represent the Township and its officers and employees in all
litigation wherein the Township is named a party defendant or the
officers or employees are named parties defendant as the result of
performing their duties as officers or employees of the Township,
with the exception of litigation wherein the Township or its officers
or employees are named defendants and the defense of the action
is the obligation of an insurance company under a policy wherein
the Township is designated an insured.
§ 2-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-3
1:15
§ 2-4. Township Engineer.
There is hereby created and established in the Township the position of
Township Engineer pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance and the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140 and 40A:63-6.
(7) Prosecute and defend such other actions and proceedings
instituted by or against the Township as directed by the Township
Committee.
(8) Conduct appeals from orders, decisions or judgments affecting any
interest of the Township as directed by the Township Committee.
(9) With the approval of the Township Committee, compromise, settle
or adjust any rights, claims, demands or causes of action in favor of
or against the Township when authorized by the Township
Committee.
(10) Represent the Township in matters in the Municipal Court
involving violations of the land use ordinances of the Township and
such other ordinance violations as may be directed by the Township
Administrator or Township Committee.
(11) Have such other different functions, powers and duties as may be
provided by law or be from time to time conferred upon him by the
Township Committee.
D. Compensation. For attendance and services performed at all regular
meetings of the Township Committee, the Township Attorney shall
receive the salary provided for in the Annual Salary Ordinance. For all
other services, the Township Attorney shall be paid such additional fees
as set forth in an agreement for legal services which shall be executed
annually. Payment for all such services as actually rendered shall be
made on the basis of vouchers properly executed and furnished to the
Township Administrator.
E. Special counsel. If the Township Attorney by reason of disability,
personal disqualification or for any other reason advises that he will be
unable to represent the Township on a specific matter, the Township
Committee may, within the limits of the budgetary appropriations and
amendments thereto, appoint special counsel to represent the
Township with respect to the matter.
A. Term. The Township Engineer shall be appointed by the Township
Committee for a term not exceeding three years from January 1 in the
year of his appointment until his successor has been appointed and has
qualified.
B. Qualifications. The person to be appointed to the position of Township
Engineer shall be a duly qualified professional engineer who has been
licensed by the State Board of Professional Engineers and Land
Surveyors.
§ 2-3 WALL CODE § 2-4
1:16
§ 2-5. Township Planner.
There is hereby created and established in the Township the position of
Township Planner pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance and the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 and 40A:9-9.
C. Functions and duties. The Township Engineer shall, from time to time,
provide the following services, as directed by the Township
Administrator or the Director of Engineering and Planning: [Amended
12-110-2003 by Ord. No. 39-2003]
(1) Prepare, review and approve specifications for municipal work
contracts, supervise and inspect the execution of such contracts
and certify satisfactory completion of work with reference to
authorized progress payments pursuant to the contract.
(2) Provide engineering services to the various departments, boards
and agencies of the Township.
(3) Attend meetings of the Township Committee and other Township
boards when directed to do so.
(4) Prepare such special reports, surveys and drawings as may be
authorized.
(5) Make engineering inspections, prepare bond estimates, prepare
and maintain current tax maps, conduct feasibility studies, make
surveys and topographical maps, engage in design work and
perform such other professional engineering functions as shall be
referred to him.
D. Compensation. For the performance of the services described herein,
the Township Engineer shall be paid such fees as may be deemed
reasonable and proper by the Township Committee for the services
actually rendered and set forth on vouchers properly executed and
furnished to the Township Administrator.
E. Consulting engineers. Any provision contained herein to the contrary
notwithstanding, the Township Committee may retain other licensed
professional engineers for projects determined to be beyond the scope
or capacity of the Township Engineer or where it shall be determined in
the best interest of the Township to do so.
A. Term. The Township Planner shall be appointed by the Township
Committee for a term of one year from January 1 in the year of his
appointment until his successor has been appointed and has qualified.
B. Qualifications. The person to be appointed to the position of Township
Planner shall be a duly qualified professional planner who has been
licensed by the New Jersey Board of Professional Planners.
C. Functions and duties. The Township Planner shall:
§ 2-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-5
1:17
§ 2-6. Township Prosecutor.
There is hereby created and established in the Township the position of
Township Prosecutor pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-9.
(1) Review all development applications and make recommendations
in connection therewith as requested by the Planning Board or the
Board of Adjustment.
(2) Attend meetings of the Planning Board, the Board of Adjustment
and the Township Committee as requested.
(3) Prepare such land development reports as may be requested by the
Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment.
(4) Testify as a professional planning expert on behalf of the Township
in litigated matters as requested.
(5) Perform such other functions as may be directed by the Township
Administrator or the Director of Engineering and Planning. [Added
12-10-2003 by Ord. No. 39-2003]
D. Compensation. The Township Planner shall receive such compensation
as shall be fixed by the General Salary Ordinance of the Township.
E. Consulting Planners. Any provision contained herein to the contrary
notwithstanding, the Township Committee, the Planning Board and the
Board of Adjustment may retain other licensed professional planners
for projects determined to be beyond the scope or capacity of the
Township Planner or where it shall be determined in the best interests
of the Township to do so, subject only to the availability of funds
therefor.
A. Term. The Township Prosecutor shall be appointed by the Township
Committee for a term of one year, from January 1 in the year of his
appointment until his successor has been appointed and has qualified.
B. Qualifications. The person to be appointed to the position of Township
Prosecutor shall have been duly admitted to the practice of law in the
State of New Jersey, and must be a member in good standing of the Bar
of the State of New Jersey at the time of his appointment and during the
term of his office.
C. Functions and duties. The Township Prosecutor shall conduct
prosecutions for crimes and offenses cognizable by the Municipal Court
of the Township of Wall, except such crimes and offenses as it may be
the duty of the County Prosecutor or the Attorney General of the State
of New Jersey to prosecute, and except for violations of the Township
Land Use Ordinances and other ordinance violations as may have been
assigned to the Township Attorney to prosecute pursuant to § 2-3. The
Township Prosecutor shall also handle all appeals from adverse
decisions of the Municipal Court, when either required by law or
§ 2-5 WALL CODE § 2-6
1:18
§ 2-7. Township Physician.
authorized by the Township Committee or required by the rules of the
Supreme Court of the State of New Jersey.
D. Compensation. For the performance of the services prescribed herein,
the Township Prosecutor shall be paid such fees as may be deemed
reasonable and proper by the Township Committee for services actually
rendered and set forth on vouchers properly executed and fumrnished
to the Township Administrator.
A. The office of Township Physician is hereby created. One or more
Township Physicians shall be appointed for a term of one year,
commencing as of January 1 of the year of his appointment.
B. The Township Physician shall perform such duties as may be assigned
to him by the Township Administrator and in addition thereto he shall:
(1) Conduct physical examination or examinations of every employee
or prospective employee of the Township at such time as may be
fixed by the department head, or by the Township Physician,
including any referral to another physician, subject however to the
approval by the Township Administrator; to report in writing the
result of such examination to the respective department head, with
a copy to the Township Administrator. The department head
making such request shall inform the Township Physician of the
duties involved to be performed by the particular employee.
(2) To conduct one or more physical examinations of any employee who
may be absent from duty by reason of illness or physical disability,
upon the written request of the department head in whose
department such employee is employed; to advise such department
head in writing of the result of such examination or examinations
with a copy to the Township Administrator.
(3) To conduct a physical examination of any person in the custody of
the Police Department upon the request of the police officer in
charge or officer in charge of the station acting in the line of his
duty; to report the result of such examination to the Chief of Police.
(4) To testify in any proceeding on behalf of the Township in which the
result of any physical examination by him may be material, either
upon the request of the Township Committee, the Township
Attorney, or upon the request of the Chief of Police, or his
subordinate duly authorized by the Chief of Police to make such
request.
C. The Township Physician shall be paid a reasonable fee for the services
rendered by him upon the submission of a detailed voucher specifying
the services performed.
§ 2-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-8
1:19
§ 2-8. Temporary appointments.
Whenever any officer or employee of the Township is temporarily absent,
disabled or disqualified, the Township Administrator may designate some
person to act in place of any such officer or employee during his temporary
absence, disability or disqualification.
§ 2-9. Code Enforcement Officer.
There is hereby created and established in the Township pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-9, the position of Code Enforcement Officer.
A. Term. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the
Township Committee and shall serve at the pleasure of the Township
Committee.
B. Compensation. The Code Enforcement Officer shall receive such
compensation as shall be fixed by the General Salary Ordinance of the
Township.
C. Functions and duties.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for the
enforcement of the regulatory ordinances of the Township
including, but not limited to land use and zoning,2 and shall make
such inspections of property and perform such investigations as
may be necessary for the enforcement thereof. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall be authorized to enter upon all property
within the Township at reasonable hours and under reasonable
conditions in order to perform such functions. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to issue a summons in
the name of the Township for a violation of any ordinance
pertaining to land use, zoning or other regulatory ordinances and
shall testify on behalf of the Township in litigated matters as
requested by the Township Administrator.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually conduct
measurements and inspections of all premises licensed for the sale
or consumption of alcoholic beverages within the Township and
shall report his or her findings to the Township Administrator on or
before May 15 for use in determining the permitted maximum
occupancy of each such license premises.
(3) The Code Enforcement Officer shall perform such additional duties
and render such other services as may from time to time be
assigned to him by ordinance or requested of him by the Township
Committee, the Township Administrator, or the Township Land Use
Officer.
2. Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Land Use and Development Regulations.
§ 2-8 WALL CODE § 2-10
1:20
§ 2-10. Chief Financial Officer.
There is hereby established in the Township the position of Chief Financial
Officer pursuant to the provisions of this section and the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1.
§ 2-11. Township Public Defender.
There is hereby created and established in the Township the position of
Township Public Defender, pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1997 c. 256
(N.J.S.A. 2B:24-1 et seq.).
A. Term. The Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed by the Township
Committee for a term of one year from January 1 in the year of his
appointment until his successor has been appointed and has qualified.
B. Qualification. The person to be appointed to the position of Chief
Financial Officer shall be a certified municipal finance officer.
C. Functions and duties. The Chief Financial Officer shall be:
(1) The custodian of financial records of the Township.
(2) Responsible for all accounting procedures.
(3) Responsible for accounts payable.
(4) Responsible for such other duties as are associated with the office
and as are prescribed by the applicable statutes, regulations and
ordinances.
D. Compensation. The Chief Financial Officer shall receive such
compensation as shall be fixed by the General Salary Ordinance of the
Township.
A. Term. The Township Public Defender shall be appointed by the
Township Committee for a term of one year, from January 1 in the year
of his appointment until his successor has been appointed and has
qualified.
B. Qualifications. The person to be appointed to the position of Township
Public Defender shall have been duly admitted to the practice of law in
the State of New Jersey, and must be a member in good standing of the
Bar of the State of New Jersey at the time of his appointment and during
the term of his office.
C. Functions and duties. It shall be the duty of the Township Public
Defender to represent, except in the case of temporary unavailability or
conflict of interest, any defendant charged with an offense in the
Municipal Court who is an indigent municipal defendant entitled to
representation, pursuant to P.L. 1997, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 2B:24-1 et seq.),
and any amendments or supplements thereto.
§ 2-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-11
1:21
§ 2-12. Deputy Township Clerk.
There is hereby established in the Township the position of Deputy
Township Clerk pursuant to the provisions of this section and the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-135.
§ 2-13. Director of Engineering and Planning. [Added 12-10-2003
by Ord. No. 39-2003]
There is hereby created and established in the Township the position of
Director of Engineering and Planning pursuant to the provisions of this
section and the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 and 40A:9-9.
D. Compensation. For the performance of the services described herein,
the Township Public Defender shall be paid such fees as may be deemed
reasonable and proper by the Township Committee for services actually
rendered, as set forth in an agreement to provide Public Defender
services which shall be executed annually and as set forth on vouchers
properly executed and furnished to the Township Administrator.
E. Application fee. Any person applying to the Municipal Court for
representation by the Township Public Defender or other court
appointed counsel shall pay an application fee of $200, subject to the
provisions of P.L. 1997, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 2B:24-1 et seq.), pertaining to
court approved waivers of application fees; periodic payments thereof;
and determination that the application fee does not exceed the amount
necessary to pay the costs of the Township Public Defender or other
court appointed counsel. All application fees collected shall be
deposited by the Chief Financial Officer in a dedicated fund pursuant to
the provisions of the aforesaid statute.
A. Term. The Deputy Township Clerk shall be appointed by the Township
Committee for a term of one year from January 1 in the year of the
appointment until a successor has been appointed and qualified.
B. Functions and duties. The Deputy Township Clerk shall assist the
Township Clerk in the performance of the Clerk's statutory duties.
During the absence or disability of the Township Clerk, the Deputy
Township Clerk shall have all the powers of the Township Clerk and
shall perform the functions and duties of such office.
C. Compensation. The Deputy Township Clerk shall receive such
compensation as shall be fixed by the General Salary Ordinance of the
Township.
A. Term. The Director of Engineering and Planning shall be appointed by
the Township Committee and shall serve at the pleasure of the
Township Committee.
B. Qualifications. The person to be appointed to the position of Director of
Engineering and Planning shall be a duly qualified professional
engineer who has been licensed by the State Board of Professional
§ 2-11 WALL CODE § 2-13
1:22
Engineers and Land Surveyors or who holds a professional engineering
license acceptable to the State of New Jersey. He shall have a broad
knowledge of municipal engineering projects, Planning and Zoning
Board procedures, as well as a background of progressively responsible
engineering design and project management experience.
C. Functions and duties. The Director of Engineering and Planning shall:
(1) Be responsible for coordination and oversight of all capital
improvement projects to include roadway reconstruction and
overlays, sanitary sewer, water distribution, parks and recreation
projects and other projects assigned by the Township
Administrator. Design projects will either be performed in-house or
coordinated with outside consultants. When coordinated with
outside consultants, the Director of Engineering and Planning shall
determine the scope of work, construction budget and review
consultants proposals and fees, specifications and bidding
documents.
(2) Coordinate all inspections within the Township. In-house or outside
consultant construction observers shall report directly to the
Director of Engineering and Planning on a daily basis. Inspections
shall include capital improvement projects, residential/commercial
developments, as-built and CO/grading inspections.
(3) Coordinate the planning, land use and zoning offices board reviews
with outside consultants and will attend meetings as necessary. The
Director of Engineering and Planning may also perform, at his/her
discretion, in-house reviews of minor site plans, minor subdivisions
and conditionally exempt site plans.
(4) The Director of Engineering and Planning will be responsible for
code enforcement within the Township and shall serve as the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(5) Other typical duties shall include:
(a) Making recommendations and preparing budgets for yearly
capital improvement projects.
(b) Assisting the Public Works Department with engineering of inhouse
projects.
(c) Responding to homeowner complaints and concerns.
(d) Performing review of all grading plans, as-built plans, street
opening permits and coordinating inspections of same.
(e) Preparing grant applications and/or coordinating same with
outside consultants.
(f) Maintaining records of all performance and maintenance
bonds and coordinating scheduled bond inspections.
§ 2-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-13
1:23
Chapter 6
BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
(g) Such other duties that may be assigned from time to time by
the Township Administrator.
D. Compensation. For the performance of the services described herein,
the Director of Engineering and Planning shall receive such
compensation as shall be fixed by the General Salary Ordinance of the
Township.
§ 2-13 WALL CODE § 2-13
1:24
ARTICLE I
Recreation Advisory Committee
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 2-8 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 6-1. Abolishment of Recreation Commission; categories of open
space; rules and regulations.
Effective October 1, 1990, the Recreation Commission of the Township
established on March 24, 1965, be and the same is hereby abolished. All
rules and regulations previously adopted by the Recreation Commission
governing parks, playgrounds and other recreation areas in the Township
be and the same are hereby ratified by the Township Committee and
violation of any of the aforesaid rules and regulations shall be subject to the
penalty provided in Chapter 1, Article I, of the Code of the Township of Wall.
§ 6-2. Establishment of Recreation Advisory Committee
There is hereby created and established the Recreation Advisory Committee
of the Township.
§ 6-3. Membership.
A. Establishment of categories of public recreation and open space areas.
The property owned by the Township of Wall and devoted to recreation,
open space, and conservation uses shall be identified and designated in
one of three categories of public recreation and open space properties
as follows: "active park," "passive open space," or "open space and
conservation area." All such properties shall be identified and
designated on a map entitled "Public Recreation and Open Space Map"
of the Township of Wall, which shall be maintained and shall be
available for public inspection in the office of the Township Clerk. The
aforesaid map shall be maintained and the applicable properties
designated in one of the aforesaid categories by the Township
Administrator, subject to the approval of the Township Committee.
B. Rules and regulations. The Township Administrator shall establish,
subject to the approval of the Township Committee, reasonable rules
and regulations pertaining to the operation and use of active parks,
passive open space and open space and conservation properties in the
Township, which regulations shall establish reasonable and appropriate
rules as to the activities to be permitted or conducted on such
properties and regulations as to the conduct of persons on said
properties. Such rules and regulations may be modified or amended
from time to time by the Township Administrator subject to the
approval of the Township Committee, and shall be maintained on file
and be made available for public inspection in the office of the Township
Clerk. A violation of any of the aforesaid rules and regulations shall be
subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, Article I of the Code of
the Township of Wall.
§ 6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-3
1:25
§ 6-4. Organization.
A. The Recreation Advisory Committee shall consist of 10 residents of the
Township appointed by the Township Committee. Four members of the
Recreation Advisory Committee shall each be appointed for a threeyear
term on a calendar-year basis. The remaining six members of the
Recreation Advisory Committee shall consist of the presidents, or their
designees, of the Wall Soccer Club, North Wall Little League, South
Wall Little League, Inc., American Youth Football, Wall Wrestling and
Wall Lacrosse. The presidents shall be appointed by the Township
Committee to the Recreation Advisory Committee for a one-year term
on a calendar-year basis. Should any such appointee cease to hold the
office of president of the organization which he or she represents, the
appointment will terminate and the then-current president or acting
president of the applicable organization shall be appointed as a
member of the Recreation Advisory Committee. The presidents of each
organization may choose a designee to represent their organization at
Committee meetings. A letter recommending a designee must be
provided to the Clerk's office, in writing, at least 12 hours prior to the
meeting. [Amended 11-24-2009 by Ord. No. 25-2009; 10-24-2018
by Ord. No. 16-2018]
B. A vacancy occurring on the committee otherwise than by expiration of a
term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an
original appointment. All members of the Committee shall serve
without compensation.
C. The Mayor shall designate one of the members of the Township
Committee to serve as the liaison between the Recreation Advisory
Committee and the Township Committee.
D. The title "Director of Operations" shall be changed to "Director of
Recreation." The Director of Recreation shall serve as an ex officio
member of the Recreation Advisory Committee. [Amended
10-24-2018 by Ord. No. 16-2018]
A. The Committee shall conduct an organizational meeting and shall
organize as set forth herein within 30 days of the date of the final
adoption of this article. Thereafter, an annual organizational meeting
shall be conducted during the first meeting of the Committee in January
of each year.
B. The Committee shall elect a Chairperson whose duty shall be to fix
meeting dates, conduct the meetings, appoint subcommittees and
arrange the activities and functions of the Committees so that they may
be accomplished in an orderly and productive fashion. The Committee
shall also elect a Vice Chairperson, whose duties are to assist the
Chairperson in the completion of his duties. The secretary to the
Director of Operations shall serve as the secretary of the Committee.
The secretary shall record the minutes of all meetings and shall receive
and transmit all correspondence of the Committee.
§ 6-3 WALL CODE § 6-5
1:26
§ 6-5. Removal of members.
The Township Committee shall have the discretion, upon recommendation
from the Recreation Advisory Committee or the Director of Operations, to
remove any members appointed to the Committee who are not fulfilling
their duties and responsibilities.
§ 6-6. Duties.
The duties of the Recreation Advisory Committee shall be as follows:
§ 6-7. Assistance.
The Committee shall receive from all Township officials, offices and
departments such assistance as may be proper and reasonably necessary to
aid the Committee in the performance of its duties.
§ 6-8. (Reserved)3
§ 6-9. Records and annual reports.
The Committee shall keep records of its meetings and activities and shall
make an annual report on or before December 1 of each year and submit
the report to the Township Committee, which report shall be comprehensive
in detail concerning the operations and activities of the Committee during
the proceeding year.
A. To recommend to the Township Committee, programs, improvements
and activities which will benefit the Township's recreational programs
and recreation facilities.
B. To bring matters of importance and concern regarding recreation to the
attention of the Recreation Director and Township Committee.
C. To provide a resource for members of the community, community
groups, and recreation organizations to discuss areas of concern with
respect to recreational programs and facilities.
D. Recommend for adoption by the Township Committee suitable rules and
regulations for the use of parks, playgrounds and recreational facilities
and the conduct of all persons while on or using the same.
E. To assist and collaborate with the Operations Director in the Director's
duties and responsibilities pertaining to recreation.
F. To perform such other functions as may be requested by the Township
Administrator or Township Committee.
3. Editor’s Note: Former § 6-8, Funds, was repealed 10-24-2018 by Ord. No. 16-2018.
§ 6-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-10
1:27
§ 6-10. Recreation program fees.
The Recreation Department is hereby authorized to charge and to collect
fees for participation in programs or activities conducted by the
Department. Such fees shall be reasonable, shall be subject to the approval
of the Township Administrator, and shall not exceed the following maximum
fees for the activities or types of activities specified:
A. For Biddy basketball; wrestling programs; track; tennis; arts and crafts
programs and other similar programs intended for children, the fee to
be charged shall not exceed $50 per participant.
B. For men's or women's softball team registration, the fee shall not
exceed $500 per team, per season.
C. For adult participation in programs or classes, the fee shall not exceed
$50 per class or program, as may be appropriate.
D. For participation in the five-mile run or similar activities, the fee shall
not exceed $25.
E. For Recreation Department sponsored trips or excursions, the fee shall
not exceed $125 per person.
F. For the Recreation Department summer camp program, the fee shall
not exceed $25 per week per participant or $200 per season per
participant.
§ 6-10 WALL CODE § 6-10
1:28
ARTICLE II
Environmental Advisory Committee
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 2-11 of the Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 6-11. Creation.
There is hereby created and established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-27 the
Environmental Advisory Committee of the Township.
§ 6-12. Membership; vacancies; liaison to Planning Board.
§ 6-13. Functions.
The Committee is established to assist in the protection, development and
use of natural resources, including water resources, located within the
territorial limits of the Township. In order to carry out these purposes the
Committee shall have the following functions:
A. The Environmental Advisory Committee shall consist of nine members
appointed by the Township Committee, all of whom shall be residents of
the Township. The terms of office of all members shall be three years
and until the appointment and qualification of their successors.
B. The Township Committee shall appoint three members for one year,
three members for two years, and three members for three years,
whose terms shall commence retroactively on January 1, 2003.
Thereafter, the Township Committee shall appoint or reappoint
members for three-year terms.
C. The Mayor shall designate one of the members of the Planning Board to
serve as the liaison between the Advisory Committee and the Planning
Board.
D. A vacancy occurring on the Committee other than by expiration of a
term shall be filled for the unexpired term. All members of the
Committee shall serve without compensation.
A. Promoting the conservation and development of the natural resources
of the Township by making recommendations to the appropriate
Township officials, boards and bodies.
B. Planning, implementing and informing the public about local
conservation programs.
C. Conducting research into the possible use of the open areas of the
Township.
D. Recommending to the Planning Board plans and programs for use of
such open areas.
§ 6-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-13
1:29
§ 6-14. Recommendation of acquisitions.
The Committee may recommend to the Township Committee that the
Township acquire property, both real and personal, for the Committee's
purposes, including but not limited to use as living museums, sites for
scientific study, areas for teaching of natural history and conservation, place
of historic or prehistoric interest and scientific beauty and habitat for rare
or endangered plants and animals, and shall assist in administering the
same for such purposes. Such acquisitions may be to acquire the fee for
any lesser interest, development right, easement (including conservation
easement) covenant or other contractual right (including a conveyance on
conditions or with limitations or revisions) as may be necessary to acquire,
maintain, improve, protect or limit the future use or otherwise conserve and
properly utilize open spaces and other lands and water areas within the
Township.
E. Assisting and collaborating with the Planning Board in the latter's
duties and responsibilities.
F. Rendering nonbinding opinions with respect to any matter referred for
review by the Planning Board or any application for development
referred by the administrative officer within 20 days of such referral.
G. Advertising, preparing, printing and distributing books, maps, charts,
plans and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems necessary for its
purposes.
H. Acting as the coordinating agency for the community on environmental
matters and a liaison between local environmental needs and regional,
county, state and federal agencies administering to those needs.
I. Compiling and annually updating an environmental resource inventory
of land and water resources, which are both publicly or privately
owned, including open marsh lands, swamps, and other wetlands, in
order to obtain information on the proper use of such areas.
J. At the request of the Township Administrator, reviewing proposed and
existing legislation and actions of regulatory agencies as they impact
the environment and advising the Township Committee on such
matters.
K. Rendering nonbinding opinions with respect to any matter referred for
review by the Township Administrator or the Township Committee,
including any proposed sale or exchange of Township-owned property,
within 20 days of such referral.
L. Recommending to the Township Committee the planting of shade and
ornamental trees and shrubbery in appropriate locations or
recommending the removal of any tree or part thereof for reasons of
public safety.
§ 6-13 WALL CODE § 6-15
1:30
§ 6-15. Rules and regulations.
The Committee may recommend, for adoption by the Township Committee,
suitable rules and regulations for the use of any such lands and the conduct
of all persons while on or using the same.
§ 6-16. Assistance.
The Committee may request from all Township officials, offices and
departments such assistance as may be proper and reasonably necessary
to aid the Committee in the performance of its duties. The Committee shall
make such requests for assistance through the Township Administrator, who
shall determine if such assistance is reasonably necessary and proper to aid
the Committee in the performance of its duties.
§ 6-17. Funds.
The Committee shall submit a budget request to the Township
Administrator by December 15 of each year which shall recommend the
appropriation of such sum to accomplish the functions set forth herein and
to implement those recommendations of the Committee which the Township
Committee, in its discretion, decrees feasible and appropriate.
§ 6-18. Records and annual reports.
The Committee shall keep records of its meetings and activities and shall
make an annual report on or before December 1 of each year and submit
the report of the Township Committee, which report shall be comprehensive
and detailed concerning the operations and activities of the Committee
during the preceding year.
§ 6-19. Organization.
§ 6-20. Removal of members of Committee.
The Township Committee may remove any member of the Committee for
cause, on written charges served upon said member and after a hearing
thereon, at which time the member shall be entitled to be heard in person
or by counsel.
A. The Committee shall conduct a reorganization meeting and shall
organize as set forth herein within 30 days of the date of the final
adoption of this article. Thereafter, an annual organizational meeting
shall be conducted during the first meeting of the Committee in January
of each year.
B. The Committee shall elect a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, and
secretary at its annual meeting and shall adopt a resolution establishing
the dates, times and places of Committee meetings for the year.
C. The Committee is hereby authorized to adopt bylaws to govern its
procedures.
§ 6-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-20
1:31

ARTICLE III
Senior Citizens Advisory Council
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 2-12 of the Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 6-21. Findings.
The Township Committee deems it necessary and appropriate to establish
an organization to serve the needs of senior citizens and through the efforts
of which the Township's senior citizens would be apprised of federal, state,
county and local programs available to senior citizens.
§ 6-22. Creation.
There is hereby created and established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2, a
council to be known as the "Senior Citizens Advisory Council of the
Township of Wall."
§ 6-23. Membership.
A. The Council shall consist of nine members during the first year and
such additional number as may be deemed appropriate and necessary
by the Township Committee to effect the purpose of this article.
B. The Township Committee shall appoint three members for one year,
three members for two years, and three members for three years,
whose terms shall commence retroactively on January 1, 1977.
Thereafter, the Township Committee shall appoint or reappoint
members for three-year terms.
C. All of the members shall be residents of the Township and shall be of the
age of 62 years or older, except for the Township liaison member who
may be of any age. All members shall be selected on the basis of their
qualifications, fitness and desire to fulfill and advance the objectives
and purposes of the Council as defined herein.
D. The Council shall annually elect one of its members as Chairman, whose
duties shall be to fix meeting dates, conduct the meetings, appoint
subcommittees and arrange the activities and functions of the Council
so that they may be accomplished in an orderly and productive fashion.
E. The Senior Citizens Advisory Council shall annually elect one of its
members as Cochairman, whose duties are to assist the Chairman in
the completion of his duties.
F. The Senior Citizens Advisory Council shall annually elect one of its
members as secretary, whose duties shall be to record the minutes of all
meetings and to receive and transmit all correspondence of the
Committee.
G. One of the members shall be designated as the Township Committee
liaison member of the Senior Citizens Advisory Council, and shall act as
§ 6-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-23
1:33
§ 6-24. Duties.
The duties of the Council shall be as follows:
a liaison between the Township Committee and the Senior Citizens
Advisory Council.
H. All members of the Council shall serve without compensation.
I. The Township Committee shall have the discretion, upon
recommendation from the Senior Citizens Advisory Council to remove
any members appointed by the Council who are not fulfilling their
duties or responsibilities.
A. To bring matters of importance and concern to senior citizens to the
attention of the Township Committee of the Township.
B. To identify senior citizens residing in the Township.
C. To arrange for and secure tickets and arrange transportation to cultural
events of interest to senior citizens of the Township.
D. To encourage formation of a telephone communication check service
for senior citizens living alone.
E. To work to obtain use of a senior citizen van or similar type vehicle for
transportation of elderly residents of the Township.
F. To establish and develop a senior center.
G. To interview and select a Wall Township member to the Cooperating
Council of the Office on Aging of Monmouth County.
H. To promote a nutrition program for the elderly and to seek
representation in the Nutrition Program Project Council.
I. To act as trustees of any senior center that may be developed and
implemented by this Council.
J. To facilitate communication between senior citizens and other members
of the community.
K. To provide a resource for the community to discuss problematic areas of
concern to senior citizens.
L. To recommend to the Township Committee programs, improvements
and activities which will benefit the Township's senior citizens as well
as alleviate problem areas of concern to those Township residents who
are senior citizens.
M. To act as a liaison between the senior citizens of the Township and the
Township police.
§ 6-23 WALL CODE § 6-25
1:34
§ 6-25. Assistance.
The Council shall receive from all Township officials, offices and
departments such assistance as may be proper and reasonably necessary to
aid the Council in the performance of its duties.
§ 6-26. Funds.
The Senior Citizens Advisory Council may submit a budget request to the
Township Administrator. The Township Committee may appropriate in each
annual budget of the Township such sum as may be determined by the
Township Committee to be necessary to accomplish the purposes set forth
herein, and to implement those recommendations of the Council which
the Township Committee in its discretion, deems economic, feasible and
appropriate.
§ 6-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-26
1:35

ARTICLE IV
Community Relations/Community Alliance Committee
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 2-17 of the Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 6-27. Findings.
The Township Committee deems it necessary and appropriate for the social
development of the Township of Wall to promote better relations within the
community. The Township Committee also finds that alcoholism and drug
abuse are important public health and law enforcement problems in our
community and the community is desirous of working with the Governor's
Council on Alcoholism and Drug Abuse and the Monmouth County Board of
Chosen Freeholders in preventing and resolving these problems. In order
to address those concerns, the Township Committee wishes to create an
advisory body in accordance with the statutory requirements of P.L. 1989,
c. 51 (N.J.S.A. 26:2BB-1 et seq.), to provide continuing advice to it and the
citizens of this community on matters pertaining to alcoholism and drug
abuse and to foster improved relations, communication and community
service in the Township.
§ 6-28. Established.
There is hereby created and established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2, a
committee to be known as the "Community Relations/Community Alliance
Committee of the Township of Wall."
§ 6-29. Membership.
§ 6-30. Election of officers.
A. The Committee shall consist of 12 members during the first year and
such additional number as may be deemed appropriate and necessary
by the Township Committee to effect the purpose of this article.
B. The Township Committee shall appoint four members for one year, four
members for two years and four members for three years, whose terms
shall commence retroactively on January 1, 2000. Thereafter, the
Township Committee shall appoint or reappoint members for three-year
terms.
C. All of the members shall be residents of the Township, except that one
member of the Police Department who is not a resident may be
appointed. All members shall be selected on the basis of their
qualifications, fitness and desire to fulfill and advance the objectives
and purposes of the Committee as defined herein.
A. The Community Relations/Community Alliance Committee shall
annually elect one of its members as Chairman, whose duties shall be to
fix meeting dates, conduct the meetings, appoint subcommittees and
§ 6-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-30
1:37
§ 6-31. Township Committee to appoint representatives.
The Township Committee shall annually appoint one of its members as
the Township Committee's representative to the Community Relations/
Community Alliance Committee. The Township Committee shall also
annually appoint the Director of the Wall Youth Center to be a full voting
member of the Committee, and who shall also act as liaison between the
Committee, the Township and the Wall Youth Center and who shall advise
the Community Relations/Community Alliance Committee as necessary and
appropriate.
§ 6-32. Compensation.
All members of the Committee shall serve without compensation.
§ 6-33. Removal of members.
The Township Committee shall have the discretion, upon recommendation
from the Community Relations/Community Alliance Committee, to remove
any members appointed to the Committee who are not fulfilling their duties
or responsibilities.
§ 6-34. Duties.
The duties of the Committee shall be as follows:
arrange the activities and functions of the Committee so that they may
be accomplished in an orderly and productive fashion.
B. The Community Relations/Community Alliance Committee shall
annually elect one of its members as Cochairman, whose duties are to
assist the Chairman in the completion of his or her duties.
C. The Community Relations/Community Alliance Committee shall
annually elect one of its members as secretary, whose duties shall be to
record the minutes of all meetings and to receive and transmit all
correspondence of the Committee.
A. To recommend to the Township Committee programs, improvements
and activities which will benefit the Wall Youth Center.
B. To bring matters of importance and concern regarding the Wall Youth
Center to the attention of the Youth Center Director and the Township
Committee.
C. To provide a resource for the community to discuss areas of community
concern; to facilitate communication and maintain tranquillity within
the community.
D. To recommend to the Township Committee programs, improvements
and activities which will benefit the Township's relations with the
§ 6-30 WALL CODE § 6-34
1:38
§ 6-35. Assistance.
The Community Relations/Community Alliance Committee shall receive
from all Township officials, offices and departments such assistance as
may be proper and reasonably necessary to aid the Committee in the
performance of its duties.
§ 6-36. Funds.
The Community Relations/Community Alliance Committee shall submit a
budget request to the Township Committee which shall appropriate in each
annual budget of the Township, such sum as may be determined by the
Township Committee to be necessary to accomplish the purposes set forth
herein, and to implement those recommendations of the Committee which
the Township Committee, in its discretion, deems feasible and appropriate.
community, alleviate areas of community concern and improve the
Township's services to its youth.
E. To act as a liaison between the community and the Township Police
Department.
F. To assist in the organization and coordination of efforts at preventing
drug and alcohol abuse involving schools, law enforcement agencies,
business groups, and other community organizations.
G. To serve in an advisory capacity to the local school district and the
Township, as they cooperate in the development and implementation of
comprehensive and effective drug and alcohol education programs in
the local public schools.
H. To serve in an advisory capacity to the Township and the local school
district, as they develop and implement policy, procedures, and
programs to address issues of drug and alcohol involvement among
students; including intervention, student assistance, counseling and
discipline.
I. To serve in an advisory capacity to the Township as it carries out its role
in the development and implementation of programs of drug and
alcohol abuse education, prevention and intervention.
J. To assist in the development of a comprehensive alcoholism and drug
abuse community awareness program for this community.
K. To consult with the Monmouth County Board of Alcoholism and Drug
Abuse Services, identifying alcoholism and drug abuse prevention,
education and intervention needs in the Township.
§ 6-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-36
1:39

ARTICLE V
Marconi Park Complex Advisory Board
[Adopted 11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 23-2007]
§ 6-37. Findings.
§ 6-38. Creation.
There is hereby created and established, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2, an
advisory board to be known as the "Marconi Park Complex Advisory Board
of the Township of Wall."
§ 6-39. Membership.
A. In 1990, the United States Government declared Camp Evans a surplus
Army facility and determined that it would be closed by the end of 1998.
Following this announcement, the Township formed the Marconi Park
Complex Advisory Committee to serve as the designated local
redevelopment authority responsible for creating a reuse master plan
for Camp Evans. The Marconi Park Complex Advisory Committee met
on a regular basis to study the property in question; to conduct
investigations; and to hold public hearings regarding potential reuses
of the property. Following considerable research, evaluation and public
hearings, the Marconi Park Complex Advisory Committee presented its
reuse plan to the Township Committee, which plan was adopted in
January 1996.
B. The reuse plan represents the Township's strategy, approved by the
appropriate federal agencies, for conversion of Camp Evans into the
Marconi Park Complex as a long-term community asset. These 258
acres of land located completely within the boundaries of Wall Township
provide a unique opportunity for the Township and its residents.
C. Under the reuse plan, a portion of the former Camp Evans property has
been conveyed to Brookdale Community College for educational
purposes. Other portions have been designated for historic
preservation, museum and educational purposes and have been or are
about to be transferred to the Township of Wall and leased to the
InfoAge Learning Center. A substantial additional portion of the former
Camp Evans property has been transferred to the Township of Wall for
passive recreation purposes, and a portion has been transferred to the
Township for active recreation purposes.
D. In furthering the goals of the reuse plan, the Township Committee
believes it important to offer existing volunteer advisory boards and
committees the ability to provide advice and assist in furthering the
designated purposes of the Marconi Park Complex.
A. The Board shall consist of eight members and such additional members
as may be deemed appropriate by resolution of the Township
Committee. [Amended 5-14-2008 by Ord. No. 7-2008]
§ 6-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-39
1:41
§ 6-40. Duties.
The duties of the Marconi Park Complex Advisory Board shall be as follows:
B. The Township Committee shall initially appoint three members for one
year, two members for two years, and two members for three years,
whose terms shall commence on January 1, 2008. Thereafter, the
Township Committee shall appoint or reappoint members for three-year
terms, except for the Township Committee member, who shall be
appointed or reappointed to a one-year term.
C. Three of the members of the Advisory Board shall be residents of the
geographic area of the Township surrounding the Marconi Park
Complex. One member shall be a representative of the InfoAge
Learning Center; one member shall be a representative from Brookdale
Community College; one member shall be a representative from the
Wall Township Environmental Advisory Committee; one member shall
be a representative from the Township Committee; and one member
shall be a representative of North Wall Little League. All members shall
be selected on the basis of their qualifications, fitness and desire to
fulfill and advance the objectives and purposes of the Board as defined
herein. [Amended 5-14-2008 by Ord. No. 7-2008]
D. The Board shall annually elect one of its members as Chairman, whose
duties shall be to fix meeting dates, conduct meetings, appoint
subcommittees and arrange the activities and functions of the Board so
that they may be accomplished in an orderly and productive fashion.
E. The Marconi Park Complex Advisory Board shall annually elect one of
its members as Vice Chairman, whose duties are to assist the Chairman
in the completion of his duties.
F. The Board shall annually elect one of its members as Secretary, whose
duties shall be to record the minutes of all meetings and to receive and
transmit all correspondence of the Committee.
G. All members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
H. The Township Committee shall have the discretion, upon
recommendation from the Marconi Park Complex Advisory Board, to
remove any members who are not fulfilling their duties or
responsibilities.
A. To provide advice, information and appropriate recommendations to the
Township Committee concerning the activities conducted within the
Marconi Park Complex under the existing reuse plan together with any
perceived need for future amendments to the reuse plan for the
purpose of maximizing the use of the Marconi Park Complex in a
manner that promotes and furthers the interests of Township residents
generally and those residents in proximity to the Marconi Park Complex
in particular. The Township Committee shall provide notice to the
Marconi Park Complex Advisory Committee and solicit the Board’s
§ 6-39 WALL CODE § 6-40
1:42
§ 6-41. Assistance.
The Board may request the Township Administrator for such assistance
from Township officials, offices and departments as may be proper and
reasonably necessary to aid the Board in the performance of its duties.
input and recommendations concerning any proposed action of the
Township Committee of any nature with respect to the structures, uses
or any other matter respecting the Marconi Park Complex. The Marconi
Park Advisory Committee shall also provide advice, information and
appropriate recommendations to the Recreation Advisory Committee
concerning the recreational programs and facilities to be provided and
constructed at the Marconi Park Complex. [Amended 5-14-2008 by
Ord. No. 7-2008]
B. To provide advice, information and appropriate recommendations to the
Marconi Park Complex Restoration Advisory Board (RAB) on any
environmental or other issues within the jurisdiction of the RAB.
C. To provide a resource for the community to discuss and make
recommendations on issues concerning the use, operation,
maintenance and future development of the Marconi Park Complex.
D. To meet no less than biannually in furtherance of the foregoing
purposes.
§ 6-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-41
1:43

ARTICLE VI
Citizens Committee on Affordable Housing
[Adopted 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2-2009]
§ 6-42. Establishment; membership. [Amended 5-13-2009 by Ord.
No. 12-2009]
There is hereby established a committee to be known as the Township
of Wall Citizens Committee on Affordable Housing (CCAH). The CCAH
shall consist of 11 members; seven of the members will be resident
representatives and four of the members shall be representatives of the
Township and Board of Education.
§ 6-43. Organizational meetings.
The Committee shall conduct an organizational meeting and shall organize
as set forth herein within 30 days of the date of the final adoption of this
A. Initially, the Township Committee shall appoint three members for a
one-year term, two members for a two-year term and two members for
a three-year term. These terms shall commence retroactively to January
1, 2009. Thereafter, the Township Committee shall appoint or reappoint
members for three-year terms. There shall be at least one, but no more
than four members from each of the four primary school districts.
B. The Mayor shall designate two members of the Township Committee to
serve as liaison between the CCAH and the governing body. The
Township Committee members shall be appointed or reappointed to
one-year terms.
C. The Township Administrator or a designee and the President of the
Board of Education shall be appointed as members of the Committee.
The individuals who hold these positions shall be appointed by the
Township Committee to the CCAH for a one-year term. Should these
appointees cease to hold their office, the appointment will terminate
and the current holder of said position shall be appointed as a member
of the CCAH.
D. A vacancy occurring on the Committee otherwise than by expiration of
a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an
original appointment. All members of the Committee shall serve
without compensation.
E. All members shall be selected on the basis of their qualifications, fitness
and desire to fulfill and advance the objectives and purposes of the
Committee as defined herein.
F. The Township Committee shall have the discretion, upon
recommendation from the CCAH or the Township Administrator to
remove any member appointed to the Committee who are not fulfilling
their duties and responsibilities.
§ 6-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-43
1:45
article. Thereafter, an annual organizational meeting shall be conducted
during the first meeting of the Committee in January of each year.
§ 6-44. Election of officers.
§ 6-45. Service at discretion of Township; relationship with other
committees.
The CCAH shall serve at the discretion of the Township Committee and
work cooperatively with the Township's Mount Laurel Subcommittee on
issues surrounding the Township of Wall's affordable housing mandates.
§ 6-46. Meetings; actions; recordkeeping.
§ 6-47. Assistance from Township.
The CCAH may request from the Township Administrator such assistance as
may be proper and reasonably necessary to aid it in the performance of its
duties.
§ 6-48. Role of Committee.
The CCAH shall be a resource for the residents of Wall Township, committee
groups and the Township's Mount Laurel Subcommittee and shall assist
in the gathering and dissemination of information with regard to the
Township's affordable housing obligation and promote a greater public
awareness of the Fair Housing Act and the Rules of the Council of Affordable
Housing.
A. The Committee shall elect a Chairperson whose duties will be to fix
meeting dates, conduct the meetings, appoint subcommittees and
arrange the activities and functions of the Committee so the business
shall be accomplished in an orderly and productive fashion.
B. The CCAH shall also elect one of its members as Vice Chairperson,
whose duties are to assist the Chair.
C. The Board shall also elect one of its members as secretary, whose duties
shall be to record the minutes of all meetings and to receive and
transmit all correspondence of the CCAH.
A. The CCAH shall meet at least quarterly, or upon call of the Chairman.
Actions shall be by a majority vote of all the members. The meeting
place and time shall be such as may be determined by the Committee.
B. The CCAH shall keep records of its meetings and activities and shall
make an annual report on or before December 1 of each year and
submit this report to the Township's Mount Laurel Subcommittee. The
report shall be comprehensive in detail concerning the operations and
activities of the CCAH during the preceding year.
§ 6-43 WALL CODE § 6-48
1:46
ARTICLE VII
General Provisions Applicable to Boards, Committees and
Commissions
[Adopted 2-27-2013 by Ord. No. 1-2013]
§ 6-49. Absence from Board, Committee or Commission Meetings.
A. A person appointed by the Wall Township Committee to any board,
committee, commission, authority or other agency of the Township of
Wall, with or without compensation, shall be required to attend at least
65% of the regularly scheduled meetings of that body in each calendar
year. Unless excused from attendance by a majority of the members of
that body, the member, upon failure to meet this attendance
requirement, may be removed by a two-thirds majority vote of that
board, committee, commission, authority or other agency, and the office
will thereafter be deemed vacant. The board, committee, commission,
authority or other agency may refuse to excuse only those absences
which are not due to legitimate illness.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 6 above or any other
ordinance to the contrary, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-12,
whenever the member of any board, committee, commission, authority
or other agency of the Township of Wall, without being excused by a
majority of the authorized members of such body for a period of eight
consecutive weeks, or for four consecutive regular meetings, whichever
shall be of longer duration, fails to attend and participate at meetings of
such body, the office of such member shall be deemed vacant at the
conclusion of such period, provided that such body shall notify the
appointing authority in writing of such determination; provided,
further, that such board, committee, authority or other agency may
refuse to excuse only those failures to attend and participate which are
not due to legitimate illness.
C. A member of a board, committee, commission, authority or other
agency of the Township of Wall may appeal his or her removal from
office as a result of the application of Subsection A or B of this section to
the governing body, which may hear such appeal, and for good cause
shown, overturn the action of the board, committee, authority or other
agency of the Township of Wall and reinstate the member.
D. In furtherance of Chapter 6, § 6-49, all committees, boards,
commissions, authorities or other agencies of the Township of Wall shall
submit attendance reports for each meeting held to the Township Clerk
within a reasonable time after the meeting.
E. Whenever a vacancy in office occurs from any cause other than
expiration of the term of office or the filing of petition for recall, such
vacancy shall be filled in the manner prescribed by law. All members of
the Committee shall serve without compensation.
§ 6-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-49
1:47

ARTICLE VIII
Health Advisory Board
[Adopted 8-22-2018 by Ord. No. 13-2018]
§ 6-50. Findings.
The Township Committee deems it necessary and appropriate for the health
and welfare of the residents of the Township of Wall to promote public
health within the community. To address those concerns, the Township
Committee wishes to create a Health Advisory Board in accordance with
the statutory requirements of N.J.S.A. 26:3-1 et seq., to provide continuing
advice to it and the citizens of this community on matters pertaining to
public health in the Township. The Health Advisory Board will provide policy
and action recommendations, act to support the Township Committee in its
capacity as the Board of Health and serve as public health advocates to the
community.
§ 6-51. Board established.
There is hereby created and established, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-3, a
board to be known as the "Health Advisory Board of the Township of Wall."
§ 6-52. Membership.
§ 6-53. Officers.
A. The members constituting the Health Advisory Board shall be
appointed by resolution of the Township Committee for a term of three
years. One of the members may be, in the discretion of the Township
Committee, a licensed physician or licensed physician's assistant of the
State of New Jersey. One of the members may be, in the discretion of
the Township Committee, a school nurse of one of the Township's
schools. Two of the members shall be members of the Township
Committee whose term on such Board shall be concurrent with his/her
term on the Township Committee. Other members shall include the
Township Administrator or his/her designee, the Township Clerk or his/
her designee and the Township's Code Enforcement Officer.
B. If any vacancies occur among the members of the Health Advisory
Board, they shall be filled by resolution of the Township Committee but
only for the unexpired portion of such terms.
C. All members of the Board shall serve without compensation, except that
the members of the Board shall be reimbursed by the Township, with
prior approval, for expenses incurred while performing any function as
a member of the Board.
A. The Health Advisory Board's Chairman shall be the Township
Administrator or his/her designee. The Chairman's duties shall be to fix
meeting dates, conduct the meetings, appoint subcommittees and
§ 6-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-53
1:49
§ 6-54. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Health Advisory Board are as follows:
§ 6-55. Assistance.
The Health Advisory Board shall receive from all Township officials, offices
and departments such assistance as may be proper and reasonably
necessary to aid the Committee in the performance of its duties.
§ 6-56. Funds.
The Health Advisory Board shall submit a budget request to the Township
Committee which shall appropriate in each annual budget of the Township
such sum as may be determined by the Township Committee to be
necessary to accomplish the purposes set forth herein, and to implement
those recommendations of the Board which the Township Committee, in its
discretion, deems feasible and appropriate.
arrange the activities and functions of the Board so that they may be
accomplished in an orderly and productive fashion.
B. The Township shall provide a secretary to the Health Advisory Board
whose duties shall be to record the minutes of all meetings and to
receive and transmit all correspondence of the Board.
C. A Certified Public Health Officer will attend all Health Advisory Board
meetings in accordance with the Township's Public Health Shared
Services Agreement.
A. Advise and consult with the Health Officer with respect to the public
health needs and programs of the Township.
B. Review and make recommendations to the Health Officer with respect
to public health hazards in and about the Township.
C. Study and report on proposed health-related ordinances to the Health
Officer, the Township Administrator and Township Committee.
§ 6-53 WALL CODE § 6-56
1:50
Chapter 9
CLAIMS, PAYMENT OF
§ 9-1. Submission of voucher and detailed statement of services;
signing of voucher or purchase order.
A voucher and/or an approved purchase order shall be attached to a
detailed statement of services rendered or supplies furnished and shall be
signed by the claimant and submitted to the Chief Financial Officer of the
Township. The Township Chief Financial Officer shall cause the voucher
and/or purchase order to be countersigned by the department head or
Township official having knowledge of the validity of the claim.
§ 9-2. Certification of check register by Chief Financial Officer.
The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare and certify as accurate a check
register which shall be dated and set forth the check number, date, amount,
payee, and purpose of each check and the total dollar amount of all checks,
vouchers and/or purchase orders to be submitted to the Township
Committee for approval.
§ 9-3. Review and submittal to Committee.
The Township Administrator or, in his absence, the Chief Financial Officer,
shall review all vouchers listed on the check register and then submit the
same to the Township Committee with recommendations as to which should
and which should not be paid.
§ 9-4. Committee review and approval.
A majority of the Township Committee shall review a voucher report
prepared on a monthly basis by the Chief Financial Officer. The voucher
report shall include a purchase order, number, vendor, amount, and
department. If the Township Committee finds the voucher report to be
acceptable, it shall execute a certification, which shall be attached to each
voucher report. The Township Committee shall at all times have the option
of reviewing individual vouchers prior to the execution of the certification.
Following the approval of the voucher report, the vouchers shall be
returned to the finance office.
§ 9-5. Certified check register required; approval of vouchers.
A certified check register, as prepared by the Chief Financial Officer, shall
be provided to the Township Committee at the regular meeting following
the executive meeting at which time the vouchers were approved. The
Township Committee at the regular meeting shall approve the vouchers for
payment by a motion, second, and roll-call vote.
§ 6-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-6
1:51
§ 9-6. Wording of motion for approval.
The motion for approval shall be in the following form: "I move that all
vouchers set forth on the certified check register, dated (date), totaling
(amount), as audited by the Township Committee be ordered paid."
§ 9-7. Signing and issuance of checks. [Amended 9-12-2012 by Ord.
No. 15-2012; 8-27-2014 by Ord. No. 18-2004; 12-28-2016 by Ord.
No. 15-2016]
Each check shall be signed on behalf of the Township by no fewer than
three of the following Township officials: the Mayor, the Deputy Mayor, the
Township Administrator, the Chief Financial Officer, the Township Clerk.
In the absence of the Chief Financial Officer, the Assistant Chief Financial
Officer may sign. In the absence of the Township Administrator, the
Assistant Township Administrator may sign. In the absence of the Clerk, the
Deputy Clerk may sign.
§ 9-8. Book of claims.
There is hereby established a book of claims of the Township of Wall in
which shall be filed copies of the certified check register approved as
provided herein. The book of claims shall be maintained by the Township
bookkeeper and shall be opened to public inspection during regular
business hours at the convenience of the finance office.
§ 9-9. Filing of vouchers.
All vouchers approved as provided herein shall be filed in the office of
the Chief Financial Officer and shall be opened to public inspection at the
convenience of the finance office.
Chapter 12
COOPERATIVE PRICING
§ 12-1. Authority to enter into agreements with lead agencies.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(5), the Township of
Wall is hereby authorized to enter into a cooperative pricing agreement
with the County of Monmouth as the lead agency and the Township as a
participating contracting unit for the purchase of selected work
materials and supplies.
B. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(5) the Township of Wall
is hereby authorized to enter into a cooperative pricing agreement with
the Monmouth County Educational Services Commission as the lead
agency for the purchase of selected work, materials and supplies.
§ 9-6 WALL CODE § 12-1
12:52
§ 12-2. Responsibilities of lead agency and Township.
Chapter 14
COURT, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative offices — See Ch. 2.
§ 14-1. Establishment; statutory authority.
There is hereby created and established in the Township, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1 et seq., as amended,4 a municipal court which shall be
entitled the "Municipal Court of the Township of Wall."
§ 14-2. Seal.
The Municipal Court shall have a seal which shall bear the impression of the
name of the court.
§ 14-3. Judge; appointment and term.
The Municipal Court shall have a Judge who shall be known as the
Municipal Judge. He shall be appointed by the Township Committee and
shall serve for a term of three years from the date of his appointment
and until his successor is appointed and qualified. Any appointment to fill
a vacancy caused other than by expiration of term shall be made for the
unexpired term only.
C. The Township is further authorized to enter into other such agreements
with other lead agencies as may be determined by the Township
Committee from time to time to be advantageous to the Township.
A. The lead agency under such cooperative pricing and cooperative
purchasing agreements shall be responsible for compliance with all
applicable provisions of the Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A.
40A:11-1 et seq.) and all other provisions of the revised statutes of the
State of New Jersey as to the bidding, awarding, and execution of
master contracts.
B. The Township shall be responsible under such agreements to certify the
availability of funds for purchases to be made by or on behalf of the
Township and to issue such purchase orders or other documents as may
be necessary to complete such purchases.
4. Editor's Note: Repealed by L. 1993, c. 293. See now N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq.
§ 12-1 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 14-4
14:53
§ 14-4. Qualifications of Judge.
The person to be appointed to the position of Municipal Judge shall have
such qualifications as required by the statutes of New Jersey and the rules
of the Supreme Court of this state.
§ 14-5. Duties of Judge.
It shall be the function and obligation of the Municipal Judge to carry
out the administration of justice within the Township and manage the
operations of the Municipal Court as required by the Statutes of New Jersey
and the rules of the Supreme Court of this state.
§ 14-6. Administrator.
§ 14-7. Department head.
The Municipal Court Administrator shall be considered to be the
department head of the Municipal Court for purposes of all benefits,
entitlements and regulations of this chapter, including compensatory time
provisions.
§ 14-8. Compensation.
The salary for Municipal Judge, Court Administrator and Deputy
Administrators shall be established by the Annual Salary Ordinance.
§ 14-9. Municipal Court discovery. [Added 12-8-2004 by Ord. No.
35-2004]
A. There shall be a Municipal Court Administrator who shall serve for a
term of three years from the date of his appointment and until his
successor is appointed and qualified. He shall perform such functions
and duties as are prescribed for him by law, the rules of the courts and
the Judge.
B. The Judge of a Municipal Court may designate, in writing, an Acting
Administrator or Deputy Administrator to serve temporarily for an
absent Administrator or Deputy Administrator until the absent
Administrator or Deputy Administrator returns or a new Administrator
or Deputy Administrator is appointed. The Acting Administrator or
Acting Deputy Administrator shall be paid at a rate established by the
Judge but not exceeding that established for the Administrator or
Deputy Administrator.
C. The Administrator and Deputy Administrator shall accept appearances,
waivers of trial, pleas of guilty and payments of fines and costs in
nonindictable offenses in the Municipal Court and its Violations Bureau
subject to the limitations prescribed by the rules of court.
A. All requests for discovery in matters pending in the Wall Township
Municipal Court shall be submitted through the Municipal Prosecutor.
§ 14-4 WALL CODE § 14-9
14:54
Chapter 16
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire companies and first aid squads — See Ch.
18.
Fire districts — See Ch. 20.
Police Department — See Ch. 36.
Alarms — See Ch. 59.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 113.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 125.
B. The following fees shall be payable by the requestor to the Township of
Wall for the discovery provided:
(1) Seventy-five cents per page for each of the first 10 pages
photocopied.
(2) Fifty cents per page for each of the next 10 pages photocopied.
(3) Twenty-five cents per page for each of the pages photocopied
thereafter.
(4) Actual postage for any discovery sent by mail.
(5) Twenty-five cents for the envelope for any discovery sent by mail.
(6) Photographs will be photocopied at the rates established herein. If
requests are made for duplicate photographs, the actual cost of
making the photographs shall be charged.
(7) Duplication of videotapes or audiotapes constitutes an
extraordinary duplication process and will be charged at the rate of
$5 per videotape or audiotape.
(8) On any item that cannot be photocopied on the Township copy
machine or not otherwise provided for in this schedule, the actual
cost incurred in making the copy shall be charged.
C. Where the discovery must be obtained from an entity other than the
Township of Wall, e.g., another police department, the actual costs paid
to the other entity shall be paid by the requestor.
§ 14-9 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 14-9
14:55

ARTICLE I
Adoption of National Incident Management System
[Adopted 10-22-2008 by Ord. No. 19-2008]
§ 16-1. Intent and purpose.
§ 16-2. Definitions.
A. It is the intent and purpose of this article to formally adopt the National
Incident Management System (NIMS) and adopt the principles and
policies of the NIMS that will ensure the complete and efficient
utilization of all of the Township of Wall's resources to efficiently
respond to emergent incidents affecting the public welfare and safety.
B. The purpose of the NIMS is to provide a consistent nationwide
approach for federal, state, territorial, tribal, and local governments to
work effectively and efficiently together to prepare for, prevent,
respond to, and recover from domestic incidents, regardless of cause,
size or complexity.
C. The NIMS provides a common foundation for day-to-day operations,
training and other preparedness efforts; communicating and sharing
information with other responders and with the public, ordering
resources to assist with a response effort, and for integrating new
technologies and standards to support incident management.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COORDINATOR — The Coordinator of the Wall Township Office of
Emergency Management, appointed as prescribed in this article.
DISASTER — Includes but is not limited to actual or threatened enemy
attack, sabotage, extraordinary fire, flood, storm, epidemic, accident,
chemical spill or other impending or actual calamity endangering or
threatening to endanger health, life or property of constituted
government.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT — The basic government functions of
maintaining the public peace, health and safety during an emergency.
This term includes plans and preparations for protection and relief,
recovery and rehabilitation from effects of an attack by the forces of an
enemy nation or the agents thereof, or a disaster as defined herein. It
does not, however, include activity that is the primary responsibility of
the military forces of the United States.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES — The employees, equipment
and facilities of all Township departments, agencies, boards, councils,
institutions and commissions; in addition, it shall include all volunteer
personnel, equipment and facilities contributed by or obtained from
volunteer persons or agencies that are assigned the duties of
responding to emergencies within Wall Township.
§ 16-1 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 16-2
14:57
§ 16-3. Adoption of NIMS.
§ 16-4. Appointment and duties of Coordinator.
INCIDENT COMMAND SYSTEM (ICS) — The combination of facilities,
equipment, personnel, procedures and communications operating
within a common organizational structure, designed to aid in domestic
incident management activities as outlined in the NIMS document
under Appendix A.
NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (NIMS) — A document
produced by the Department of Homeland Security under the direction
of Presidential Directive-5 that strengthens response capabilities
through a balance between flexibility and standardization, and use of
common doctrine, terminology, concepts, principles and processes.
NIMS INTEGRATION CENTER (NIC) — The federal agency established
to provide strategic direction and oversight of the NIMS, supporting
both routine maintenance and continuous refinement of the system and
its components. NIC develops and facilitates national standards for the
NIMS.
B. Other terms. Any other terms not defined herein shall be defined by the
National Incident Management System.
A. The Township of Wall formally adopts NIMS, as same may be revised
from time to time by the Department of Homeland Security as its
incident response policy to a disaster and to provide a common
foundation for training and other preparedness efforts, for
communicating and sharing information with other responders and
with the public, for ordering resources to assist with a response effort
and for integrating new technologies and standards to support incident
management.
B. NIMS' principles and policies are to be adhered to by all emergency
management forces and across all functional disciplines within Wall
Township, including volunteer emergency services.
C. Wall Township shall institutionalize the use of the ICS as outlined in
Appendix A of NIMS in order to enhance command, control and
communications capabilities.
A. The Wall Township Emergency Management Coordinator shall serve as
the Coordinator of NIMS operations pursuant to this article.
B. The Coordinator shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
(1) To consult with other agencies, municipalities and affected
organizations in Wall Township to recommend and require
specified levels of NIMS training.
(2) To oversee Wall Township's commitment to NIMS through
planning, training and implementation.
§ 16-2 WALL CODE § 16-4
14:58
§ 16-5. Applicability extension.
The municipal organizations listed below are hereby required to adhere to
and participate in NIMS as directed by the Township.
(3) To conduct training exercises for all participating agencies using
ICS and NIMS concepts.
(4) To develop an organizational structure and make appointments
thereto in accordance with the policies and procedures set forth in
NIMS.
A. Wall Fire Company District No. 1.
B. Glendola Fire Company District No. 2.
C. South Wall Fire Company District No. 3.
D. Wall Township First Aid and Rescue Squad.
E. Wall Community First Aid Squad.
F. Wall Township Police.
G. Wall Township Emergency Management.
H. Wall Township Public Works.
I. Wall Township Municipal Government.
§ 16-4 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 16-5
14:59
Chapter 18
FIRE COMPANIES AND FIRST AID SQUADS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Districts — See Ch. 20. Fire prevention — See Ch. 113.
§ 16-5 WALL CODE § 16-5
14:60
ARTICLE I
Application for Membership
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Secs. 3-24.1 through 3-24.5 of the Revised
General Ordinances]
§ 18-1. Application.
Every person seeking to join a volunteer fire company or first aid squad
within the Township shall make application to the fire company or first aid
squad which he or she desires to join and shall complete an application,
in duplicate, the form of which may be prescribed by the company or
squad, which application shall contain the following information about the
applicant:
§ 18-2. Investigation.
Following the filing of such application, the fire company or first aid squad
shall transmit a copy of the application to the Chief of Police who shall
conduct an investigation to ascertain the truth of the statements made by
the applicant upon his or her application and any such other investigation
of the applicant's background as he deems necessary for the protection of
the public good. If as a result of such investigation the applicant is found to
have been convicted of a violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:17-1 or N.J.S.A. 2C:33-3, or
any other crime or disorderly person violation; or the investigation reveals
any other information that would indicate that the applicant may be a threat
to the health, safety or welfare of the community, the Chief of Police shall
report such information and the particulars thereof to the fire company or
first aid squad.
A. Name;
B. Home address;
C. Birth date;
D. Social security number;
E. Driver's license number;
F. Any conviction of a violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:17-1, including aggravated
arson, arson, failure to control or report a dangerous fire, or directly or
indirectly pay or accept any form of consideration for the purpose of
starting a fire or explosion;
G. Any conviction of a violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:33-3 regarding false public
alarms;
H. Any conviction of a crime or disorderly persons violation; and
I. Any such other information as the fire company or first aid squad deems
relevant to the application, provided that no such information shall be
requested which is prohibited by law.
§ 18-1 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 18-3
14:61
§ 18-3. Fingerprinting.
In connection with such investigation, the applicant shall submit to
fingerprinting, and the Chief of Police is authorized to submit the applicant's
fingerprint card and receive state criminal history record information from
the Division of State Police/State Bureau of Identification for use in
considering the suitability of an applicant covered under this chapter. The
Chief of Police shall endeavor to complete any such investigation within 60
days of his receipt of the application.5
§ 18-4. Fire companies and first aid squad considered authorized
agencies.
It is intended that the three existing fire companies, and the two existing
first aid squads in the Township shall be deemed to be authorized agencies
as defined by N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1 for the purposes of requesting information
from the Division of State Police/State Bureau of Identification.
§ 18-5. Statutory authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:42-1 et seq., the Home Rule
Act, which directs municipalities to act for the health, welfare and safety of
its citizens, and to implement the provisions of N.J.S.A. 15:8-1.1.
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. 33, Personnel Policies, Art. IV, Criminal History Background
Checks.
§ 18-3 WALL CODE § 18-5
14:62
ARTICLE II
Incentive Benefits
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Secs. 3-24.6 through 3-24.9 of the Revised
General Ordinances]
§ 18-6. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIVE MEMBER — Volunteers in a Township fire company or first aid
squad who meet the definition of active member or active life member as
certified in writing by the chief executive officer of a volunteer fire company
or volunteer first aid squad within the Township and who have served at
least one year of continuous service in the company or squad and who
possess the necessary certifications and/or training required by the said
company or squad.
FEES — Those charges established by the Township Committee of the
Township of Wall which are fully retained by the Township of Wall as
revenue. Specifically excluded is any portion of any fee which is collected
by the Township on behalf of another entity including by way of example but
not by way of limitation the State of New Jersey, the County of Monmouth,
any regional sewerage authority, or any outside vendor.
§ 18-7. Exemption from payment of certain fees.
A. All active members of any Township fire company or first aid squad
shall be entitled to an exemption from payment of the following:
(1) Township fees for marriage licenses;
(2) Township fees for dog licenses;
(3) Township fees for recreation activities; 50% discount for the spouse
and children of an active member of any Township fire company or
first aid squad; [Amended 4-9-2003 by Ord. No. 7-2003]
(4) Township fees for Township training programs;
(5) Township certificate of occupancy fees;
(6) The Township portion of all Construction Department permit fees
for a primary residence owned and occupied by the active
volunteer member; [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No.
23-2015]
(7) The Township land use permit fees for a primary residence owned
and occupied by the active volunteer member. [Added
12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 23-2015]
§ 18-6 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 18-7
14:63
§ 18-8. Exclusions.
Incentive benefits for active members exclude the following:
§ 18-9. Submission of list of active members and updates.
§ 18-10. Enforcement.
The Township Administrator or his designee is hereby authorized to enforce
the provision of this article.
B. The foregoing exemptions shall apply only to fees established by the
Township Committee which are fully retained by the Township as
revenue.
A. Fees, licenses and permits associated with any for-profit activity.
B. Inclusion in programs when the registration is received after maximum
registration has been reached.
C. Fees and escrows associated with Planning Board and Board of
Adjustment site plan and subdivision applications, i.e., engineering
fees, legal fees and inspection fees.
D. Escrows associated with engineering inspections.
E. Posting of performance and maintenance guarantees where required.
F. Sewerage authority charges and fees.
A. On or about January 31 of each calendar year each fire company and
first aid and rescue squad shall submit to the Township Administrator a
list of individuals who meet the definition for active member status.
Updates shall be provided by the fire companies and first aid squads to
the Township Administrator on a periodic basis to add those individuals
who have completed their probationary status or to delete individuals
who no longer meet the criteria for active member status.
B. All active members must comply with all registration procedures and
complete all application forms established by the Township for any
permit, approval, program or activity.
§ 18-7 WALL CODE § 18-10
14:64
ARTICLE III
Length of Service Awards Program for First Aid Squads
[Adopted 8-14-2002 by Ord. No. 38-2002]
§ 18-11. Establishment.
There is hereby established in the Township of Wall a length of service
award program (LOSAP) to reward members of the volunteer first aid
squads for their loyal, diligent and devoted services to the residents of
the Township of Wall. This LOSAP is created pursuant to the Emergency
Services Volunteer Length of Service Award Program Act, N.J.S.A.
40A:14-183, and the regulations promulgated thereunder at N.J.A.C.
5:30-14.1, et seq.
§ 18-12. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the operative words and terms shall have
the meanings set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-184, and N.J.A.C. 5:30-14.1, as
those provisions may be amended and supplemented from time to time.
§ 18-13. Description of LOSAP.
The Wall Township LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to
a deferred income account for each volunteer member that meets the
criteria set forth in § 18-14 hereof. Such contributions shall be made in
accordance with a plan that shall be established by the Township Committee
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-183 et seq., and such plan shall be administered
in accordance with the laws and regulations of the State of New Jersey
pertaining thereto, the United States Internal Revenue Code and this
article. The plan shall have the following provisions:
A. Benefits will become fully vested upon the completion of five years of
active volunteer emergency service.
B. There shall be a forfeiture provision for a break of service of five
consecutive years prior to vesting.
C. Benefits shall be payable after 15 years of service, at age 55, or upon
another qualifying event pursuant to law.
D. As required by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-188, points will be awarded according to
certain criteria. To qualify for the full award for a calendar year under
the plan, an active volunteer member shall be required to accrue 500
points in that calendar year.
E. The plan shall provide for a credit for up to 10 years of prior service
based on the same criteria.
§ 18-11 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 18-14
14:65
§ 18-14. Criteria.
The Wall Township LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions to each
eligible active volunteer member of a first aid squad who meets the
following criteria:
A. One year as an active volunteer member of the Wall Township First Aid
and Rescue Squad or the Wall Community First Aid Squad; and
B. The amount of the award for a year under the program shall be based
upon the points accrued in a calendar year in accordance with the
following point schedule:
(1) Ten points for responding in an ambulance to a dispatched
emergency or dispatched unscheduled assignment;
(2) Three points for immediately responding to the squad
headquarters for such a call, but being unable to respond in the
ambulance due to impossibility, such as the ambulance being in
service or fully staffed prior to the member's arrival at the squad
headquarters;
(3) Eight points for responding and remaining with the ambulance for
scheduled events, such as local school athletic events, parades and
special events sponsored by the Township which benefit from the
presence of the emergency service organization;
(4) Five points for attendance at a drill, training session, or other
recognized continuing education event;
(5) Three points to be awarded at the discretion of a Squad Captain;
(6) Three points for washing or other maintenance of ambulances or
squad equipment;
(7) Three hundred points for a full year of service as Squad Captain;
(8) Two hundred points for a full year of service as 1st Lieutenant;
(9) One hundred fifty points for a full year of service as 2nd Lieutenant;
(10) One hundred points for a full year of service as Sergeant;
(11) One hundred points for a full year of service as Engineer;
(12) Two hundred points for a full year of service as President;
(13) Two hundred points for a full year of service as Vice President;
(14) Two hundred fifty points for a full year of service as Secretary;
(15) Two hundred fifty points for a full year of service as Treasurer;
(16) One hundred fifty points for a full year of service as trustee;
(17) Fifty points for a full year of service as crew chief.
§ 18-14 WALL CODE § 18-15
14:66
§ 18-15. Minimum and maximum contributions.
The Wall Township LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions in the
minimum amount of $100 and the maximum amount of $1,000, subject to
periodic consumer price index increases pursuant to law.
§ 18-16. Prior service credit.
The Wall Township LOSAP shall provide for not more than 10 years of credit
for prior active emergency service prior to the establishment of the plan.
Prior service credit shall be subject to the same minimum and maximum
annual amounts as set forth in § 18-15 hereof and shall be credited based
upon the same criteria as set forth in § 18-14 hereof. Only active volunteer
members shall be eligible for prior service credit. The amount of the prior
service contribution for each member shall be paid over a ten-year period,
subject to the maximum annual contribution per member as established by
law.
§ 18-17. Estimated costs.
The estimated cost of the Wall Township LOSAP program has been
calculated as follows:
§ 18-18. When effective.
This article shall take effect on January 1, 2003; provided, however, that it
is approved by the voters of the Township in a public question to be placed
on the ballot of the general election to be held on November 5, 2002.6
A. For annual contributions to active volunteer members: $30,000 per
year.
B. For contributions for prior service credits: $32,600 per year for 10
years.
6. Editor's Note: The voters did approve the public question at the general election.
§ 18-15 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 18-18
14:67

ARTICLE IV
First Aid Squad Fees
[Adopted 6-11-2003 by Ord. No. 12-2003]
§ 18-19. Fees for services rendered by first aid squads.
The Township Committee, by duly adopted resolution, shall establish the
fees to be charged for certain patient transportation service costs in
connection with the services provided by the Township first aid squads.
§ 18-20. (Reserved)
§ 18-19 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 18-20
14:69
Chapter 20
FIRE DISTRICTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire companies and first aid squads — See Ch.
18.
§ 20-1. Realignment of fire districts.
§ 20-2. Establishment of Fire District No. One.
The first fire district of the Township shall be bounded as follows:
A. The Township Committee has received petitions pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-91 for the dissolution of Fire Districts Nos. 2 and 3 each signed
by at least 20 legal voters residing in each fire district proposed to be
dissolved; and the Township Committee has received petitions pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-90 for the enlargement of Fire District No. 1 to
include additional territory in the Township now included in Fire
Districts Nos. 2 and 3, said petition setting forth a description of Fire
District No. 1 as it would be constituted after enlargement, and said
petition being submitted and signed by at least 10 legal voters residing
in each area proposed to be included in Fire District No. 1.
B. The Township Committee has received petitions pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-70 for the establishment of new Fire District Nos. 2 and 3 and
setting forth in said petition a description of the territorial locations to
be included in said fire districts and each petition being signed by at
least 20 legal voters residing in Fire District No. 2 and Fire District No.
3; and the Township Committee has considered the petitions submitted
to it and has determined that it will be in the best interest of the public
health, safety and welfare and will greatly contribute to the furnishing
of an efficient and effective means of fire protection to the residents of
the Township if the territorial locations of the three fire districts
presently serving the Township are realigned; and the Township
Committee pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-70 is obliged to designate by
this chapter a territorial location or locations for use as a fire district or
fire districts.
§ 18-20 WALL CODE § 20-2
20:70
BEGINNING at a point in the centerline of New Jersey State Highway
Route No. 35, where the same is intersected by the dividing line between
the Township of Wall and the Borough of Belmar, and running from said
beginning point (1) Eastwardly. along the aforesaid dividing line between
the Township of Wall and the Borough of Belmar, to the point in the
dividing line between the Township of Wall and the Borough of South
Belmar, thence (2) Southwardly, along the aforesaid dividing line between
the Township of Wall and the Borough of South Belmar, to a point in the
dividing line between the Township of Wall and the Borough of Spring
Lake Heights, thence (3) Southwestwardly, and Southwardly, along the
aforesaid dividing line between the Township of Wall and the Borough
of Spring Lake Heights to its intersection with the Northerly line of Lot
8, Block 273, thence (4) Westwardly, along the aforesaid northerly line
of Lot 8, Block 273 to its intersection with the easterly line of Lot 4,
Block 273, thence (5) Southwardly, along the aforesaid easterly line of Lot
4, Block 273 to its intersection with Goss's Lane (extended Eastwardly),
thence (6) Westwardly, along Goss's Lane, and the extension thereof, across
New Jersey State Highway Route No. 35 to a point in the centerline of
New Bedford Road, thence (7) Northwardly, along the aforesaid centerline
of New Bedford Road to a point in the centerline of Eighteenth Avenue
(Monmouth County Highway Route No. 30), thence (8) Eastwardly, along
the aforesaid centerline of Eighteenth Avenue to its intersection with the
Easterly line (extended Southwardly) of Lot 6, Block 85, Wall Township Tax
Map, property of the Board of Education of the Township of Wall, commonly
known and referred to as High School Property, thence (9) Northwardly,
along the aforesaid Easterly line of Lot 6, Block 85, and the extension
thereof, to the Northerly side of the Eastbound lane of the New Jersey State
Highway Route No. 38, thence (10) Eastwardly, along the Northerly side of
the aforesaid Eastbound lane of the New Jersey State Highway Route No.
38, to its intersection with the centerline of the New Jersey State Highway
Route No. 35, thence (11) Northeastwardly, along the aforesaid centerline
of Route No. 35, to the point or place of BEGINNING; and shall be known
as Wall Fire District No. 1 of the Township.
§ 20-3. Affect on terms of Fire Commissioners.
Nothing contained herein shall affect the terms of members of the Board
of Fire Commissioners or officers or personnel thereof, nor the bonds or
obligations of Wall Fire District No. 1.
§ 20-4. Establishment of Fire District No. 2.
There is hereby established in the Township pursuant to N.J.S.A.40A:14-70
a fire district which shall be known as "Wall Fire District No. 2" and the
geographical area encompassed by the Wail Fire District No. 2, described
by metes and bounds, is as follows:
§ 20-2 FIRE DISTRICTS § 20-4
20:71
BEGINNING at a point in the centerline of Atlantic Avenue, also known as
Monmouth County Highway Route No. 524, (formerly Como-Allaire Road),
where the same is intersected by the dividing line between the Township
of Wall and the Township of Howell, and running from said beginning point
(1) Northwardly, along the aforesaid dividing line between the Township of
Wall and the Township of Howell to a point in the dividing line between the
Township of Colts Neck and the Township of Wall, thence (2) Eastwardly,
along the aforesaid dividing line between the Township of Colts Neck and
the Township of Wall, to a point in the dividing line between the Borough
of New Shrewsbury and the Township of Wall, thence (3) Southwardly
and Southeastwardly, along the aforesaid line dividing the Township of
Wall from the Borough of New Shrewsbury, and the Township of Neptune,
its various courses to a point in the main channel of Shark River, said
point being in the Northwesterly boundary line of the Borough of Belmar,
thence (4) Southwestwardly, Southeastwardly, and Southwardly, along the
dividing line between the Borough of Belmar and the Township of Wall
to a point in the centerline of New Jersey State Highway Route No. 35,
thence (5) Southwestwardly, along the aforesaid centerline of Route 35, to
its intersection with the Northerly side of the Eastbound lane of New Jersey
State Highway Route No. 38, thence (6) Westwardly, along the Northerly
side of the aforesaid Eastbound lane of Route No. 38 to its intersection
with the Easterly line (extended Northwardly) of Lot 6, Block 85, Wall
Township Tax Map property of the Board of Education of the Township of
Wall, commonly known and referred to as the High School Property, thence
(7) Southwardly, along the aforesaid Easterly line of Lot 6, Block 85 and
the extension thereof to a point in the centerline of Eighteenth Avenue
(Monmouth County Highway Route No. 30). thence Westwardly, along the
aforesaid centerline of Eighteenth Avenue to a point in the centerline of
New Bedford Road, thence (9) Southwardly, along the aforesaid centerline
of New Bedford Road to a point in the centerline of Allaire Road also
known as Monmouth County Highway Route No. 524, (formerly Como-
Allaire Road), thence (10) Westwardly, and Northwestwardly, along the
centerline of Allaire Road to a point in the centerline of Atlantic Avenue
also known as Monmouth County Highway Route No. 524, thence (11)
Northwestwardly, along the centerline of Atlantic Avenue to the point or
place of BEGINNING.
§ 20-5. Commissioners of Fire District No. 2.
The Commissioners of Wall Fire District No. 2 and their successors shall be
known as the "Commissioners of Fire District No. 2 in the Township of Wall,
County of Monmouth." The District Board of Fire Commissioners shall have
all such powers and duties as are provided by law.
§ 20-6. Establishment of Fire District No. 3.
There is hereby established in the Township pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-70
a fire district which shall be known as "Wall Fire District No. 3" and
the geographical area encompassed by the said Wall Fire District No. 3
described by metes and bounds is as follows:
§ 20-4 WALL CODE § 20-6
20:72
BEGINNING at a point in the centerline of Atlantic Avenue, also known as
Monmouth County Highway Route No. 524 (formerly Como-Allaire Road)
where the same is intersected by the dividing line between the Township
of Wall and the Township of Howell and running from said beginning point
(1) Southeastwardly, along the aforesaid centerline of Atlantic Avenue to a
point in the centerline of Allaire Road, also known as Monmouth County
Highway Route No. 524 thence (2) Southeastwardly, and Eastwardly, along
the aforesaid centerline of Allaire Road to a point in the centerline of New
Bedford Road thence (3) Southwardly, along the aforesaid centerline of
New Bedford Road to its intersection with a lane known as Goss's Lane
(extended Westwardly) thence (4) Eastwardly, crossing New Jersey State
Highway Route No. 35, along Goss's Lane and the extension thereof to
a point in the westerly line of Lot 8, Block 273 thence (5) Northwardly,
along the aforesaid westerly line of Lot 8, Block 273 to its intersection with
the southerly line of Lot 11, Block 273, thence (6) Eastwardly, along the
aforesaid southerly line of Lot 11, Block 273 to a point in the dividing line
between the Township of Wall and the Borough of Spring Lake Heights,
thence (7) Southwestwardly, along a line dividing the Township of Wall
from the Borough of Spring Lake Heights, Borough of Sea Girt, Borough
of Manasquan, and the Borough of Brielle, to a point in the dividing
line between the Township of Wall and the Township of Brick at the
Manasquan River, thence (8) Northwestwardly, along the aforesaid dividing
line between the Township of Wall and the Township of Brick, the various
course thereof to an angle point in the said dividing line near Allenwood-
Lakewood Road (School House Road) thence (9) Southwestwardly,
continuing along the dividing line between the Township of Wall and the
Township of Brick to a point in the dividing line between the Township
of Wall and the Township of Howell, thence (10) Northwardly, along the
aforesaid dividing line between the Township of Wall and the Township of
Howell to a point or place of BEGINNING.
§ 20-7. Commissioners of Fire District No. 3.
The Commissioners of Wall Fire District No. 3 and their successors shall be
known as the "Commissioners of Fire District No. 3 in the Township of Wall,
County of Monmouth." The District Board of Fire Commissioners shall have
all such powers and duties as are provided by law.
§ 20-8. Status of money in treasuries and real and personal
property of fire districts.
Nothing contained herein shall affect any moneys remaining in the fire
district treasury of Wall Fire District No. 2 or Wall Fire District No. 3 nor
any of the real or personal property or assets, tangible or intangible title
to which is held by either Wall Fire District No. 2 or Wall Fire District No.
3, but the title to all such assets shall be and become the property and be
retained for the use and enjoyment of those respective fire districts created
hereunder and bearing the same name.
§ 20-6 FIRE DISTRICTS § 20-9
20:73
§ 20-9. Election of Fire Commissioners.
§ 20-10. Terms of members.
The members shall be elected to terms of three years.
§ 20-11. Vacancy.
Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled by appointment by the
remaining members until the next succeeding annual election, at which
time a resident of the district shall be elected for the unexpired term.
Chapter 23
GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP
§ 23-1. Acquisition of property authorized.
The Township Committee on its behalf is hereby authorized to acquire, by
gift, bequest or devise, any real or personal property, subject to conditions
or limitations imposed by the person from whom the property is so acquired,
or by any previous owner.
Chapter 33
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative offices — See Ch. 2.
A. There shall be elected a Board of Fire Commissioners for Wall Fire
District No. 2 and Wall Fire District No. 3 each Board to consist of five
persons, residents of the fire districts concerned.
B. At the first meeting of the newly elected Board of Fire Commissioners of
each district, the Board shall choose a Chairman and fix the time and
place for the annual election. The members of the Board shall divide
themselves by lot into three classes: the first to consist of two members
to be elected for terms of one year; the second, two members for terms
of two years; and the third, one member of a term of three years.
§ 20-9 WALL CODE § 23-1
23:74
ARTICLE I
Municipal Employees
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Secs. 2-4.1 through 2-4.12 of the Revised
General Ordinances]
§ 33-1. Establishment of policies.
There is hereby established in and for this Township the following personnel
policies relating to all present and future municipal employees of this
Township.
§ 33-2. General personnel policy.
The purpose of these personnel policies is:
A. To seek and to obtain for each position to be filled the highest and best
qualified person available, and to employ individuals without regard to
race, color, creed, national origin, sex, age, or religious or sexual
preference.
B. To provide for all employees the best possible direction, leadership,
training, supervision, guidance, instruction and working conditions.
C. To base promotion and job security on ability, performance, experience,
character, integrity, attitude, interest and personality.
D. To make the best possible use of employee skills and abilities, in order
to have each job performed by the best qualified person.
E. To first consider qualified Township personnel for promotion, whenever
there is an opportunity for advancement.
F. To treat every employee with the justice, respect, courtesy and
consideration properly due him.
G. To expect and require every employee consistently to do the best work
of which he is capable; to be loyal and conscientious at all times; to
conduct himself in a proper manner; and to treat all with whom he
comes in contact with the same consideration and courtesy that he
could reasonably expect from them.
H. To urge the self-betterment of every employee; to encourage him to
study and seek all possible means of increasing his value, both to his
community and to himself.
I. To pay fair and adequate salaries for each position, and in return to
expect and require a consistently good job from the employee.
J. To impress on all employees that at all times they are serving and
responsible to the citizens and taxpayers of their community and the
general public.
§ 33-1 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 33-2
23:75
§ 33-3. General employment practices.
The following general employment practices shall be followed in this
Township:
K. To inculcate and to maintain in every employee of the Township a
feeling of pride in himself and his employer, as well as satisfaction
because he serves, and is an important part of, one of the finest
communities in the State of New Jersey.
A. Creation of new positions. The Township Committee shall formally
effect the creation of any new position and authorize the filling of any
such position, prior to any employment or engagement of any employee,
either by establishing the position in the annual budget and Salary
Ordinance or by action taken at any regular meeting of the Township
Committee. There shall be provided in the current budget or otherwise
specific and adequate funds to compensate an employee before his or
her engagement. This provision shall not, however, prevent the
temporary hiring of any employee between Township Committee
meetings, subject to approval at the next regular Township Committee
meeting.
B. Filling vacancy open six months. The Township Administrator shall
examine the need for the hiring of an employee or the filling of a
vacancy which has existed for over six months in any previously
authorized or established full-time position and shall report to the
Township Committee before any action is initiated to fill the same.
C. Notice of job opening. Whenever a vacancy exists or a new position is
created, a notice of the same will be posted in the Municipal Building,
the Department of Public Works and police headquarters for at least
one week prior to the deadline for receiving applications. All Township
employees who believe they possess the necessary qualifications may
apply for the position, if they so desire. Such applications should be by
letter, addressed to the Township Administrator and filed before the
deadline specified. Due consideration shall be given by the department
head or heads effected and by the Township Administrator of each
requested transfer of an employee from one department to another, and
the parties shall also consider the overall welfare of the Township in
considering and making employee transfers. The Township at all times,
however, reserves the right to reject any and all requests for such
transfer and to publicly advertise for any vacant or new position.
D. Application forms. Application forms for employment as approved by
the Township Administrator may be obtained in the office of the
Township Clerk and shall be completed by all persons applying for
employment with the Township. The application form shall contain a
release authorizing the Township to conduct appropriate background
investigations, including an examination of the applicant's driving
record, and the applicant shall be required to provide his or her driver's
license number on the application form.
§ 33-2 WALL CODE § 33-3
23:76
E. Consideration by department heads. As soon as practical after the final
date specified for filing, all such applications received, including those
from Township employees, will be considered by the department head
involved and the Township Administrator.
F. Interview by Township Administrator. The Township Administrator shall
personally interview the applicants for Township employment who
appear to be best qualified for the position and able to perform the
duties thereof, and will make a written recommendation to the
Township Committee relative to the appointment. The Township
Administrator will interview only those applicants who the
Administrator, in his discretion, deems qualified for a position. The
Township Committee shall make the final determination whether to
appoint, engage or hire the applicant recommended by the Township
Administrator, subject to a satisfactory medical examination in the case
of public works, Police Department and recreation employees and any
further investigation of references as deemed necessary by the
Township Committee. The hiring of any other employee shall be subject
to a satisfactory medical examination when deemed necessary or
appropriate by the Township Administrator or the Township Committee.
G. Layoff and recall policy.
(1) General statement. In the event it is determined that a reduction in
the work force will take place, the Township will consider such
factors as length of service, qualifications, experience, work history
and its operational needs in determining which employees will be
affected.
(2) Layoff policy. General determinations of which employee(s) will be
laid off will be conducted on a job classification and functional
basis.
(a) Temporary employees and/or employees who have not yet
completed their probationary period of employment in any
affected position will generally be terminated prior to the layoff
of any regular full-time or part-time employee in that position.
Exceptions may arise where removing full-time or part-time
employees who do not have requisite skills and/or abilities
necessary to perform the jobs previously performed by such
temporary or short-term employees may be necessary,
particularly where the position is directed by state statute.
(b) Where there is more than one regular full-time and/or parttime
employee in a position affected by a reduction in work
force, the Township will consider such factors as work record,
past attendance, qualification, skill, experience, overall
flexibility within the department and length of service with the
Township and/or in the position, in determining which
employee or employees will be laid off.
§ 33-3 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 33-3
23:77
(3) Recall policy. Generally, employees with the longest service in a
position to be filled will be recalled to that position first, if and
when increases in that position occur.
(a) Regular full-time and part-time employees who are laid off due
to a staff reduction may be extended an invitation to return to
work following the layoff in the event the Township determines
an increase in staff is warranted. This invitation will normally
be offered for only three days after a layoff period.
(b) Employee recall opportunities will expire after one year
following a layoff or for a period equal to the employee's most
recent length of continuous service with the Township,
whichever is sooner.
(c) Employees who are recalled and begin employment within the
applicable period will retain credit for past continuous service
up to the date of layoff for purposes of such benefits as
vacation earning, rates and similar benefits. The period of
layoff is not counted as continuous length of service in a
computation of longevity payments.
(d) Employees who are not recalled within the relevant period or
refuse an offer of reemployment will be considered terminated
as of the end of the relevant period or as of the date of refusal,
whichever is applicable.
(e) Temporary employees and employees on probation when staff
reductions occur will be terminated and will normally not be
extended any recall privileges.
(f) The affirmative action officer shall review decisions made
concerning specific personnel to be laid off or recalled for
compliance with equal employment opportunity laws.
(g) Medical and other insurance benefits shall continue for fulltime
laid-off personnel, for one month after the month in which
they are terminated.
H. Basis for appointment. Appointments to Township employment shall be
made on the basis of information contained in the application for
employment and such other information as may be obtained in the
personal interview or employment investigation process. Any
misstatement or withholding of pertinent information by the applicant
will be considered as sufficient cause for immediate separation from the
service of the Township.
I. Probationary service. Except where statutory requirements direct
otherwise, all new, rehired or transferred employees, except those
covered by collective bargaining agreements, shall serve a period of
probation of a minimum of 90 days. New hires in an entry-level position
will have a probationary period of one year. Within that time frame, two
§ 33-3 WALL CODE § 33-3
23:78
reviews shall take place with feedback on work performance. All entrylevel
positions will have the possibility of increases not to exceed
$1,000 each based on the two performance reviews during the oneyear
probationary time. "Entry-level" positions shall be defined as those
that do not require a certification or degree. All full-time employees
shall be entitled to insurance and sick leave benefits commencing on
the first day of the month following the first 30 days of employment.
All full-time employees shall be entitled to the other personnel benefits
of this article commencing on the 31st day of employment. [Amended
12-28-2016 by Ord. No. 17-2016]
J. Personal history file. The Department of Personnel will check all papers
and records for completeness and establish a personnel file for each
and every employee of the Township. [Amended 12-28-2016 by Ord.
No. 17-2016]
K. Employees covered. The benefits of this article are intended to cover
only permanent full-time employees, elected officials and part-time
employees where specified. Temporary and seasonal employees shall
not receive any of the benefits of this article. [Amended 12-28-2016
by Ord. No. 17-2016]
(1) Part-time employees.
(a) Regular part-time employees are defined as those who work an
average of 20 or more hours per week, averaged over a
calendar quarter. In lieu of all earned time provisions
contained elsewhere in this article, such employees will be
entitled to eight hours of paid time off per calendar quarter.
(b) Part-time employees will not be entitled to longevity.
L. Exceptions; personnel covered by collective bargaining agreements.
The benefits, rules and regulations of this article shall apply to all
Township personnel defined above except those covered by collective
bargaining agreements entered into between the Township Committee
and duly recognized collective bargaining units of the Township.
Anything set forth in the collective bargaining agreements inconsistent
with the provisions of the personnel chapter shall be controlled by the
collective bargaining agreements. Any subject matters of the personnel
chapter which are not covered in the collective bargaining agreements
shall be controlled by this personnel chapter.
M. Whistle-blower policy. The Township shall not take any retaliatory
action against an employee because the employee does any of the
following:
(1) Disclose or threaten to disclose to a supervisor or a member of the
governing body or to a public body, as defined in the Employment
Protection Act (N.J.S.A. 34:19-1 et seq.), an activity, policy or
practice of the Township that the employee reasonably believes is
in violation of a law, or Township policy.
§ 33-3 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 33-3
23:79
(2) Provides information to, or testifies before, any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation of
law, or a rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to law by the
Township.
(3) Objects to or refuses to participate in any activity, policy or practice
which the employee reasonably believes is in violation of a law, or a
rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to law; is fraudulent or
criminal; or is incompatible with a clear mandate of public policy
concerning the public health, safety, or welfare.
(4) Procedure. In accordance with the state statute, the employee must
bring the activity, policy or practice in violation of a law, or a rule or
regulation promulgated pursuant to law to the attention of a
supervisor or the employee, a department head, or the personal
officer by written notice.
(a) The employee shall grant the Township a reasonable
opportunity to correct the activity, policy or practice.
(b) Disclosure shall not be required where the employee is
reasonably certain that the activity, policy or practice is known
to one or more supervisors of the Township or where the
employee reasonably fears physical harm as a result of the
disclosure or where the situation is emergent in nature.
(c) The Township will not tolerate any retaliatory action taken by
any employee, supervisor, or elected official as a result of
bringing the activity to its attention.
(d) In accordance with statute, a copy of this policy of the
Township employees' protections and obligations shall be
posted in all Township facilities.
N. Contagious disease policy.
(1) It shall be an unlawful practice for the Township, or any employee,
or supervisor to do or attempt to do any of the following as a result
of the fact, in whole or in part, that a person has AIDS, associated
conditions or any other contagious disease:
(a) Fail to refuse to hire, or to discharge any person, or otherwise
to discriminate against any person with respect to
compensation, terms, conditions or privileges of employment.
(b) Limit, segregate or classify employees or applicants for
employment in any manner which would deprive or tend to
deprive any person of employment opportunities, or adversely
affect his or her employment status.
(c) Fail to refuse to refer for employment any person, or otherwise
to discriminate against any person.
§ 33-3 WALL CODE § 33-3
23:80
(d) Discriminate against any person in admission to, or
employment in, any program established to provide
apprenticeship or other training or retraining, including any
on-the-job training program.
(2) Bona fide occupational qualification not prohibited; burden of
proof.
(a) Nothing contained in this section shall be determined to
prohibit the selection, rejection or dismissal of an employee
based upon a bona fide occupational qualification. A bona fide
occupational qualification exists under this section where the
Township can demonstrate that the absence of AIDS or other
contagious disease is reasonably necessary to the essence of
the Township's business and that all or substantially all
persons with AIDS or other contagious disease are unable to
perform the duties of the position in question without harm to
themselves or others.
(b) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the
selection, rejection, or assignment of an employee where,
because a person has AIDS or other contagious disease, he/she
is unable to perform his or her duties, or is unable to perform
such duties in a manner that would not endanger his or her
health or safety or the health or safety of others.
(c) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the
selection or rejection of an applicant for employment where it
can be demonstrated that the Township is unable to reasonably
accommodate a person who has AIDS or other contagious
disease, without undue hardship on the conduct of the
Township's business.
(d) In any action brought under this policy, if a party asserts that
an otherwise unlawful discriminatory practice is justified as a
bona fide occupational qualification, that party shall have the
burden of proving:
[1] That the discrimination is in fact the necessary result of a
bona fide occupational qualification;
[2] That there exists no less discriminatory means of
satisfying the occupational qualification.
(3) Exceptions. It shall not be an unlawful discriminatory practice for
the Township to observe the conditions of a bona fide employee
benefit system, provided that such systems or plans are not a
subterfuge to evade the purposes of this section.
(4) Township's facilities and services.
§ 33-3 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 33-3
23:81
(a) It shall be an unlawful practice for any employee to deny any
person the full and equal enjoyment of, or to impose different
terms and conditions on the availability of any of the following,
as a result of the fact, in whole or in part, that a person has
AIDS or other contagious disease:
[1] Use of any Township facilities or service.
[2] Any service, program or facility, wholly or partially funded
or otherwise supported by the Township.
(b) Exceptions set forth in Subsection N(2) above, entitled "Bona
fide occupational qualification not prohibited; burden of proof,"
are also applicable to this subsection on Township facilities and
services.
(5) Health and safety exception affirmative defense. The affirmative
defenses described herein shall be applicable to the preceding
sections. In any action brought by a party asserts that an otherwise
unlawful discriminatory practice is justified as necessary to protect
the health or safety of a person who has AIDS or other contagious
disease or associated conditions or the health and safety of the
general public, that party must establish a defense by proving:
(a) That the discriminatory act is necessary to avoid an imminent
and substantial risk to a person who has AIDS or other
contagious diseases, or associated conditions; or
(b) That the discriminatory act is necessary to avoid a danger to
other significantly greater than that posed by persons without
AIDS, or other contagious diseases; and
(c) That there exists no less discriminatory means of protecting
health and safety.
(6) The Township shall not require any person to take a test or undergo
any medical procedure designed to show or help to show that a
person has AIDS or other contagious disease or any of the
associated conditions covered by this policy. This does not apply if
the Township can show that the absence of AIDS or contagious
disease is a bona fide occupational qualification as defined herein.
O. Drug and alcohol policy.
(1) It is the Township of Wall's policy to provide its employees with a
work environment that is free from the effects of illegal drugs and
alcohol. Employees of Wall Township are responsible for
cooperating and actively participating in the effort to keep illegal
drugs and alcohol out of the workplace and to maintain a work
environment free from the effects of illegal drugs and alcohol.
(2) As a result, the use, sale, possession, distribution, control, and
transportation of illegal drugs or being under the influence of
§ 33-3 WALL CODE § 33-3
23:82
alcohol or illegal drugs on the job or on the employer's property
is prohibited. Employees who violate this prohibition or who are
involved in illegal drug activities whether on or off the job will be
subject to disciplinary action by the employer up to and including
discharge.
(3) While recognizing that employees are responsible for making their
own lifestyle choices, the employer will not accept even small risks
that on-the-job or off-the-job drug use by employees might cause or
contribute to accidents or other safety or performance problems.
Recognizing that any measurable amount of an illegal drug in a
person's body can put that person under the influence of the drug
to some degree, even if the impairment is not readily apparent to
the layman, the employer's policy regarding drugs strives for, and
requires, a "drug-free" work force.
P. Sexual harassment policy.
(1) General statement of policy. Sexual harassment is a form of sex
discrimination. It is the policy of the employer to maintain a
learning and working environment that is free from sexual
harassment. The employer prohibits any form of sexual
harassment.
(2) It shall be a violation of this policy for any employee of the
employer to harass an employee through conduct or
communication of a sexual nature as defined by this policy.
(3) The employer will investigate all complaints, formal or informal,
verbal or written, of sexual harassment and discipline any
employee who sexually harasses another employee of the employer.
(4) Sexual harassment defined.
(a) Sexual harassment consists of unwelcome sexual advances,
requests for sexual favors, sexually motivated physical conduct
or other verbal or physical conduct or communication of a
sexual nature when:
[1] Submissions to that conduct or communication is made a
term or condition, either explicitly or implicitly, of
obtaining or retaining employment; or
[2] Submission to or rejection of that conduct or
communication by an individual is used as a factor in
decisions affecting that individual's employment; or
[3] That conduct or communication has the purpose or effect
of substantially or unreasonably interfering with an
individual's employment, or creating an intimidating,
hostile or offensive employment environment.
§ 33-3 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 33-3
23:83
(b) Any sexual harassment as defined when perpetrated on an
employee by any employee will be treated as sexual
harassment under this policy.
(5) Sexual harassment may include but is not limited to:
(a) Verbal harassment or abuse;
(b) Subtle pressure for sexual activity;
(c) Inappropriate patting or pinching;
(d) Intentional brushing against an employee's body;
(e) Demand for sexual favors accompanied by an implied or overt
threat concerning an individual's employment;
(f) Demand for sexual favors accompanied by an implied or overt
promise of preferential treatment with regard to an
individual's employment status; or
(g) Any unwelcome sexually motivated touching.
(6) Reporting. All employees have a right and are encouraged to
informally or formally report any and all statements, acts, or
behavior by a coemployee or employees, supervisory employees,
elected officials or visitors.
(a) Informal complaints.
[1] A complaint should be reported to the supervisor of the
department in which the employee works who in turn shall
report the complaint to the Personnel Officer. The
Personnel Officer, working with the supervisor, is
responsible for investigating information charges and
arranging a mutually satisfactory disposition. the
Personnel Officer or supervisor may speak informally with
the alleged harasser in an effort to correct the offending
behavior and prevent retaliatory behavior. It should be
stated firmly and clearly that the behavior is unwelcome.
[2] In case either the Personnel officer or supervisor is
involved in the complaint, the matter shall be reported to
the Township Administrator. If the employee feels the
complaint cannot be brought to the Township
Administrator, such complaint may be made to the
Township Committee, but any complaint not made to the
employee's immediate supervisor must be accompanied by
the sworn statement of the complainant that the persons
to whom the complaint should otherwise have been
directed cannot, in the mind of the complainant, be
objective about the sexual harassment charge.
§ 33-3 WALL CODE § 33-3
23:84
[3] If the complainant is informed by his/her supervisor or the
Personnel Officer that said persons are not, within the
confines of the disposition of the complaint, able to
arrange a mutually satisfactory disposition, the
complainant may file a formal complaint.
(b) Formal complaints.
[1] An individual alleging sexual harassment may file a formal
complaint with the Personnel Officer in writing within 45
days of the incident. In case the Personnel Officer is
involved in the complaint, the matter shall be reported to
the Township Administrator. If the employee feels the
complaint cannot be brought to the Township
Administrator, such complaint may be made to the
Township Committee, but any complaint not made to the
Personnel Officer, must be accompanied by the sworn
statement of the complainant that the persons to whom the
complaint should otherwise have been directed cannot, in
the mind of the complainant, be objective about the sexual
harassment charge.
[2] A formal complaint may also be lodged verbally; however,
the Personnel Officer shall then summarize the verbal
allegations, including the date, time and place that the
employee made the complaint, and specific allegations of
the employee, in writing, and the employee must affirm the
accuracy of the information by signing such.
(c) Investigations.
[1] Complaints will be kept confidential to the extent possible;
however, anonymity cannot be guaranteed if action must
be taken against the wrongdoer as testimony of the victim
may be necessary or where law requires disclosure.
[2] The Personnel Officer shall promptly conduct an
investigation of the allegations in the complaint. Upon
completion of the investigation, the Personnel Officer shall
issue a determination setting forth the findings in the
matter and recommending an action to the Township
Administrator.
[3] The investigation shall include the taking of statements
from the complainant and taking statements from any
witnesses and coworkers, as well as the alleged harasser.
The objective of the investigation is to obtain the basis for
the complaint while giving fair notice to the accused of the
facts upon which the complaint is based.
(d) Discipline. Any employee who violates this policy will be
subject to appropriate discipline. This may include dismissal,
§ 33-3 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 33-3
23:85
§ 33-4. Working time and attendance on job.
The following regulations are hereby established relative to working time
and attendance on job by municipal employees:
depending upon circumstances as well as frequency and
severity of the activity consistent with disciplinary procedures.
Q. Policy prohibiting other forms of harassment in the workplace.
Consistent with the Township's policy of equal employment opportunity,
harassment of employees or job applicants based on their race, sex,
religion, national origin, age, marital status, sexual or affectional
orientation, or disability status will not be tolerated by Wall Township.
While it is not easy to define harassment, harassment includes slurs,
epithets, threats, unwelcome phone calls, derogatory comments,
unwelcome jokes and teasing. In an effort to ensure that such conduct
is eliminated from the work place, the Township utilizes the same
complaint procedure described in Subsection P concerning sexual
harassment for complaints of harassment based on these factors as
well.
A. Time and attendance records. [Amended 12-28-2016 by Ord. No.
17-2016]
(1) Accurate time and attendance records shall be maintained on each
employee by the person in charge of the department, office, or unit,
who will certify to the accuracy of the report each pay period to the
payroll authority of the Township.
(2) Effective January 1, 2017, employees shall receive 24 pays per year
with paydays on the 15th and the last day of the month. When the
15th or the last day of the month falls on a weekend or holiday,
employees shall be paid on the closest preceding business day.
There will be 24 pays over the course of a year. Also effective
January 1, 2017, all full-time and part-time nonseasonal employees
shall be required to utilize direct deposit for payroll purposes.
B. Longevity pay. [Amended 2-13-2002 by Ord. No. 1-2002; 3-9-2005
by Ord. No. 6-2005; 12-28-2016 by Ord. No. 17-2016]
(1) Longevity pay of a percentage of the current annual base salary will
be paid to each full-time permanent Township employee not
covered by a collective bargaining agreement for continuous
service on the following basis: after completion of three years'
continuous service, 2%; five years, 4%; 10 years, 6%; 15 years, 8%;
20 years, 10%.
(2) Full-time permanent Township employees not covered by a
collective bargaining agreement hired after January 1, 2017, will
receive longevity pay on the following basis: after completion of
five years' continuous service, 2%; 10 years, 5%; 15 years, 7%; 20
years, 10%.
§ 33-3 WALL CODE § 33-4
23:86
C. Scheduled work periods. The regularly scheduled work period for
Township employees shall be as follows, except as may be modified by
the Township Committee or Township Administrator during
emergencies, adverse weather conditions, or for other appropriate
reasons:
(1) Administrative and clerical. Eight hours daily, including a one-hour
lunch period, Monday through Friday.
(2) Police Department. The number of days per week and the number
of hours to be served per day by members of the Police Department
shall be determined by the Chief of Police, subject to the approval
of the Township Committee, and in accordance with the collective
bargaining agreement.
(3) Public Works Department. The number of days per week and the
number of hours to be served per day by members of the Public
Works Department shall be determined by the Superintendent of
Public Works, subject to the approval of the Township Committee,
and in accordance with the collective bargaining agreements.
(4) Lunch hours. The lunch hour of an employee shall be determined
by the workload of the department and shall be subject to the
approval of the department head.
(5) Part-time employees. No part-time employee shall work more than
28 hours per week on average. [Added 2-26-2014 by Ord. No.
3-2014]
D. Overtime. [Amended 5-22-2013 by Ord. No. 13-2013]
(1) The Fair Labor Standards Act ("FLSA") entitles nonexempt
employees to overtime compensation calculated at a rate of 1 1/2 of
the employee's regular rate of pay, for all hours worked in excess of
40 hours per week. Exempt employees under the FLSA are not
entitled to overtime compensation.
(2) Overtime shall be minimized, but when the Township service
requires it, the Township's nonexempt employees may be required
to work overtime if budgeted and approved by the department head
and Township Administrator. Nonexempt employees working
overtime without prior approval will be subject to disciplinary
action.
(3) It is the Township's policy that nonexempt employees who work
over 40 hours per week will receive overtime compensation at a
rate of 1 1/2 of his/her regular rate of pay. Sick, vacation, and
personal leave, as well as unpaid meal breaks, are not considered
time worked for purposes of determining overtime compensation.
Overtime for members of the Public Works Department and the
Police Department shall be governed by collective bargaining
agreements.
§ 33-4 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 33-4
23:87
E. Compensatory time. Compensatory time off shall be accorded to
nonexempt employees only for hours worked in excess of a thirty-fivehour
work period, subject to the following conditions: [Amended
3-9-2005 by Ord. No. 6-2005; 5-22-2013 by Ord. No. 13-2013]
(1) The Township, in accordance with the FLSA, will permit nonexempt
employees to accumulate compensatory time in lieu of overtime
compensation in his/her compensatory bank, not to exceed a total
of 105 hours at any given time.
(2) Before a nonexempt employee may utilize his/her accrued
compensatory time, s/he must submit a request to his/her
supervisor at least two days prior to the requested time off. The
nonexempt employee's supervisor may approve the request if the
absence does not cause undue hardship to the department.
(3) Compensatory time shall be utilized as time off and shall not be
compensated monetarily.
(a) Hours worked in excess of a thirty-five-hour week and up to a
forty-hour week shall be credited at straight time.
(b) In lieu of overtime compensation, hours worked in excess of a
forty-hour week shall be credited as compensatory time at a
rate of time and one-half.
(4) Nonexempt employees eligible for compensatory time shall submit
time records in a form and manner to be established by the
Township Administrator.
(5) Compensatory time shall be calculated on the basis of hours
actually worked. Sick, vacation and personal leave, as well as
unpaid meal breaks are not considered time worked for purposes of
determining overtime compensation.
(6) As of the effective date of this Subsection E, any Township
employee exempt from receiving overtime, pursuant to the FLSA,
hired or promoted into such a position after October 1, 2012, will
not be entitled to compensatory time. This clause shall include the
Township Administrator and Chief of Police who were hired prior to
this date.
(7) All other employees hired before October 1, 2012, shall continue to
earn compensatory time in accordance with this Subsection E but
will be required to utilize the compensatory time in the year in
which it was earned. There shall be no carryover from year to year
with the exception that compensatory time earned in the month of
December may be carried over to the following year.
F. Inclement weather. The Township Administrator shall have the
responsibility to close the Municipal Building on days when, in his
opinion, inclement weather has become a safety hazard for employees
§ 33-4 WALL CODE § 33-4
23:88
§ 33-5. Grievance procedures relative to employees.
of the Township. Should the Municipal Building be closed for any day
or part thereof, such closing shall not entitle any employee on approved
leave to any additional leave time due to the closing of the Municipal
Building.
G. Dress and appearance. All Township employees shall report for work
each day dressed in a neat and clean manner or, if applicable, in proper
uniform.
H. Employees serving as volunteers. Employees who serve as volunteer
members of a Township first aid squad or a Township fire company shall
be permitted to leave the work site in the event of a bona fide
emergency after notifying and receiving approval from the department
head.
I. Substance abuse policy.
(1) The Township will endeavor to assist an employee with a drug or
alcohol abuse problem in locating and obtaining any necessary
medical, psychological or other assistance to eliminate substance
abuse through the use of the Wall Youth Center, which shall serve
as the Township's in-house treatment agency. However, due to the
Township's obligation to serve the public and the frequent contact
by Township employees with members of the public, such
assistance will be provided to an employee on the first occasion
when a substance abuse problem is manifested. Any recurrence of
the substance abuse problem during the course of employment will
result in termination of the employee.
(2) In addition to the use of the Wall Youth Center as the Township's inhouse
treatment agency, the use of an outside professional or
agency for substance abuse or other psychological evaluation or
treatment may be authorized, in appropriate circumstances, by the
Township Administrator.
J. Assignment of work. The Township reserves to itself all usual,
customary, necessary and appropriate management rights including,
without limitation, the right to assign employees to work duties as the
Township Administrator determines from time to time is necessary for
the proper and efficient operation of the Township. The Township
Administrator shall provide to each department head job descriptions
for each of the employees in each department of the Township, with the
exception of uniformed officers in the Police Department.
A. It is the policy of the Township that every employee shall always be
treated fairly, courteously, and with respect. Conversely, each employee
shall always accord the same treatment to his fellow municipal
employees, associates, department heads and to the general public.
§ 33-4 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 33-5
23:89
§ 33-6. Absences.
The following regulations pertaining to absences from duty of employees
are hereby established:
B. Whenever an employee has a grievance, he should first present it
verbally to his immediate supervisor or department head. In the event
said grievance cannot be solved by the immediate supervisor or
department head, the employee shall present his or her grievance in
writing to his or her immediate supervisor and the grievance shall be
promptly referred through the levels of authority necessary to resolve
the grievance, with the Township Administrator responsible for making
the final determination with respect to any employee grievance. The
determination of the Township Administrator may be appealed as
provided by law.
A. Recording absences. Absences from duty shall be classified as "sick
leave," "vacation leave," "personal leave," "bereavement leave," "leave
without pay," or "other" and are to be so noted on the daily time reports.
The reason for each absence listed on the time report as "other" will be
noted thereon, with a statement as to whether or not the absence was
approved by the department head. All absences for any reason are to be
recorded and filed with the Personnel Coordinator.
B. Notification of absence. Each employee must notify his immediate
superior or department head of any absence from duty. If not possible to
do so in advance of the working day, the report shall be made by
telephone or otherwise, as early as possible on the day the employee is
absent. If unable to contact his immediate supervisor or department
head, the employee shall notify the Township Administrator. Employees
on prolonged sick leave shall contact their supervisor weekly with
updates of their condition.
C. Leaves of absence. Leave of absence without pay may be requested by
an employee, who shall submit in writing all facts bearing on the
request, to his department head, who will append his recommendation,
and forward the request to the Township Administrator for
consideration by the Township Committee. Each case will be considered
on its merits, and without establishing a precedent.
D. Annual vacation. Annual vacation with pay is credited from date of
employment and is authorized on the following basis: [Amended
5-22-2013 by Ord. No. 13-2013; 12-28-2016 by Ord. No. 17-2016]
(1) No employee shall be entitled to any vacation time prior to the first
anniversary of his date of employment unless authorized by
resolution at the time of hire by the Township Committee upon the
recommendation of the Township Administrator as a result of
negotiations during the recruitment/hiring process of professional
staff to fill a vacancy.
§ 33-5 WALL CODE § 33-6
23:90
(2) Effective January 1, 2017, new employees will be awarded vacation
time on January 1 of the subsequent year after the date of hire. An
employee hired between January 1 and July 1 shall receive 10
vacation days the subsequent January 1. An employee hired
between July 2 and December 31 shall receive five vacation days
the subsequent January 1 and another five vacation days July 1.
They shall receive 10 vacation days every January 1 thereafter.
Upon separation, all vacation time for that current year will be
prorated.
(3) During the calendar year in which time the fifth anniversary of his
employment occurs, and thereafter, each employee shall be entitled
to take 15 working days' vacation.
(4) During the calendar year in which the 10th anniversary of his
employment occurs, and thereafter, each employee shall be entitled
to take 20 working days' vacation.
(5) During the calendar year in which the 15th anniversary of his
employment occurs, and thereafter, each employee hired before
January 1, 1991, shall be entitled to take 25 working days' vacation.
(6) During the calendar year in which the 20th anniversary date of his
employment occurs, and thereafter, each employee hired before
January 1, 1991, shall be entitled to take 30 working days' vacation.
(7) Any employee hired during the month of December in any year
shall be considered as being hired on the following January 1 for
the purpose of computing vacation time. Except as indicated in
Subsections A and B above, all vacation time may be scheduled
during any part of the calendar year, subject to the needs of service
in the discretion of the department head and on the basis of
seniority.
(8) Each employee must take his authorized annual vacation during
each calendar year and shall not be permitted to accumulate the
same from year to year, except that the Township Administrator, in
his discretion, may permit the carry over of vacation time into the
first month of the following year. Compensation in lieu of unused
vacation time will not be allowed. Each employee shall submit a
written request to the department head and each department head
shall submit a written request to the Township Administrator for
approval of the specific dates for the employee's annual vacation.
Effective January 1, 2017, employees may carry over five vacation
days to the subsequent year. However, upon separation from
Township employment, there will be no compensation made for any
days carried from the prior year that remain unused.
(9) Prepayment of vacation pay may be made to employees during the
week preceding vacation, provided that a written request therefor,
signed by the department head, is received by the Personnel
§ 33-6 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 33-6
23:91
Department at least three weeks prior to the date the check is to
be issued.
(10) When an employee leaves the Township's employ and subsequently
is reemployed, the date of reemployment is to be used as the
employee's anniversary date with the Township for purposes of
entitlement to vacation time.
(11) When an employee is absent for any reason, except annual vacation
or authorized personal days, for a period in excess of 20
consecutive working days, the amount of annual vacation days and
personal and sick days earned by the employee during the year or
years in which the absence occurs shall be reduced pro rata on the
basis of the relationship between the number of working days the
employee is absent to the number of working days in the year.
(12) When an employee is absent, for any reason, in excess of six
consecutive months, the employee's Township employment may be
terminated by the Township Committee and, in such event, all
benefits and other entitlements of Township employment shall
cease.
E. Holidays.
(1) The official holidays for all Township employees, except Police
Department personnel, shall be:
New Year's Day
Birthday of Martin Luther King Jr.
Presidents' Day
Good Friday
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day
Columbus Day
Veterans Day
Thanksgiving Day
The day after Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day
One additional holiday to coincide with each individual
employee's birthday
(2) Employees regularly scheduled to work on a holiday shall receive
additional compensation at their straight time rate for the work
period. When an official holiday occurs during an employee's
vacation the employee is entitled to an additional day of vacation.
When a holiday falls on a Saturday, the prior Friday shall be
§ 33-6 WALL CODE § 33-6
23:92
observed. When a holiday falls on a Sunday, the succeeding
Monday shall be observed.
F. Sick leave. [Amended 5-12-2004 by Ord. No. 8-2004; 3-26-2014 by
Ord. No. 4-2014; 12-28-2016 by Ord. No. 17-2016]
(1) Accumulation of sick leave.
(a) Sick leave with pay shall be credited each permanent full-time
employee on the basis of one day per month of continuous
service, with no maximum limit, and commencing from January
1, 1969, or date of employment, whichever is later. Upon
separation in good standing from service, each permanent fulltime
employee shall be entitled to 1/2 day's pay, at the rate of
pay in effect at the time of separation, for each full day of
unused accumulated sick leave up to a maximum of 120 days'
accumulated sick leave; provided, however, that the monetary
compensation to be paid for unused accumulated sick leave
shall not exceed $7,500 per employee. The accumulation of
sick leave shall be subject to the provisions of Subsection D(11)
hereof. For all employees hired after January 1, 2017, the
maximum compensation paid for unused sick days utilizing the
above formula shall be $5,000.
(b) The provisions of Subsection F(1)(a) above limiting the number
of days of sick leave which may be accumulated and limiting
the monetary compensation therefor shall not apply to
employees hired prior to January 1, 1980. Each permanent,
full-time employee hired prior to January 1, 1980, shall be
entitled, at the time of separation, to receive 1/2 day's pay, at
the rate of pay in effect at the time of separation, for each day
of unused, accumulated sick leave which the employee has
accumulated as of November 1, 1990, up to a maximum of 250
days' accumulated sick leave. Such employees shall not be
entitled to accumulate sick leave after November 1, 1990.
(2) In all cases of reported illness or disability, the Township reserves
the right to have a physician designated by the Township to
examine and report on the condition of the patient-employee to the
department head and Township Committee.
(3) When the absence on account of illness or disability does not
exceed two days, normally the employee's statement of the cause
will be accepted without a supporting statement from his attending
physician, although the Township may have any employee
examined by a licensed physician at any time if it elects to do so.
The Township also reserves the right to waive this requirement or
to require the employee to be examined by a physician designated
by the Township and to have the employee certified as fit for duty
before the employee returns to work.
§ 33-6 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 33-6
23:93
(4) During protracted periods of illness or disability, the Township may
require interim reports on the condition of the patient, at weekly or
biweekly periods, from the attending physician and/or a physician
designated by the Township. When under medical care, employees
are expected to conform to the instruction of the attending
physician if they wish to qualify for salary payment during such
period of illness or disability. For the purposes of receiving
disability insurance, this subsection shall be administered in
accordance with § 33-12 of this chapter.
(5) The Personnel Coordinator will receive record cards for each
employee, upon which he will record the total sick leave. All
absences will be maintained upon these cards, and all sick leave
earned and consumed or used for each completed continuous
service year will be shown on this record. Employees having
exhausted all of their sick leave will not receive any further sick
leave or compensation in lieu thereof until same has been
accumulated and earned by the employee's subsequent service.
(6) Where employees have left the Township's employ and
subsequently are reemployed, the date of reemployment is to be
used as employees' service date with the Township for purposes of
crediting sick leave.
(7) Sick leave may be allowed for ordinary dental care and for the
service of an oculist for normal eye care when such professional
services are not readily available outside of work hours.
(8) An employee who is certified as absent on account of a disability or
accident caused in the usual hours of his employment and directly
in the line of duty shall not have such absence charged against his
sick leave.
(9) Any employee on sick leave, and receiving his normal
compensation, who, in addition, qualifies for payments under
workers' compensation weekly benefits, shall during the period he
is receiving such weekly benefits be entitled only to that portion of
his regular salary which, with the workers' compensation
payments, equal his normal salary.
(10) Nothing contained herein shall be considered to be in derogation of
or restrictive of any statute now in effect limiting the period during
which Township employees may be compensated for leave on
account of disability or of illness (such as N.J.S.A. 40:11-8 and
40:11-9,7 pertaining to the Police Department) but these provisions
are to be construed and administered in conjunction therewith.
(11) Any employee who has completed at least 21 years of full-time
employment with the Township and has filed a written letter of
7. Editor’s Note: N.J.S.A. 40:11-8 and 40:11-9 were repealed by L. 1971, c. 200 (§ 40A:9-22),
and L. 1971, c. 197 (§ 40A:14-176), respectively, effective July 1, 1971.
§ 33-6 WALL CODE § 33-6
23:94
resignation or retirement with the Township Clerk which is to be
effective in the second or third calendar year subsequent to when it
was filed may file an election to have accumulated sick leave paid to
the employee before separation under the following circumstances:
(a) The election must be filed by December 1 of the calendar year
preceding the first year within which payment is sought.
(b) The election must state whether payment is to occur over two
or three years. Payment shall be made in equal payments.
(c) The value of a sick day will be calculated for the year in which
the payment is made.
(d) In order to receive a payment in any year, the employee's
employment must be and remain in good standing.
(e) The election may be made only once by any employee. If the
employee does not retire as stated in the notice of election,
those days for which the employee has already been paid shall
be permanently subtracted from his or her sick leave
entitlement.
(f) The election of payment is irrevocable. In the case of death of
an employee before the full payment provided for in the
election, the remaining sums will be paid to the employee's
estate.
(g) As part of the election, and if the employee so indicates, in
writing, at the time of the election, the amounts to be paid
hereunder may be paid to the employee's deferred
compensation account, to the extent provided by law.
G. Family leave. In the case of an employee with a newly born or adopted
child or a seriously ill family member, family leave may be granted
pursuant to the provisions of the Family Leave Act, N.J.S.A. 34:11B-1 et
seq. Maternity leave without pay may also be granted to Township
employees during a term of pregnancy, subject to the approval of the
Township Committee.
H. Jury duty. It is the public policy of this Township to encourage Township
employees to perform all their duties and responsibilities of citizenship
and accordingly if any Township employee is legally selected for jury
duty, every effort shall be made to enable such employee to serve as
juror. To that end the department heads of the Township government
shall use every reasonable endeavor to aid the employee in performing
jury duty. Each employee shall be paid for time served as juror in such
amount as will compensate the employee for any loss sustained by the
employee, being the difference between the amount of salary and jurors
compensation for the days required in service as juror.
§ 33-6 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 33-6
23:95
I. Bereavement. In the event of a death in the immediate family of an
employee (spouse, children, parents, brothers, sisters, grandparents,
spouse's parents, or grandparents of spouse), the Township will grant a
three-day leave of absence with pay to the employee. In the event of a
death of any other relative, the Township will grant a one-day leave of
absence with pay to the employee. If additional time is necessary in
order to manage the affairs related to this death, the employee may
utilize additional benefit time (i.e., sick, vacation, personal), up to a
maximum of five days, with an explanation to be submitted to their
respective department head. [Amended 12-28-2016 by Ord. No.
17-2016]
J. Personal days. All Township employees, not covered by a collective
bargaining agreement, shall be entitled to take up to four days off per
year with pay so as to conduct those personal matters which can only be
conducted on regular business days. The election of days to be taken
shall be subject to advance approval by the employee's department
head. Personal days shall not be accumulated from year to year.
K. Military leave. [Amended 3-9-2005 by Ord. No. 6-2005; 9-14-2005
by Ord. No. 26-2005]
(1) Policy. It is the policy of the Township to prevent, to the extent
practical, economic disruption to those employees who serve in the
reserves of any component of the military service of the United
States, or in the National Guard, who are called, as a result of such
service, to a period of federal or state active duty.
(2) "Activated reservist" or "militia member" defined. As used in this
section, "activated reservist" or "militia member" means any
individual currently serving in the reserves of any branch of the
United States Armed Services or in the organized State Militia
consisting of the Air and Army National Guard, Naval Militia, and
State Guard of New Jersey, or of any other state, who receives,
pursuant to that service, orders to be engaged in a period of federal
or state active duty.
(3) "Active duty" definitions.
(a) "Federal active duty," as used in this section, means active duty
and active duty for training as defined by state law, and, as
ordered by the federal government, but does not include
weekend drills.
(b) "State active duty," as used in this section, means active duty
and active duty for training as defined by state law, and, as
ordered by the state government, but does not include
weekend drills.
(4) Differential pay. Following exhaustion of any statutory entitlements
to full Township pay, an activated reservist or militia member shall
be entitled to differential pay as follows:
§ 33-6 WALL CODE § 33-6
23:96
(a) Differential pay calculated. Upon presentation of the orders to
federal active duty or state active duty of the activated
reservist or militia member to the Township, the Township
shall calculate the amount necessary to be added to that
employee's military pay over the course of his entire activation
which, when added to the military pay, will equal what the
activated reservist or militia member would have received had
he been paid at the municipal salary for that period. In
determining that amount, the Township shall not include the
amount of the military pay received by the employee during the
period of statutory entitlement to both military and municipal
pay in any and all calendar years that the entitlement arises.
(b) Differential pay procedure. Once the above amount is
calculated, upon exhaustion of the period provided by statute
for both municipal and military pay, the Township shall pay to
the activated reservist or militia member the differential pay
amount evenly divided among the pay periods from the close of
the statutory period until either the end of the calendar year or
the end of the activation, whichever is earlier. If the payments
end at the close of the calendar year, they shall resume again
once the new entitlement to both municipal and military pay in
the new calendar year under statute expires, and the activated
reservist or militia member would otherwise be receiving only
the military pay. If the activation is for a longer or shorter
period of time than anticipated, appropriate adjustment shall
be made at the close of the activation to ensure the activated
reservist or militia member receives what he or she would have
received if the activation had not occurred. Such adjustment
shall be accomplished by further payments or withholdings in
the case of overpayment.
(5) The Chief Financial Officer shall apply for reimbursement for any
amounts of military pay the Township must expend if the Township
is eligible for same pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:13H-2.1 or any other
state or federal law or regulation.
L. Medical leave. Whenever an employee is unable, due to a medical
disability, certified in writing to the Township Administrator by a
physician licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey, to perform all
of the duties and responsibilities of his or her Township employment,
the employee shall be eligible for medical leave without pay for a period
not to exceed six months.
M. Effect and length of unpaid leaves of absence. During an unpaid leave of
absence, an employee will not accumulate any leave, vacation time or
other entitlements dependent upon length of service. If the absence of
an employee on medical leave exceeds six months or the absence of an
employee on family leave exceeds three months, the employee's
position with the Township shall be deemed to be vacant and the
employee's service with the Township terminated.
§ 33-6 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 33-6
23:97
§ 33-7. Separation of employees.
The following regulations shall apply to the separation of employeeemployer
relations between employees of the Township and the Township
as employer:
N. No accrual of benefits during leave. During the utilization of unused
leave of any kind prior to an employee's separation from service, the
employee shall not accumulate any leave, vacation time or other
benefits or entitlements based upon length of service.
A. Separation from the service of the Township may result from voluntary
resignation of the employee, regular or disability retirement of the
employee, the death of an employee, or the termination of the
employee's services for cause by the Township Administrator.
[Amended 12-28-2016 by Ord. No. 17-2016]
B. Upon receipt of a written resignation from an employee received by the
department head, with a copy to the Township Administrator, at least
two weeks prior to the resignation date, the employee shall be entitled
to receive his or her regular pay through date of termination, together
with accumulated vacation leave and accumulated sick leave if the
employee has been employed by the Township for a minimum of five
years. All unused time shall be prorated based on the employee's
separation date. [Amended 3-9-2005 by Ord. No. 6-2005;
12-28-2016 by Ord. No. 17-2016]
C. In the case of separation from Township service by reason of
retirement, if written notice of the employee's intention to retire is
received by the department head, with a copy to the Township
Administrator, at least 30 days prior to the effective date of retirement,
the employee shall be entitled to receive pay for accumulated vacation
leave, longevity pay, and accumulated sick leave, subject to the
applicable provisions of this article. All unused time shall be prorated
based on the employee's separation date. [Amended 12-28-2016 by
Ord. No. 17-2016]
D. In the case of the death of an employee, the employees surviving
beneficiary shall be entitled to receive compensation for the employee's
accumulated vacation, pro rated longevity pay and accumulated sick
leave without regard to the employee's length of service.
E. In the case of an employee who is terminated for cause, the Township
reserves the right to deny the employee payment for accumulated
vacation or sick leave or longevity pay, subject to the determination of
the Township Administrator.
F. The amount of accumulated vacation leave to which an employee shall
be entitled upon separation from service pursuant to Subsections B, C,
D and E hereof. [Amended 3-9-2005 by Ord. No. 6-2005]
§ 33-6 WALL CODE § 33-7
23:98
§ 33-8. Training, education, promotions and transfers. [Amended
3-9-2005 by Ord. No. 6-2005; 12-20-2007 by Ord. No. 29-2007]
The following regulation shall apply to promotions and transfers of
municipal employees:
G. An employee who resigns shall tender his resignation in writing, at least
two weeks prior to the requested effective date of the resignation, in
order to provide sufficient time for appointing a successor. If at least
two weeks' prior notice is not given to the Township, the Township
reserves the right to deny the payment of accumulated leave or other
benefits to the employee.
A. Training and education.
(1) In-service training courses. It is policy of the Township to
encourage employees, whenever possible, to raise the level of
competency in the performance of their duties and responsibilities,
and to pursue additional education that is designed to enhance job
performance. Employees shall submit a written request to the
department head for authorization to attend any training or
education course, seminar or program designed to enhance their
abilities within the field of their employment, and may attend such
programs if recommended by the department head and approved
by the Township Administrator. Such requests will be approved
whenever possible, subject to the demands of the workload of the
employee and the department. The Township Administrator may
approve reimbursement of the employee’s necessary fees for such
training upon receipt of a satisfactory record of completion of the
course, seminar or program.
(2) Extended courses of study. Employees may submit a written
request to the department head for authorization to attend an
extended course of study which consists of at least 18 hours of
instruction and which is directly related to the employee’s current
position with the Township. If recommended by the department
head and approved by the Township Administrator, the Township
will pay the employee’s registration fees and transportation costs if
a Township vehicle is not available. The transportation rate
reimbursed will be pursuant to the current mileage figure approved
by the IRS. The department head shall determine whether the
employee may take the course of study on Township time or
employee time. If taken on the employee’s time, the employee may
be reimbursed monetarily at the applicable hourly rate. Upon
receipt of a satisfactory record of completion of the approved
course of study, the employee’s base salary will be increased by
$1,000 per annum. Department heads are not eligible for such a
base salary increase.
(3) Higher education salary increase.
§ 33-7 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 33-8
23:99
(a) It is the policy of the Township to promote and encourage the
pursuit of higher education for all of its employees. Higher
education benefits the Township and improves the daily
function and operation of individual Township departments.
Any employee not covered by a collective bargaining
agreement who, while working for the Township, earns a
higher education degree as follows will receive a one-time
applicable monetary increase to the employee’s base salary
upon receipt by the Township Administrator of a satisfactory
record that the degree has been obtained, as follows:
[1] Associate Degree: $3,000 base salary increase.
[2] Bachelor’s Degree: $3,000 base salary increase.
[3] Master’s Degree: $3,000 base salary increase.
(b) This policy does not apply to any education degree held by an
employee at the time of hiring by the Township and is intended
to encourage employees who do not already hold such degrees
to pursue higher education.
B. Promotions within staff. Whenever it is practical to do so, promotions
will be made from within the ranks of the Township staff of municipal
employees, provided there are qualified employees available capable of
performing the required duties in a satisfactory manner.
C. Transfers within Township. Transfers from one position or department
to another will be made when it would be advantageous to the Township
and/or the employee to make such a transfer. The Township reserves
the right, however, to publicly advertise for any open position within the
Township.
D. Employees' list of skills and training. Employees are requested to file
with their respective department heads a list of their skills and special
training in order that the Township may make the best possible use of
all the capabilities and potentialities of its personnel.
E. Department head's duties. Department heads will be responsible for onthe-
job instructions, as well as for providing guidance for all employees
under their leadership and supervision.
F. Criteria for promotions or merit increases. Promotions from within the
ranks and merit increases in salary shall be based upon merit,
character, qualifications, and work habits as determined by an impartial
review of all available facts by the Township Administrator. Each
department head shall at least annually prepare a written evaluation of
each employee in his or her department on a form to be provided by the
Township Administrator. The Township Administrator shall at least
annually prepare a written evaluation of each department head. Such
written evaluations shall be maintained in the personal history files of
all Township employees.
§ 33-8 WALL CODE § 33-8
23:100
§ 33-9. Disciplinary actions.
G. Recommendations for promotions and transfers. Recommendations for
promotions or transfers will be processed by the department head
through the Township Administrator.
H. Transfers; seniority rights. Employees may request transfer to another
position or department without prejudice or loss of any seniority rights.
Such requests will be considered on their merits, and any action taken
will be without establishing a precedent in any case.
I. Transfers; consideration of department heads. When an employee
requests a transfer from one position or department to another, such
proposed transfer and request shall be first referred to the department
head or department heads involved with the proposed transfer and the
recommendation of such department head or department heads shall
be received and considered before the transfer of employee is effected.
J. Required certifications. In the case of an employee who is required by
federal or state regulation or mandate to attend training courses or
seminars to maintain an initial certification received by the employee,
and such training class or seminar takes place after normal working
hours, a department head may, with the approval of the Township
Administrator, be entitled to compensatory time for attendance at such
training class or seminar. Other Township employees required to attend
such training classes or seminars, upon the approval of the Township
Administrator, will be paid at regular pay rates for such attendance.
A. Violation of policy or rules. When a department head believes that an
employee is not conforming to the letter or spirit of the Township
policies and rules, or to specific instruction given him, or is in violation
of any of the rules or regulations thereof, the department head shall
first privately discuss this matter with the employee concerned, in
order to obtain the employee's side of the matter. The department head
shall, if possible, then obtain assurance that there will not be a
repetition of the incident, if it is not sufficient to warrant the employee's
dismissal from Township employment. A note or memorandum of the
incident and its disposition shall be placed upon the employee's
personal history file by the department head.
B. Matters of minor importance. If the matter is not a serious one, and the
department head is satisfied to thereby close the incident, the matter
may then be dropped.
C. Review by Township Administrator. In the event that it appears
desirable to do so, the matter may be referred to the Township
Administrator for review and/or action as is warranted by the facts.
D. Forms of disciplinary action. Disciplinary actions against employees
shall be in the following forms:
(1) Informal private, verbal reproof by department head.
§ 33-8 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 33-9
23:101
(2) Written memorandum of censure from the department head.
(3) Letter of admonition from Township Administrator.
(4) Suspension from duty without pay.
(5) Transfer or demotion of employee.
(6) Separation from the service of the Township.
E. Regulations concerning disciplinary action. Subsection D(4) may be
ordered by the immediate department head, if and when such summary
action is considered as being necessary. Such action shall be reported
by the person ordering it to the Township Administrator without delay.
Subsection D(5) and (6) may be ordered only by the Township
Administrator. Subsection D(4), (5) and (6), when a member of the
Police Department is involved, shall be governed by the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147 et seq., as well as by any other provisions or
statutes now in effect or which may be hereafter adopted.
F. Investigation by Township Administrator. A fair and complete
investigation of the case will be made promptly by the Township
Administrator to accumulate all facts and to interview all interested
persons. A written report of such investigation, the findings and action
taken, supported by available data, will be forwarded to the employee.
G. Filing of papers required. All papers in connection with a disciplinary
action will be placed in the employee's personal history file.
H. Appeal of disciplinary action. Any employee may appeal a disciplinary
action taken by his immediate supervisor, by means of the procedure
set forth for the handling of grievances, to the Township Administrator,
who shall make the final determination regarding all disciplinary
matters. Disciplinary actions taken by the Township Administrator may
be appealed as provided by law.
I. Interim suspension. During the pendency of a disciplinary investigation,
the Township Administrator may in his discretion, should he determine
it to be in the best interests of the Township and the public to do so,
temporarily suspend an employee, with or without pay, until the
disciplinary investigation is completed.
J. Termination of employment for cause. In determining to order
separation from service, pursuant to Subsection D(6), the Township
Administrator shall consider the seriousness of the offense, the
employee's work history, the best interests of the Township and the
public and such other matters as the Administrator may in his
discretion deem appropriate and relevant. The following actions by an
employee are, by way of example, and not by way of limitation, matters
which shall justify the termination from the service of the Township for
cause:
§ 33-9 WALL CODE § 33-9
23:102
§ 33-10. Administrative procedures and records.
The following regulations relative to administrative procedures and records
are hereby adopted:
(1) Insubordination, including discourteous remarks to a superior or a
subordinate.
(2) The theft of Township owned equipment or public funds, or the
theft of personal property or money belonging to another Township
employee.
(3) The unauthorized use of Township-owned equipment or property.
(4) An employee's conviction on criminal charges involving alcohol,
illegal drugs or an act of violence.
(5) The revocation of an employee's drivers license.
(6) The misuse or abuse of Township-owned equipment or property.
(7) Verbal or physical abuse to the public or to another Township
employee.
(8) Reporting for duty in an impaired condition due to the use or abuse
of alcohol or drugs.
(9) Leaving a job site or duty station without the explicit authorization
of the employee's supervisor or department head.
(10) Failure by the employee to carry out his duties or work as assigned.
(11) Failure to report to work on time and prepared for duty.
(12) Failure to be properly attired upon reporting for work.
(13) Failure to fully and accurately disclose all information requested on
the employee's application for employment pertaining to an
applicant's criminal history, driving record or health problems.
A. Township Committee's right to modify policies. The Township
Committee reserves the right to add, change, to interpret, or to
eliminate personnel policies, practices and rules, whenever it appears
to be in the best interest of the Township to do so, but only in
exceptional instances and not as a general practice.
B. Amendments to personnel policies. All changes, additions or deletions
will be made by means of amendments of this article, copies of which
will be posted and published in accordance with law. The Township will
endeavor to provide specific notice of all such changes to each
employee; however, it is the responsibility of each employee to be aware
of all ordinance amendments pertaining to personnel policies.
§ 33-9 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 33-10
23:103
§ 33-11. Retirement.
Additional benefits pertaining to Township employees are as follows:
C. Maintenance of personal history files. All personal history files are
confidential records and will be maintained in the Personnel
Department. Department heads shall furnish all relevant information
for personal history files, including accumulated leave and leave
request forms to the Personnel Coordinator on a weekly basis.
D. Access to personal history files. Access to personal history files will be
restricted to the Township Committee, acting as a body, Township
Administrator and, when necessary, the Township Attorney. Any
employee may examine, at reasonable times in the personnel office, his
own personal history file. Nothing contained in the personal history file
shall be removed therefrom by any individual.
A. All Township employees enrolled in the New Jersey State Employees
Retirement Pension Plan are subject to the requirements and provisions
of the plan.
B. The employee's contribution to the plan is deducted from the salary
paid to such full-time employee, and remitted to the state as prescribed
by law.
C. The Township contribution for such employees is determined by and
subsequently remitted to the state in accordance with the provisions of
the law.
D. Township employees having completed the required number of years of
service, and having attained the specified age, may apply for retirement
as provided for by the plan.
E. All information regarding the retirement plan may be obtained from the
Personnel Department.
F. Any Township employee who desires to retire under either the public
employee's retirement system or the police and firemen's retirement
system shall provide at least 30 days advance written notice to the
Township of the intention to apply for such retirement.
G. The Township Committee may, by resolution, on behalf of an employee,
authorize the Township's purchase of credit in the Police and Firemen's
Retirement System (PFRS) of prior service credit in the Public
Employees' Retirement System (PERS), which was not previously
eligible for cost-free transfer. [Added 5-12-2004 by Ord. No. 8-2004]
(1) The amount of credit to be purchased shall not exceed $15,000 per
employee.
(2) Any such purchase is contingent upon the prior PERS service credit
having been accumulated while in the employ of the Township of
Wall.
§ 33-10 WALL CODE § 33-12
23:104
§ 33-12. Insurance and other benefits.
A. Disability insurance. [Amended 3-26-2014 by Ord. No. 4-2014]
(1) Each full-time permanent employee shall be enrolled in the
disability insurance plan maintained and paid on a noncontributory
basis by the Township. This benefit shall terminate upon the
employee's separation from Township service. Any employee on
sick leave and receiving his normal compensation, who in addition
qualifies for disability payments, shall be entitled during the period
he is receiving disability payments to only that portion of his
regular salary which, with the disability payments, equals his
regular weekly salary. Absence from work resulting from disability
not incurred in the course of employment with the Township shall
be charged against the employee's accumulated sick leave, but only
in proportion to that portion of his regular salary not paid by
disability insurance.
(2) An employee who is absent for more than five days and who
qualifies for temporary disability payments under the Township's
disability insurance policy, and who seeks to utilize accumulated
leave during the period of disability, shall endorse, to the Township,
any temporary disability checks the employee has received during
this period of absence. During this period of absence, the employee
shall be charged a pro rata amount of sick leave that is equivalent
to the amount of salary not reimbursed through the disability
payment.
B. Medical insurance.
(1) Each full-time permanent employee shall be enrolled in a family
medical insurance plan as may be determined from time to time by
the Township Committee, which shall be maintained and paid for
on either a noncontributory or contributory basis, as may be
determined by the Township Committee.
(2) Except as hereinafter provided in Subsection B(3), (4), and (5), this
benefit shall terminate upon the employee's separation from
service. At that time, the employee may make his own
arrangements with the insurance company for the continuation or
conversion of the insurance at his own expense.
(3) An employee that receives retirement disability from the public
employment retirement system and who has at least 15 years of
service with the Township shall be entitled to continue to be
enrolled in the family medical insurance plan provided to Township
employees pursuant to Subsection B(1) hereof, under the same
terms and conditions as provided to active Township employees.
(4) In the case of an employee who is separated from the Township's
service by reason of death after having been employed by the
Township for at least 20 years, the Township shall pay for the cost
§ 33-12 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 33-12
23:105
of medical insurance for the employee's spouse and eligible
children for a period of 18 months from the date of separation.
In the case of an employee who is separated from the Township's
service by reason of death and who has been employed by the
Township for less than 20 years, the Township shall pay for the
cost of medical insurance coverage for the employee's spouse and
eligible children for a period of three months from the date of
separation.
(5) The enrollment provided for under Subsection B(3) and (4) above
shall cease at such time as the retired or disabled employee or the
spouse of a deceased employee becomes eligible for enrollment
under the Federal Medicare Program or becomes employed in a
full-time capacity, or in the event that the spouse of a deceased
employee remarries, whichever event shall first occur.
C. Medical insurance for retired employees.
(1) Eligible employees. Upon retirement, each full-time permanent
employee hired prior to January 1, 1991, who is not covered by a
collective bargaining agreement with the Township and who has
been covered under the public employee's retirement system or the
police and firemen's retirement system of the State of New Jersey
for at least 20 years and who has been employed by the Township
for at least 20 years in a full-time, permanent capacity shall be
entitled to continue to be enrolled in the family medical insurance
plan provided to Township employees, and the Township shall pay a
portion of the costs thereof.
(2) "Maximum medical insurance benefit" defined. For the purposes of
this subsection, the term "maximum medical insurance benefit"
shall mean the per employee cost to the Township of insurance
premiums for the applicable category (family or single) of medical
insurance in effect on the date the employee attains the age of 55
years, regardless of the actual date of retirement of the eligible
employee.
(3) Amount to be paid by Township. For each eligible employee, the
Township shall pay, upon retirement, a percentage of the maximum
medical insurance benefit determined by the number of years of
service with the Township of the eligible employee as of January 1,
1991, as follows:
Years of Service
as of 1-1-1991
Percentage of Maximum
Medical insurance Benefit
to be Paid After Retirement
Over 15 years 100%
Over 10 years 75%
Over 5 years 50%
§ 33-12 WALL CODE § 33-12
23:106
Years of Service
as of 1-1-1991
Percentage of Maximum
Medical insurance Benefit
to be Paid After Retirement
Less than 5 years 25%
(4) The enrollment in the medical insurance plan and the payment by
the Township provided for under Subsection C(1), (2) and (3) above
shall cease at such time as the retired or disabled employee or the
spouse of a deceased employee becomes eligible for enrollment
under the Federal Medicare Program or becomes employed in a
full-time capacity, or in the event that the spouse of a deceased
employee remarries, whichever event shall first occur.
D. Other insurance coverage. Each full-time permanent employee shall be
enrolled in a family dental expense plan, a family prescription eyeglass
expense plan, a family prescription drug expense plan and such other
medical expense plans as may be determined by the Township
Committee from time to time on either a noncontributory or
contributory basis, as may be determined by the Township Committee.
E. For the purposes of § 33-12, the term "full-time permanent employee"
shall exclude elected public officials. Therefore, no such official shall be
eligible for benefits under this section. Insurance benefits for all fulltime
permanent employees shall terminate upon the employee's
separation from service, including a separation from service which
occurs due to the employee's absence for any reason for a period in
excess of six months, pursuant to § 33-6D(12) hereof. [Amended
9-27-2017 by Ord. No. 9-2017]
F. Other benefit programs. Township employees shall also be eligible to
participate in optional additional benefits which may from time to time
be made available to Township employees. Such optional benefit
programs shall include by way of example, but not by way of limitation,
a deferred compensation plan; membership in a credit union, and
participation in a contributory life insurance plan. Such additional
benefits shall be optional and the cost thereof shall be borne by such
employees as may decide to participate in any such program.
G. Travel expense and other employee policies. The Township
Administrator is hereby authorized to establish written employee
policies pertaining to such matters as procedures for the
reimbursement of travel expenses by Township employees on Township
business and such other personnel or administrative matters as the
Township Administrator determines to be necessary for the proper
functioning of Township departments. Such policies shall be established
by the Township Administrator, forwarded to all department heads, and
distributed to or posted for the information of all Township employees.
§ 33-12 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 33-12
23:107
H. Employee option; health insurance. Commencing January 1, 1991, the
Township Administrator is hereby authorized to institute a policy
whereby a Township employee who is covered by other medical
insurance coverage may at the employee's option determine not to
participate in any or all health insurance coverage offered by the
Township to its employees. Such a program may provide for the
payment of additional compensation to the employee in consideration
for the cost savings to the Township resulting from the employee's
decision not to participate in such insurance programs. Such additional
compensation shall not exceed the amount established from time to
time by resolution of the Township Committee, and this benefit program
shall be subject to reasonable terms and conditions which shall be
established in the discretion of the Township Administrator. [Amended
12-28-2016 by Ord. No. 17-2016]
I. Insurance information. Additional information pertaining to Township
insurance plans may be obtained from the Personnel Department.
J. Medical insurance for employees retired after January 1, 2007.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection C herein, the following
benefits shall apply to employees who retire after January 1, 2007. For
those employees retiring before that date, the provisions of Subsection
C shall apply. [Added 12-20-2007 by Ord. No. 29-2007; amended
2-13-2008 by Ord. No. 2-2008; 12-28-2016 by Ord. No. 17-2016]
(1) Effective January 1, 2007, the Township will provide, at its expense,
medical insurance benefits to qualified retirees as hereinafter
provided.
(2) To be qualified, an employee must be 55 years of age or older, with
a minimum of 25 years of service in the public employees
retirement system, or 62 years of age or older with 15 years of
service with the PERS.
(3) Medical insurance benefits provided shall be at least equal to those
provided to active employees and shall include the spouse and
dependent children under 23 years of age, except as set forth
herein.
(4) The aforesaid insurance benefits will include surgical, major
medical and hospitalization insurance coverage, but shall not
include other forms of insurance, including but not limited to dental
or vision. Any such ancillary or auxiliary coverages such as dental,
vision, or other coverages may be purchased by retirees at rates as
provided by the Township to the extent allowed by law and the
Township's insurance carriers.
(5) The aforesaid benefits shall terminate upon a retiree reaching the
age of eligibility for Medicare or Medicaid, whichever first occurs.
(6) Spouses and dependents will be covered only while the qualified
employee is covered and only to the extent that they would be
§ 33-12 WALL CODE § 33-12
23:108
covered if the qualified employee was still an active employee.
Once the qualified employee is no longer eligible, continued spouse
and dependent coverage can only be provided by purchase of
COBRA benefits.
(7) If the qualified employee, spouse or dependent receives major
medical insurance benefits from another source, that person shall
no longer be eligible for participation in this program.
(8) If a retired Township employee gains employment with another
entity that offers health benefits, the retired employee (and their
dependents) shall take those benefits and come off the Township's
health insurance plan.
§ 33-12 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 33-12
23:109

ARTICLE II
Ethical Standards and Financial Disclosure Requirements
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 2-4.13 of the Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 33-13. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to provide for clear, consistent, and uniform
standards of ethical conduct and financial disclosure requirements for
officers and employees of the Township, so as to retain the respect and
confidence of its citizens in the conduct of municipal business and to
implement the provisions of the Local Government Ethics Law, N.J.S.A.
40A:9-22.1 et seq.
§ 33-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, all terms and phrases shall have the same meaning
as defined by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.3.
§ 33-15. Ethical standards.
All officers and employees of the Township shall comply with the following
provisions:
A. No officer or employee of the Township or member of his immediate
family shall have an interest in a business organization or engage in any
business, transaction, or professional activity, which is in substantial
conflict with the proper discharge of his duties in the public interest.
B. No officer or employee of the Township shall use or attempt to use his
official position to secure unwarranted privileges or advantages for
himself or others.
C. No officer or employee of the Township shall act in his official capacity
in any matter where he, a member of his immediate family, or a
business organization in which he has an interest, has a direct or
indirect financial or personal involvement that might reasonably be
expected to impair his objectivity or independence or judgment.
D. No officer or employee of the Township shall undertake any
employment or service, whether compensated or not, which might
reasonably be expected to prejudice his independence of judgment in
the exercise of his official duties.
E. No officer or employee of the Township, a member of his immediate
family, or business organization in which he has an interest shall solicit
or accept any gift, favor, loan, political contribution, service, promise of
future employment, or other thing of value based upon an
understanding that the gift, favor, loan, contribution, service, promise,
or other thing of value was given or offered for the purpose of
influencing him, directly or indirectly, in the discharge of his official
§ 33-13 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 33-15
23:111
§ 33-16. Financial disclosure statements.
The following officials and employees of the Township shall annually file a
financial disclosure statement, in the form prescribed by the Local Finance
Board, which statement shall include all information required to be
disclosed by the Local Government Ethics Law. Financial disclosure
statements shall be filed on or before April 30 in each year for the
proceeding year.
duties. This provision shall not apply to the solicitation or acceptance of
contributions to the campaign of an announced candidate for elective
public office, if the officer has no knowledge or reason to believe that
the campaign contribution, if accepted, was given with the intent to
influence the officer in the discharge of his official duties.
F. No officer or employee of the Township shall use, or allow to be used,
his public office or employment or any information, not generally
available to the members of the public, which he receives or acquires in
the course of and by reason of his office or employment, for the purpose
of securing financial gain for himself, any member of his immediate
family, or any business organization with which he is associated.
G. No officer of employee of the Township or business organization in
which he has an interest shall represent any person or party other than
the Township in connection with any cause, proceeding, application or
other matter pending before any agency in the Township. This provision
shall not be deemed to prohibit one Township employee from
representing another employee where the Township is the employer
and the representation is within the context of official labor union or
similar representational responsibilities.
H. No officer of the Township shall be deemed in conflict with these
provisions if, by reason of his participation in the enactment of any
ordinance, resolution or other matter required to be voted upon or
which is subject to executive approval or veto, no material or monetary
gain accrues to him as a member of any business, profession,
occupation or group, to any greater extent than any gain could
reasonably be expected to accrue to any other member of such
business, profession, occupation or group.
I. No elected Township official shall be prohibited from making an inquiry
for information on behalf of a constituent, if no fee, reward or other
thing of value is promised to, given to or accepted by the official or a
member of his immediate family, whether directly or indirectly, in
return therefor.
J. Nothing shall prohibit any Township officer or employee, or member of
his immediate family, from representing himself or themselves, in
negotiations or proceedings concerning his, or their, own interests.
A. Members of the Township Committee.
§ 33-15 WALL CODE § 33-16
23:112
B. The Township Clerk.
C. The Township Administrator.
D. The Township Attorney.
E. The Township Engineer.
F. The Township Auditor.
G. The Township Planner.
H. The Tax Assessor.
I. The Township Prosecutor.
J. The Chief of Police.
K. The Captains of the Police Department.
L. The Planning Board Attorney.
M. The members of Planning Board.
N. The Board of Adjustment Attorney.
O. The members of the Board of Adjustment.
P. The members of the Mobile Home Park Stabilization Board.
Q. The Attorney for the Mobile Home Park Stabilization Board.
R. The Construction Officer.
S. The Land Use Officer.
T. The Code Enforcement Officer.
U. The Superintendent of Public Works.
V. The members of the Joint Board of Fire Prevention.
W. The Fire Official.
X. The Chief Financial Officer.
Y. The Tax Collector.
Z. The Bond Counsel.
§ 33-16 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 33-16
23:113

ARTICLE III
Department of Personnel
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 2-4.15 of the Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 33-17. Department established.
There is hereby established within the office of the Township Administrator
the Department of Personnel.
§ 33-18. Recordkeeping; processing of benefit requests.
The Department of Personnel shall provide centralized recordkeeping for
all personnel records, with the exception of the personal history files of
uniformed members of the Police Department. The Department of Personnel
shall also provide for the timely processing of benefit requests from
Township employees.
§ 33-19. Responsibilities.
The Department of Personnel shall be responsible for the preparation of the
Township's payroll on a biweekly basis, the centralized recordkeeping of all
Township personnel records and the processing of all benefit requests and
the handling of all disputed benefit claims with the applicable insurance
carrier.
§ 33-20. Personnel Coordinator.
The Department of Personnel shall be supervised by a Personnel
Coordinator, who shall report to the Township Administrator. The Personnel
Coordinator shall have at least five years' experience in a position of
responsibility pertaining to personnel matters. The Personnel Coordinator
shall have such other duties and responsibilities as may be assigned from
time to time by the Township Administrator.
§ 33-17 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 33-20
23:115

ARTICLE IV
Criminal History Background Checks
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 2-4.15 of the Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 33-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — A determination
of whether a person has a criminal record by cross-referencing that
person's name and fingerprints with those on file with the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, Identification Division and the State Bureau of Identification
in the Division of State Police.
DEPARTMENT — The Township of Wall Police Department.
TOWNSHIP-SPONSORED PROGRAMS — Any programs sponsored by the
Township which provide and utilize Township facilities or Township
property.
§ 33-22. Request for criminal background check; costs.
§ 33-23. Disqualification from service for certain crimes and
offenses.
A person may be disqualified from serving as an employee or volunteer of
a Township-sponsored program involving minors if that person's criminal
history background check reveals a record of conviction of any of the
following crimes and offenses:
A. The Township requires that all employees and volunteers, 18 years or
older, involved with Township-sponsored programs involving minors
submit to a criminal history record background check.
B. The Division of State Police shall inform the designated department
whether the person's criminal history record background check reveals
a conviction of a disqualifying crime or offense as specified in § 33-23.
C. A criminal history record background check shall be conducted only
upon receipt of the written consent to the check from the prospective or
current employee or volunteer.
D. The Township shall bear the costs associated with conducting criminal
background checks.
A. In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense:
(1) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq.,
N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 2C:14-1 et
seq. or N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq.
§ 33-21 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 33-23
23:117
§ 33-24. Submission of documentation; coordination of background
check by Chief of Police.
Prospective or current employees and volunteers of Township-sponsored
programs involving minors shall submit their name, address, fingerprints
and written consent to the Township for the criminal history record
background check to be performed. The organization shall submit this
documentation to the Township of Wall Chief of Police who shall coordinate
the background check.
§ 33-25. Access to and use of criminal history information.
§ 33-26. Challenging accuracy of information.
If this criminal history record may disqualify an applicant for any purpose,
the person making the determination shall provide the applicant with an
opportunity to complete and challenge the accuracy of the information
contained in the criminal history record. The applicant shall be afforded a
(2) Against the family, children or incompetents meaning those crimes
and disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:33-1 et seq.
(3) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes;
(4) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes except paragraph (A) of subsection a. of N.J.S.A.
2C:35-10.
B. In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in New
Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly persons
offenses described in Subsection A of this section.
A. Access to criminal history information for noncriminal justice purposes,
including licensing and employment is restricted to authorized
personnel of the designated department, on a need to know basis, as
authorized by federal or state statute or rule or regulation, executive
order, administrative code, local ordinance or resolution.
B. The Township shall limit its use of the criminal history record
information solely to the authorized purpose for which it was obtained
and the criminal history record information furnished shall not be
disseminated to persons or organizations not authorized to receive such
information. Use of this record shall be limited solely to the authorized
purpose for which it was given, and it shall not be disseminated to any
unauthorized persons. All records shall be destroyed immediately after
they have served their intended and authorized purpose. Any person
violating federal or state regulations governing access to criminal
history record information may be subject to criminal and/or civil
penalties.
§ 33-23 WALL CODE § 33-26
23:118
reasonable period of time to correct and complete this record. A person is
not presumed guilty of any charges or arrests for which there are not final
dispositions indicated on the record.
§ 33-27. Notification of subsequent disqualifying offense.
Should an employee or volunteer be convicted of a disqualifying crime or
offense as specified in § 33-23 after he or she has cleared the required
background check, he or she must notify the Township Administrator
immediately.
§ 33-26 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 33-27
23:119
Chapter 36
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Criminal history background checks — See
Ch. 33, Art. IV.
§ 33-27 WALL CODE § 33-27
23:120
ARTICLE I
Establishment
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 2-5 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 36-1. Membership.
There is hereby created and established the Police Department of the
Township whose members shall be known as follows:
A. A Chief of Police, who has attained the rank of captain or lieutenant of
the Police Department, and such other qualifications as may be
prescribed by the Township Administrator. [Amended 3-9-2005 by
Ord. No. 6-2005]
B. Captain of Police, with not less than one year's experience as a
Lieutenant of the Police Department, and such other qualifications as
may be prescribed by the Township Administrator, the number to be
appointed as may be necessary.
C. A Lieutenant, with not less than one year's experience as Sergeant of
the Police Department, and such other qualifications as may be
prescribed by the Township Administrator, the number to be appointed
as may be necessary. [Amended 12-12-2007 by Ord. No. 24-2007;
7-24-2013 by Ord. No. 16-2013]
D. 8 A Sergeant, with not less than three year's experience as a member of
the Police Department, and such other qualifications as may be
prescribed by the Township Administrator, the number to be appointed
as may be necessary. [Amended 12-12-2007 by Ord. No. 24-2007]
E. A patrolman having such qualifications as may be prescribed by the
Township Administrator, the` number to be appointed as may be
necessary. Patrolman may be assigned to either the Patrol Division or
the Detective Division of the Police Department by the Chief of Police
subject to the approval of the Township Administrator.
F. A temporary or probationary patrolman, who shall be a high school
graduate, and have such other qualifications as may be prescribed by
the Township Administrator, the number to be appointed as may be
necessary. The appointment of such police officers shall be made for a
total period not exceeding one year for the purpose of enabling such
person seeking permanent employment to take a police training course
at the New Jersey Municipal Police Academy. Any appointment may be
for a temporary period of less than one year in the discretion of the
Township Committee. No person shall be given or accept a permanent
appointment as a police officer unless such person has successfully
completed the police training course at the New Jersey Municipal Police
Academy, and has served as a police officer, as a probationary or
8. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding Sergeant First Class, as amended
12-12-2007 by Ord. No. 24-2007, was repealed 7-24-2013 by Ord. No. 16-2013.
§ 36-1 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 36-1
23:121
§ 36-2. Assignment of personnel.
Personnel shall be assigned to the respective divisions within the Police
Department by the Chief of Police, subject to the approval of the Township
Administrator.
§ 36-3. Clothing allowance.
Clothing allowances for all members of the Police Department, including
the Chief of Police, shall be controlled by the applicable provisions of
the collective bargaining agreement in effect between the Township and
Policemen's Benevolent Association Local No. 234, a copy of which shall be
maintained on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 36-4. Videotapes and other materials. [Amended 7-10-2002 by
Ord. No. 25-2002]
The following regulations are hereby established for the viewing of
videotapes and other records of the Police Department:
§ 36-5. Fingerprint inquiries.
temporary appointment, for a minimum period of six months after
completion of the police training course. No person shall be permitted
to take the police training course unless he holds a probationary or
temporary appointment.
G. A special law enforcement officer having such qualifications as may be
prescribed by the Township Administrator, the number to be appointed
as may be necessary. [Added 8-8-2012 by Ord. No. 14-2012]
A. The viewing or reviewing of police reports, photographs, videotapes or
other documents or materials constituting public records in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq. shall be permitted at police headquarters
from 8:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. daily, Monday through Friday, except
holidays. A written request to review public records must be filed with
the Custodian of Records.
B. The viewing of videotape shall be permitted provided that at least 48
hours' notice is given to the Custodian of Records. The Custodian of
Records shall establish the date and time for the viewing of a videotape;
provided, however, that a videotape shall be made available for viewing
within seven days of a request.
C. A duplication of a videotape or audiotape may be obtained by written
request to the custodian of records, together with the payment of fee in
the amount of $5. [Amended 12-8-2004 by Ord. No. 33-2004]
A. Except when the taking of fingerprints or processing of fingerprint
inquiries is required by state or federal statute, or regulation, or
Township ordinance, the Police Department will fulfill fingerprint
§ 36-1 WALL CODE § 36-5
23:122
requests only from residents of the Township. A fee of $20 will be
charged for the taking of fingerprints.
B. In those cases where the processing of a fingerprint inquiry is required
by a state, federal or Township regulation, statute or ordinance, the
applicant shall pay a sum in the amount charged by any state or federal
agency for a fingerprint inquiry concerning the applicant.
§ 36-5 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 36-5
23:123

ARTICLE II
Police Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 2-6 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 36-6. Establishment of appropriate authority and promulgation of
rules and regulations regarding the government and discipline of
members of the Police Department. [Amended 4-12-2006 by Ord.
No. 8-2006]
§ 36-7. Violations.
Any member of the Police Department who violated the rules and
regulations shall be subject to punishment as provided by law.
A. The Township Administrator shall be designated as the appropriate
authority, as provided in the New Jersey statutes (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118),
for the promulgation of rules and regulations. The Township
Administrator shall adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for the
government of the Police Department and for the discipline of its
members.
B. The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Department and shall
be directly responsible to the Township Administrator for its efficiency
and day-to-day operations. Pursuant to policies established by the
Township Administrator, the Chief of Police shall:
(1) Administer and enforce the rules and regulations of the Police
Department and any special emergency directives for the
disposition and discipline of the Department and its members and
officers;
(2) Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of
the Police Department;
(3) Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members and officers;
(4) Delegate such authority as may be deemed necessary for the
efficient operation of the Police Department to be exercised under
the Chief's direction and control; and
(5) Report at least weekly to the Township Administrator, in such form
as shall be prescribed, on the operation of the Police Department
during the preceding week and make such other reports as may be
requested by the Township Administrator.
§ 36-6 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 36-7
23:125

ARTICLE III
Extra-Duty Police Assignments
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 2-18 of the Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 36-8. Written requests for exta-duty assignments.
All requests for extra-duty assignments of police officers for traffic safety
and security at construction sites, special events and other locations within
the Township of Wall shall be made in writing to the Chief of Police before
the first day such police services commence. In case of unforeseen
emergencies, written requests shall be made as soon as practicable. All
requests shall include a traffic safety plan for review by the Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police may require revisions to the plan before approval of the
extra-duty assignments. Extra-duty assignments of police personnel made
by the Chief of Police shall not violate the terms of any applicable collective
bargaining agreement.
§ 36-9. Deposit required.
The person or entity requesting such police services shall deposit with the
Township cash, a bank check or money order in the amount of $500 for each
day such services are requested. All payments shall be made payable to the
"Township of Wall." No police personnel will be provided unless the required
amounts are prepaid and the traffic safety plan is approved by the Chief of
Police in advance of the commencement of such police services.
§ 36-10. Escrow fund established.
All funds for such police services will be placed in a Extra-Duty Assignment
Police Services Fund which shall be established in the annual budget as a
dedicated rider trust fund. As soon as the police services are provided to
the requesting person or entity, the funds may be withdrawn to reimburse
the Township to ensure the timely payment of wages of the police officers
as well as all administrative costs to the Township.
§ 36-11. Minimum escrow deposits.
For those persons or entities which require continuous police services
for a week or longer, a minimum balance of the average weekly costs
shall be maintained in the escrow account. For those persons or entities
which require continuous or frequent service, a deposit of $500 shall be
maintained in the escrow account for emergencies. Failure to maintain this
minimum balance shall result in the termination of such police services until
the escrow balance is replenished to the minimum balance.
§ 36-12. Rates established.
The rates to be charged for such extra-duty police services shall be as
follows:
§ 36-8 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 36-12
23:127
A. For wages: $35 per hour.
B. For administrative costs: $13.10 per hour.
§ 36-12 WALL CODE § 36-12
23:128
Chapter 42
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative offices — See Ch. 2.
Salary of Judge — See Ch. 14.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 33.
Salary of Sewerage Authority members — See
Ch. 47.
§ 36-12 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 36-12
23:129

ARTICLE I
Salaries and Wages
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 2-13 of the Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 42-1. Account established.
A salary and wage account shall be hereby established in the Township. The
Township Chief Financial Officer or the Chief Financial Officer's designee
shall deposit the necessary funds to meet payroll requirements in an official
depository as designated by resolution of the Township committee in an
account captioned "Salary and Wage Account of the Township of Wall."
§ 42-2. Chief Financial Officer as disbursing official.
§ 42-3. Biweekly payment of salaries and wages.
All salaries and wages paid pursuant to the provisions of this section shall
be paid biweekly by the disbursing official.
A. The Chief Financial Officer shall be designated as the disbursing official
to draw checks thereon to pay salaries and wages to all employees and
officials of the Township in accordance with salary ordinances
applicable thereto and the provisions of this section. In the absence of
the Chief Financial Officer, the Township Administrator shall act as the
disbursing official and fulfill the functions herein set forth.
B. The disbursing official shall cause the checks to be issued to be listed in
the certified check register for presentation to the Township
Committee, at its regular meetings.
C. The disbursing official shall regularly, as provided by law, disburse to
the various state and federal agencies such monies as are withheld from
employees salary and wage checks.
D. The disbursing official shall draw necessary funds from the salary and
wage account to meet regular salary and wage requirements of the
Township for the next succeeding pay period.
§ 42-1 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 42-3
23:131

ARTICLE II
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 9-10-2008 by Ord. No. 16-2008]
§ 42-4. Participation in Defined Contribution Retirement Program.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following persons are deemed
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
(1) Township Administrator;
(2) Department heads appointed by the governing body and who
report directly to an elected official or the Township Administrator;
(3) Municipal Engineer;
(4) Municipal Court Judge;
(5) Municipal Prosecutor.
B. Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
(1) Chief Financial Officer;
(2) Construction Code Official;
(3) Tax Assessor;
(4) Registered Municipal Clerk;
(5) Plumbing Sub-Code Inspector;
(6) Fire Sub-Code Official;
(7) Electrical Sub-Code Official;
(8) Superintendent of Public Works.
C. This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to Chapter 92
of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.), as amended from time to
time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
D. This article shall be filed with the Director of the Division of Pensions
and Benefits of the New Jersey Department of the Treasury.
§ 42-4 GIFTS TO TOWNSHIP § 42-4
23:133
Chapter 44
SEAL
§ 44-1. Establishment of seal.
The seal heretofore provided and used by and for the Township is hereby
established and continued as the seal of the Township.
§ 44-2. License required for use of seal.
§ 44-3. Incorporation of disclaimer with use of seal.
Notwithstanding the grant of a license, any person utilizing the Township
Seal pursuant to this chapter shall incorporate a disclaimer as promulgated
by the Township Clerk.
Chapter 45
SELF-INSURANCE FUND
§ 45-1. Establishment of fund.
There is hereby established in the Township of Wall, the Wall Township Self-
Insurance Fund for Health Benefits.
§ 45-2. Purpose of fund.
The fund established in § 45-1 herein shall be to provide contributory or
noncontributory self-funded, or partially self-funded, health benefits to
Township employees, their dependents, or both in accordance with rules
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to use the Township Seal without
first obtaining a license from the Township.
B. The Township Clerk shall prepare an appropriate application form
which prospective applicants shall complete and submit to the
Township Committee for its consideration.
C. The Township Committee shall consider such a request and, if approved
by the Township Committee, then, in that event, an applicant will be
allowed limited use of the Township Seal for the consideration of $1 per
year.
D. The issuance of a license shall permit the licensee to use the Township
Seal in a specified publication, document or website. An appropriate
description of its identity as the Official Seal of the Township of Wall
shall accompany the seal. An informative historical description of the
significance of the seal may be provided with the use of the seal by an
applicant.
§ 42-4 WALL CODE § 45-2
44:134
and regulations of the Director of the Division of Local Government Services
in the Department of Community Affairs.
§ 45-3. Appropriations.
The Township Committee of the Township of Wall shall appropriate such
funds as are necessary to accomplish the purposes for which the Wall
Township Self-Insurance Fund for Health Benefits is established.
§ 45-4. Amount of fund.
The minimum amount to be held in said fund for the remainder of the 2007
budget year shall be such funds as the Chief Financial Officer certifies are
available from Account No. 70123220000298 - Employee Group Insurance
and Account No. 70954502000536 - Other Insurance. Beginning in the 2008
budget year, there shall be a minimum amount of $3,400,000 appropriated
for said fund.
§ 45-5. Appointment of Commissioners. [Amended 2-27-2013 by
Ord. No. 3-2013]
The Mayor shall appoint three Township officials, who may be members of
the governing body, to serve as Insurance Fund Commissioners. The Mayor
shall appoint a person to serve as Secretary to the Commission who shall
serve at the pleasure of the Township Committee of the Township of Wall.
The Commissioners shall hold office for two years or the remainder of their
term of office as officials, whichever shall be less, and until their successors
shall have been duly appointed and qualified. The Commissioners shall
serve without compensation. The salary of the Secretary shall be set by the
salary ordinance authorized by the Township Committee.
§ 45-6. Vacancies in office.
Vacancies in the office of Insurance Fund Commissioners caused by any
reason other than expiration of term as an official shall be filled for the
unexpired term. Vacancies in the position of Secretary shall be filled in the
manner of the original appointment.
§ 45-7. Powers and authority.
The Commissioners shall have the following powers and authority:
A. Employ necessary clerical assistants, whose compensation shall be
fixed and paid by the Township in the same manner as is that of other
employees of the Township;
B. Invest the fund and all additions and accretions thereto in such
securities as they shall deem best suited for the purposes of the fund;
C. Adopt rules and regulations for the control and investment of the fund;
§ 45-2 SEAL § 45-7
44:135
Chapter 47
SEWERAGE AUTHORITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water and sewers — See Ch. 222.
D. Fix reasonable rates of premium for all insurance carried by the
Insurance Fund, and shall effect all insurance in the Insurance Fund or
with any insurance company or companies authorized to do business in
this state;
E. Collect and incorporate into the fund employee contributions for health
benefits which are made pursuant to applicable Township ordinances or
contracts;
F. The Secretary to the Insurance Fund Commission shall be entrusted
with the daily operation of the Insurance Fund and shall submit a report
to the Commissioners at least once a month.
§ 45-7 WALL CODE § 45-7
47:136
ARTICLE I
Manasquan River Regional Sewerage Authority
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 12-4 of the Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 47-1. Findings.
§ 47-2. Creation of Authority.
Pursuant to the provisions of Paragraph (c), Section 4 of the Sewerage
Authorities Law of the State of New Jersey [Laws of 1946, Chapter 138, as
amended and supplemented; N.J.S.A. 40:14A-4(c)], there is hereby created
a public body corporate and politic, under the name and style of the
Manasquan River Regional Sewerage Authority, which sewerage authority
shall be formed of territory as indicated on a map known as "Existing
Facilities, Manasquan River Region, Sewerage Study Plan, Plate 1, Thomas
A. There are in and about the western Monmouth area waters which are
polluted and subject to pollution by sewerage and industrial and other
wastes arising from causes within the territories of the municipality and
the other four municipalities hereinafter mentioned. The Township
Committee has ascertained that there is an imperative need to relieve
such waters from pollution and thereby to reduce and ultimately abate
the menace to the public health resulting from such pollution. The
Sewerage Authorities Law of the State of New Jersey, (Laws of 1946,
Chapter 138, as amended and supplemented; N.J.S.A. 40:14A-1 et seq.)
grants power to any two or more municipalities the areas of which
together comprise an integral body of territory by means and through
the agency of a sewerage authority, to acquire, construct, maintain,
operate or improve works for the collection, treatment, purification, or
disposal of sewerage or other wastes. The Boroughs of Freehold and
Farmingdale, the Township of Howell and portions of the Township of
Wall and Freehold together comprise such an integral body of territory.
B. The Township Committee has decided and hereby determines that it is
necessary and advisable and that it is in the best interests of the
inhabitants of the Township that by joint parallel action by or on behalf
of the Borough of Freehold and Farmingdale and the Townships of Wall,
Howell and Freehold, each a municipal corporation of the State of New
Jersey situated in the County of Monmouth and hereinafter referred to
as "municipalities" that there be created a sewerage authority pursuant
to said Sewerage Authorities Law as a public body corporate and politic
and an agency and instrumentality of said municipalities for the
purpose of relief of the waters in or bordering upon the state from
pollution arising from causes within the area of the municipalities and
the relief of waters in, bordering or entering said area from pollution or
threatened pollution and the consequent improvement of conditions
affecting the public health and to further provide for a collective
approach solving the sewerage and pollution problems of the area of
said municipalities.
§ 47-1 SEWERAGE AUTHORITIES § 47-2
47:137
W. Birdsall, Professional Engineer, Land Surveyor and Professional Planner,
Belmar, New Jersey," dated June 16, 1971, a copy of which is on file in the
office of the Township Clerk.
§ 47-3. Powers of Authority.
§ 47-4. Appointment of members; compensation. [Amended
8-14-2002 by Ord. No. 30-2002]
The Manasquan River Regional Sewerage Authority shall consist of 10
members thereof, and two of such members shall be appointed by the
governing body of each municipality in accordance with the provisions of
said Sewerage Authorities Law. The Manasquan River Regional Sewerage
Authority shall be authorized to establish an annual salary for each of
its members for the year 2002 of not more than $3,000. For each year
thereafter, the maximum annual salary for each member shall be computed
by applying a factor, based upon the annual increase or decrease in the
implicit price deflater index (a/k/a municipal cap index) to the maximum
salary for the prior year to determine the yearly adjusted maximum salary
of each member.
§ 47-5. Copy filed With New Jersey Secretary of State.
A copy of this article duly certified by the Township Clerk shall forthwith
be filed by the Township Clerk in the office of the Secretary of State of the
State of New Jersey pursuant to the provisions of said Sewerage Authorities
Law.
A. Manasquan River Regional Sewerage Authority is and shall be an
agency and instrumentality of the five municipalities created by parallel
ordinances duly adopted by their governing bodies and is a sewerage
authority as contemplated and provided for by the Sewerage
Authorities Law and shall have and exercise all of the powers and
perform all of the duties provided for by the Sewerage Authorities Law
and any other statutes heretofore or hereinafter enacted and applicable
thereto, except that it shall not have the power to construct, install,
maintain or operate local or municipal sewage collection systems, nor
any part thereof within the boundaries of any participating
municipality. This limitation shall not prohibit the regional authority
from constructing, maintaining or operating regional transmission
mains within the boundaries of any participating municipality,
extending from the local or municipal sewage collection system of any
participating municipality to the regional authority's sewage treatment
plant or plants.
B. All physical facilities of the regional authority, including treatment
plants and pumping stations, shall, if feasible and practicable, be
located and constructed in compliance with all lawful and reasonable
zoning, building, screening, buffer, noise and odor requirements of the
municipality in which they are to be located.
§ 47-2 WALL CODE § 47-5
47:138
ARTICLE II
South Monmouth Regional Sewerage Authority
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 2-5 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 47-6. Creation of Authority.
Pursuant to the provisions of Paragraph (c), Section 4 of the Sewerage
Authorities Law of the State of New Jersey [Laws of 1946, Chapter 138, as
amended and supplemented; N.J.S.A. 40:14A-4(c)], there is hereby created
a public body corporate and politic under the name and style of the "South
Monmouth Regional Sewerage Authority," consisting of the Boroughs of
Belmar, South Belmar, Spring Lake, Spring Lake Heights, Sea Girt,
Manasquan and Brielle and that part of the Township as indicated in the
Wall Region Water Pollution Control Feasibility Study and Report, dated
January 30, 1970, prepared by Thomas W. Birdsall, Professional Engineer
and Land Surveyor, Professional Planner.
§ 47-7. Powers of Authority.
The South Monmouth Regional Sewerage Authority is and shall be an
agency and instrumentality of the eight municipalities created by parallel
ordinance duly adopted by their respective governing bodies, and is a
sewerage authority contemplated and provided for by the Sewerage
Authorities Law and shall be vested with all the powers granted by the
provision of N.J.S.A. 40:14A et seq., except that it shall not have the power
to construct, install, maintain or operate local or municipal sewage
collection systems, nor any part thereof within the boundaries of any
participating municipality. This limitation shall not prohibit the regional
authority from constructing, maintaining or operating regional transmission
mains within the boundaries of any participating municipality, extending
from the local or municipal sewage collection system of any participating
municipality to the regional authority's sewage treatment plant or plants.
§ 47-8. Appointment of members; compensation.
The South Monmouth Regional Sewerage Authority shall consist of eight
members thereof, and one of such members shall be appointed by the
governing body of each of the municipalities in accordance with the
provisions of the Sewerage Authority Law. The South Monmouth Regional
Sewerage Authority shall be authorized to establish an annual salary for
each of its members of not more than $2,000.
§ 47-9. Copy filed with New Jersey Secretary of State.
A copy of this article duly certified by the Township Clerk shall forthwith
be filed by the Township Clerk in the office of the Secretary of State of the
State of New Jersey.
§ 47-6 SEWERAGE AUTHORITIES § 47-10
47:139
§ 47-10. Alternate member.
The Township Committee shall appoint one alternate member to the South
Monmouth Regional Sewerage Authority. The term of office of the alternate
member shall be for five years commencing on February 1 of the year of
appointment. Compensation for the position of alternate member of the
authority shall be as fixed and compensated by the Township Committee. A
vacancy in the position of alternate member shall be filled for the unexpired
term. Pursuant to N.J.S A. 40:14A-4(n), the Township's alternate member
may participate in discussions of the proceedings of the Authority, but may
not vote, except in the absence or disqualification of the Township's regular
member.
§ 47-11. Addendum No. 1 authorized. [Added 9-17-2003 by Ord. No.
26-2003]
Addendum No. 1 to the service agreement between the Township of Wall
and the South Monmouth Regional Sewerage Authority providing for
amendments to Part II, and additions to the aforesaid service agreement, be
and the same is hereby approved.
§ 47-12. Addendum No. 2 authorized. [Added 9-17-2003 by Ord. No.
26-2003]
Addendum No. 2 to the service agreement between the Township of Wall
and the South Monmouth Regional Sewerage Authority providing for
amendments to Part II, and additions to the aforesaid service agreement, be
and the same is hereby approved.
§ 47-13. Addendum No. 3 authorized. [Added 9-17-2003 by Ord. No.
27-2003]
Addendum No. 3 to the Service Agreement between the Township of Wall
and the South Monmouth Regional Sewerage Authority providing for an
amendment to Section 3.08 of the aforesaid Service Agreement be and the
same is hereby approved.
§ 47-14. Addendum No. 4 authorized. [Added 8-11-2004 by Ord. No.
23-2004]
The Agreement Addendum, in the form presented to this meeting, be and
hereby is approved. The Township of Wall, in the County of Monmouth,
New Jersey, shall enter into the Agreement Addendum, amending its Service
Agreement, dated as of March 13, 1974, with the South Monmouth Regional
Sewerage Authority, whereby the Township shall agree to pay the debt
service costs and expenses associated with improvements to its sewerage
collection system, on the terms and conditions and substantially in the form
presented to this meeting. The Mayor shall be and hereby is directed on
behalf of the Township to execute said Agreement Addendum under the
corporate seal of the Township which shall be affixed and attested by the
Township Clerk, and to deliver the same.
§ 47-10 WALL CODE § 47-14
47:140
Chapter 51
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative offices — See Ch. 2.
§ 51-1. Legislative power.
All legislative power of the Township, except in matters of health, shall be
exercised by the Township Committee pursuant to law, and in matters of
health by the Board of Health.
§ 51-2. Organization of Township Committee.
The Township Committee shall organize annually during the first week
in January, at which time it shall elect a Mayor and Deputy Mayor from
among its members. The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Township
Committee and perform such other duties as the Township Committee or
state law may prescribe. In the absence or disability of the Mayor, the
Deputy Mayor shall perform all of the duties and functions of the Mayor.
§ 51-3. Powers of Mayor.
The Mayor shall have the power to appoint subcommittees of the Township
Committee with the consent of the Township Committee. He shall sign and
execute documents and agreements on behalf of the Township. He shall
have the power to make proclamations concerning holidays and events of
interest to the Township. He shall exercise the ceremonial power of the
Township and every other power usually exercised by Township mayors or
conferred upon him by law.
§ 51-4. Meetings of Township Committee.
A. Regular meetings. The Township Committee shall hold its annual
organizational meeting during the first week in January. The Committee
shall establish a schedule of regular executive and public business
meetings by resolution adopted by the Township Committee at its
annual organizational meeting or as may be modified from time to time
pursuant to law.
B. Special meetings. Special meetings of the Township Committee shall be
held as the need therefor arises and shall be held in compliance with
the Open Public Meetings Act (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.).
§ 47-14 SEWERAGE AUTHORITIES § 51-5
47:141
§ 51-5. Open meetings; private sessions; rules of procedure.
All regular and special meetings of the Township Committee shall be open
to the public, except for those portions of such meetings which the
Committee determines to hold in private session pursuant to the provisions
of the Open Public Meetings Act. The rules of procedure to be followed
and rules for the consideration of nominations submitted by the Mayor and
for the conduct of other business of the Committee shall be provided by
resolution.
§ 51-6. Inclusion of routine items on consent agenda.
§ 51-7. Quorum.
A majority of the full membership of the Township Committee shall
constitute a quorum; provided, however, that no ordinance shall be adopted
by the Township Committee without the affirmative vote of a majority of
the full membership of the Committee. If a quorum is not present at the
appointed time for any meeting, the presiding officer or the Clerk may
declare the meeting adjourned.
§ 51-8. Roll call votes; minutes.
The vote upon every ordinance and upon resolutions shall be taken by roll
call, and the yeas and nays shall be entered on the minutes. The minutes of
each meeting shall be maintained and signed by the Township Clerk.
§ 51-9. Adoption of ordinances.
All ordinances shall be introduced, read, heard and enacted in the manner
provided by general law.
A. Items of business, excluding ordinances and as otherwise provided by
law, which the Township Committee at its executive meeting has
determined to be routine and which do not require discussions shall be
included under a single section of the agenda known as the "consent
agenda." Such items may be adopted or approved as the case may be
collectively, upon a single motion and roll call vote of a majority of the
Township Committee voting affirmatively.
B. The consent agenda section of the agenda shall be preceded by an
explanatory note in substantially the following form: "All matters listed
on the consent agenda are considered routine by the Township
Committee and will be adopted or approved collectively by a single
motion or roll call vote of a majority of the Township Committee. All
such items will be available for inspection at the meeting and in the
office of the Township Clerk. There will be no separate discussion of
these items. If discussion is desired on any item, that item will be
considered separately."
§ 51-5 WALL CODE § 51-10
47:142
§ 51-10. Basic courses in local government. [Added 2-26-2014 by
Ord. No. 1-2014]
The Mayor and members of the Township Committee shall, within each of
their terms of office, attend one or more basic training courses on their
responsibilities and obligations as local government officials. Such courses
should include the subjects of budgeting, policy setting, local government
contracting, risk management, and the Open Public Records Act9 and may
be coordinated through Rutgers University, county government, the New
Jersey State League of Municipalities, the New Jersey Association of
Counties, the New Jersey Council of Mayors, a local Mayors Association,
joint insurance fund, or other qualified instructional provider.
Chapter 53
WATER AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewerage authorities — See Ch. 47. Water and sewers — See Ch. 222.
9. Editor’s Note: See N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
§ 51-10 SEWERAGE AUTHORITIES § 51-10
47:143

ARTICLE I
Southeast Monmouth Utility Authority
[Adopted 11-25-2008 by Ord. No. 22-2008]
§ 53-1. Legislative intent and purpose.
§ 53-2. Establishment; composition.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:14B-5, there is hereby established a joint municipal
water authority to be known as the Southeast Monmouth Utility Authority
("Authority") consisting of one member from the Township of Wall; one
member from the Borough of Brielle; one member from the Borough of
Spring Lake; one member from the Borough of Spring Lake Heights and one
member from the Borough of Sea Girt.
§ 53-3. Powers.
The Authority shall possess such powers as authorized by law and approved
by the local Finance Board.
§ 53-4. Membership.
Upon creation of the Authority in accordance with applicable law, the
governing body shall appoint by resolution one individual to serve as a
member of the Authority.
§ 53-5. Governance.
The Authority shall be governed by the bylaws established by the Authority.
A. The municipalities of the Boroughs of Brielle, Spring Lake, Spring Lake
Heights, Sea Girt and the Township of Wall (collectively the "treated
water purchasers") are currently parties to individual treated water
purchase contracts dated September 1, 1987, between the respective
municipalities and the Monmouth County Improvement Authority
("Treated Water Purchase Contract"). The current relationship amongst
the treated water purchasers is in the nature of an interlocal services
arrangement intended to collectively benefit all Treated Water
Purchasers. Section 17 of the Treated Water Purchase Contract grants
an option to the treated water purchasers to purchase the water
treatment and transmission facilities from the Monmouth County
Improvement Authority.
B. The governing body of the Township of Wall and the governing bodies of
the other treated water purchasers have determined that their
respective financial interests and thereby the interests of their
residents would be better served and furthered by establishing a joint
entity comprised of representatives of the treated water purchasers for
the purpose of purchasing the water treatment and transmission
facilities from the Monmouth County Improvement Authority. The
intent and purpose of this enactment is to establish the joint authority.
§ 53-1 SEWERAGE AUTHORITIES § 53-6
47:145
§ 53-6. Additional legislative findings.
The governing body considered alternate means of undertaking and
financing the proposed project and has determined that the creation of an
authority is the most efficient and feasible means of providing and financing
the project.
§ 53-6 WALL CODE § 53-6
47:146
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 59
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I. False fire alarms — See Ch. 164, § 164-1T.
§ 53-6 ALARMS § 53-6
59:147

ARTICLE I
Alarm Systems
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 3-15 of the Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 59-1. Purposes.
It is the intent of this article to promote the public safety and welfare by
alleviating conditions which lead to an unnecessary drain on the manpower,
time, facilities, and finances of the Township of Wall and its Police
Department and the deterioration of the quality of services to persons
subscribing to alarm services by establishing standards and regulations
concerning the installation, operation and maintenance of alarm systems
within the Township.
§ 59-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM BUSINESS — Any business or enterprise which engages in any
of the following activities within the Township: the installing, leasing,
maintaining, repairing, replacing, selling, servicing, or responding to alarm
devices, or which causes any such activity to take place within the
Township.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any mechanical, electrical, or electronic device which is
designed or used to signal the existence of an emergency requiring urgent
attention and to which police or firemen are expected to respond.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE — An alarm system which automatically
sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise,
a prerecorded message or coded signal indicating the existence of an
emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
CENTRAL STATION — A communications center operating for subscribers
which receives signals from alarm signaling devices and takes appropriate
action upon receipt of an emergency signal.
DIRECT CONNECT — Any alarm signaling system other than an automatic
dialing device which, when activated, transmits a signal directly to the
communications center of the Police Department.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm system through mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation, without an unlawful entry, or
through the negligence or intentional conduct of the owner or lessee of an
alarm system or of his employees or agents or through any other cause.
LOCAL ALARM SYSTEM — A signaling system which, when activated,
causes an audible and/or visual signaling device to be activated in or about
the premises in which the system is installed.
PRIMARY TRUNK LINE — A telephone line leading directly to the
communications center of the Police Department for the purpose of
§ 59-1 ALARMS § 59-2
59:149
handling emergency calls on a person-to-person basis, and which is
identified as such by a specific number listed among the emergency
numbers listed in the telephone directory issued by the telephone company
and covering the service area within the Police Department's jurisdiction.
SPECIAL TRUNK LINE — A telephone line leading to the communications
center of the Police Department and having the primary purpose of handling
emergency signals or messages originating either directly or through a
central location from automatic dialing devices.
§ 59-3. Operation and maintenance of alarm systems.
A. No automatic dialing device shall be keyed to a primary trunk line after
the effective date of this article.
B. Within 30 days after the effective date of this article, all automatic
dialing devices interconnected to a primary trunk line shall be
disconnected therefrom. The owner or lessee of such device shall be
responsible for having the device disconnected within the thirty-day
time period.
C. Automatic dialing devices designed to transmit signals directly to the
Police Department may be interconnected to a special trunk line into
the Police Department and shall be coded to dial a separate, special
number which shall be provided by the Police Department.
D. The contents of any recorded message from a dialer alarm must be
intelligible and in a format approved by the Chief of Police. No such
message shall be transmitted more than three times as a result of a
single stimulus of the mechanism. Messages shall not exceed 15
seconds, and the time gap between delivery shall be approximately 10
seconds.
E. All dial alarms shall be capable of being disconnected by the owner to
permit a call to the police switchboard in the event that a false alarm
occurs.
F. The sensory mechanism of a dial alarm shall be adjusted so as to
suppress false indications and to prevent its activation by impulses due
to pressure changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, wind, noise,
rattling or vibration of doors or windows, or other forces unrelated to
general alarms.
G. All local alarms shall be equipped with a time relay or battery to limit
the sounding of alarms to 15 minutes or less.
H. Each alarm business shall provide accurate and complete instruction to
the alarm system user in the proper use and operation of any alarm.
I. All alarm hookups to the Police Department shall be completed by an
alarm installer designated by the Township.
§ 59-2 WALL CODE § 59-3
59:150
§ 59-4. Inspection and information.
§ 59-5. False alarms; investigation; fees.
J. Every alarm business shall provide repair service within two hours of
notification by the Police Department or a subscriber that a malfunction
in an alarm system has occurred.
K. No alarm business shall operate a central station alarm service, unless
the same has been inspected and approved by the Chief of Police, or his
designee.
A. Any person, firm, or corporation which owns, operates, installs or
services a police alarm device or a local alarm system in the Township
shall provide the Chief of Police with written notification of the
existence or installation of the alarm, which notification shall contain at
least the location of the device, the name of the installer of said device,
the type of device, provisions relating to false alarms and testing
procedures, the names, addresses and emergency telephone numbers
of at least three persons to contact if the alarm is activated, and shall
further notify the Chief of Police of any change in the information
contained in the notification.
B. The Police Department shall make effort to contact one of the persons
named in the event of an alarm, and the alarm owner or other person
named is strongly urged to respond to the premises, even in the event
of what appears to be a false alarm.
C. The Chief of Police or his representatives are authorized to, at
reasonable times and upon oral notice, enter any premises in the
Township to inspect the installation and/or operation of any alarm
device or alarm business.
A. The Police Chief, or his designee, shall keep a written record of all false
alarms to which the Police Department has responded.
B. In any twelve-month period the following penalties shall be assessed by
the Chief of Police or his designee:
(1) For the first through sixth false alarms, from any alarm system, a
warning shall be issued.
(2) For the seventh and eighth false alarm from any alarm system, a fee
of $25 payable to the Township shall be imposed to partially defray
the Township's cost in responding to such false alarm.
(3) In the event of a ninth or subsequent false alarm, a fee of $100 per
alarm shall be paid, and an investigation shall be conducted by the
Police Department. Where the investigation of the Police
Department discloses continued abusive or negligent operation or
maintenance of an alarm device and a disregard for the taking of
remedial steps to avoid false alarms, the Police Chief may require
§ 59-3 ALARMS § 59-5
59:151
§ 59-6. Violations and penalties.
Every person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject
to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or both, in the discretion of the court or judicial officer before whom
conviction may be had. Each and every day that such violation continues
shall be considered a separate and specific violation of the chapter.
§ 59-7. Fees.
disconnection of the device for a limited or permanent period;
however, the owner or user of the device shall be given adequate
notice of the proposed disconnection and shall have an opportunity
within 14 days of receipt of such notice, to appeal such
disconnection to the Township Administrator. The determination of
the Township Administrator in such matters shall be based upon
the effect on the general public health, safety and welfare of the
continued use of the alarm device in question.
(4) Should any disconnection result due to the foregoing subsection,
the Township shall not be liable for any loss which results from
such disconnection.
(5) In order to reconnect the alarm subscriber must submit, in writing,
to the Chief of Police satisfactory proof that the alarm has been
repaired and is operating properly, together with the required
reconnection fee. Approval may be given on a trial basis for 60
days.
A. The owner or lessee of an automatic dialing device which is
interconnected to a special trunk line transmitting directly into the
Police Department shall pay the Township a nonrefundable fee of $100
to cover the cost of the special phone lines necessitated by those
systems.
B. Local alarms shall be registered as set forth herein, but no fee shall be
charged therefor.
C. The reconnection fee as outlined in § 59-5 shall be $50.
§ 59-5 WALL CODE § 59-7
59:152
ARTICLE II
Key Boxes
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 13-13 of the Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 59-8. Key box required; exception. [Amended 12-11-2002 by Ord.
No. 48-2002]
All properties within the Township of Wall having an automatic fire alarm
system or a fire sprinkler system shall be equipped with a key box. This
requirement shall not apply to single-family residential and owner-occupied
one- and two-family dwellings.
§ 59-9. Approval of Fire Official.
The key box shall be of UL type and approved by the Wall Township Fire
Official. The rapid entry key box shall be installed in a location approved by
the Wall Township Fire Official.
§ 59-10. Key box contents.
The rapid entry key boxes may be required to contain any or all of the
following, as shall be determined by the Fire Official:
A. Keys to locked points of egress, whether on interior or exterior of such
buildings.
B. Keys to the locked mechanical rooms.
C. Keys to the locked elevator rooms.
D. Keys to the elevator controls.
E. Keys to any fence or secured areas.
F. Keys to any other areas.
G. A floor plan of the rooms within the building.
H. All access or combination codes to locked points of egress or ingress,
whether on interior or exterior of such buildings. [Added 12-11-2002
by Ord. No. 48-2002]10
10.Editor's Note: Former § 59-11, Waiver, added 5-8-2002 by Ord. No. 16-2002, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 1-2003.
§ 59-8 ALARMS § 59-10
59:153
Chapter 62
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Duty of Code Enforcement Officer to inspect
premises where alcoholic beverages are
sold — See Ch. 2, § 2-9C.
Community Relations/Community Alliance
Committee — See Ch. 6, Art. V.
Employee substance abuse policy — See Ch.
33, § 33-4I.
Alcoholic beverages at turkey shoots — See
Ch. 211.
§ 59-10 WALL CODE § 59-10
59:154
ARTICLE I
Purpose; Definitions
§ 62-1. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Township of Wall in accordance with the provisions of an
act of the Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled An Act Concerning
Alcoholic Beverages, comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws of 1933, its
supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.,
and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 62-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meanings as in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and the rules and regulations of
the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 62-1 ALARMS § 62-2
59:155

ARTICLE II
Licenses
§ 62-3. Laws applicable.
All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all proceedings under
this chapter shall be in accordance with the act, rules and regulations
referred to in § 62-1 and all other applicable laws of the State of New Jersey
or the United States.
§ 62-4. Issuing authority.
All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the Township
Committee, which shall also administer the provisions of this chapter.
§ 62-5. License required.
No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the Township
without obtaining a license in accordance with the Act referred to in § 62-1
and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 62-6. License fees; maximum number. [Amended 3-13-2002 by
Ord. No. 11-2002; 11-12-2003 by Ord. No. 35-2003]
The annual fee and maximum number of licenses for the sale or distribution
of alcoholic beverages in the Township shall be as follows:
Class of License
Annual
License Fee Number of Licenses
Plenary retail consumption $2,500 12
Plenary retail distribution $2,500 2
Club $188 1
Hotel [Added 3-14-2007 by
Ord. No. 6-2007]
$2,500 As determined by state
law
§ 62-3 ALARMS § 62-6
59:157

ARTICLE III
Regulation of Licensed Premises
§ 62-7. Hours of sale. [Amended 5-13-2009 by Ord. No. 13-2009]
§ 62-8. Consumption.
No licensee shall permit, suffer or allow any person to consume alcoholic
beverages or to be in or upon any part of the licensed premises on any
weekday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., prevailing time, or
on Sundays between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 12:00 noon, prevailing time,
except regular employees of the licensee actually engaged in the course of
their employment, tradesmen with whom the licensee is actually engaged
in doing business, or public officers or employees engaged in the course of
their official duties.
§ 62-9. Identification of employees.
No licensee shall employ any person in or about any licensed premises,
except entertainers, who has not been issued an identification card by the
Police Department. All persons presently so employed shall report to the
Police Department for fingerprint and identification checks and the issuance
of an identification card within 15 days of the effective date hereof.
§ 62-10. Identification cards.
A. Plenary Retail Consumption License with "Broad Package Privilege"
("32") and Plenary Retail Distribution License ("44"): No alcoholic
beverages shall be sold, delivered or served in any licensed premises on
any weekday between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., prevailing
time, or on Sundays between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., prevailing time.
B. All other retail liquor licenses: No alcoholic beverages shall be sold,
delivered or served in any licensed premises on any weekday between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., prevailing time, or on Sundays
between 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon, prevailing time.
A. All persons employed in or about any licensed premises, except
entertainers, shall carry an identification card issued by the Police
Department at all times while in the course of their employment, and
shall exhibit the same upon the request of any authorized Township
official.
B. Any person desiring to obtain an identification card shall report to
police headquarters where application forms shall be completed and
fingerprints and a photograph obtained. The applicant shall pay a fee of
$5 for an identification card.
C. The Police Department shall issue an identification card to each
employee, which card shall contain the name, address, and a
§ 62-7 ALARMS § 62-10
59:159
§ 62-11. Hours for certain holidays. [Amended 5-13-2009 by Ord.
No. 13-2009]
§ 62-12. Sales to certain persons.
No licensee or employee of a licensee shall sell, serve or deliver, directly
or indirectly, any alcoholic beverages to any habitual drunkard, intoxicated
person or person under 21 years of age, nor permit the consumption of
alcoholic beverages on any licensed premises by any of the above named
classes or persons, or permit any such persons to congregate in or about
the licensed premises.
§ 62-13. Closing provisions.
During the hours that the sale of alcoholic beverages are hereinabove
prohibited, the entire licensed premises shall also be closed, and no person
shall be admitted or permitted to remain therein except the licensee or
bona fide employees of the licensee except as may be herein otherwise
specifically provided.
§ 62-14. Loitering after closing hours.
No person not connected with the alcoholic beverage business shall
congregate or loiter in or about any premises wherein alcoholic beverages
are sold during the hours between which the sale of alcoholic beverages is
prohibited.
photograph of the employee. A copy of the identification card and
photograph shall be maintained on file by the Police Department.
D. In addition to the fee set forth in Subsection B herein, the applicant
shall pay a sum in the amount charged by any state or federal agency
for a fingerprint inquiry concerning the applicant.
A. The provisions of § 62-7 and § 62-8 shall not apply on January 1. On that
day, alcoholic beverages may not be served or consumed in any licensed
premises between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless January
1 is a Sunday, in which case alcoholic beverages may not be sold,
served, delivered or consumed in any licensed premises between the
hours of 5:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. in the case of licenses identified in
§ 62-7A and between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon in the case
of licenses identified in § 62-7B.
B. The provisions of § 62-7 and § 62-8 shall not apply on December 24 and
December 31 if those dates are Sundays. In such cases, alcoholic
beverages shall not be sold, served, delivered or consumed in any
licensed premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.
§ 62-10 WALL CODE § 62-15
59:160
§ 62-15. Occupancy requirements.
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, delivered to or consumed, or
allowed to be sold, served, delivered to or consumed, in any room or area
in any licensed premises in which the number of persons in the room is
greater than one person for each 10 square feet of floor area of the room
not covered by a bar or working space. A placard shall be issued advising
the total number of persons permitted in the room pursuant to this section,
which shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place and manner.
§ 62-16. Consumption in unlicensed public premises prohibited;
BYOB exception. [Amended 12-8-2004 by Ord. No. 37-2004;
8-10-2011 by Ord. No. 19-2011; 4-22-2015 by Ord. No. 6-2015;
4-27-2016 by Ord. No. 3-2016]
A. No person shall drink or otherwise consume, or offer to another person
for the purpose of consumption, in any public place, lane or sidewalk,
public parking lot, public or quasi-public place other than a place
licensed to sell alcoholic beverages and dispense alcoholic beverages
for consumption on the premises, or in public conveyance; provided,
however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any
place or establishment for which a valid alcoholic beverage
consumption license has been issued by the New Jersey Division of
Alcoholic Beverage Control. No person owning or operating any
commercial establishment, whether or not food or beverages are sold
or served on the premises, shall permit or allow the consumption of
alcoholic beverages on the premises whether or not said alcoholic
beverages are brought onto the premises by the owner or operator of
the establishment or by any member of the general public.
B. Except as defined below in Subsection B(1), only restaurants shall be
permitted to offer customers BYOB services. The word "restaurant"
shall have the meaning set forth in § 140-17 of the Land Use and
Development Regulations of the Township and shall not include fastfood/
carry-out restaurants, as defined therein.
(1) In addition to restaurants, art galleries that charge customers a fee
to participate in art classes may offer customers BYOB services at
art gallery premises. Art classes require instructors who are
compensated for teaching customers to paint or to engage in a
similar artistic endeavor.
(2) Art galleries shall be subject to all of the requirements of the Land
Use and Development Regulations of the Township.
C. Rules and regulations. The following rules and regulations are
applicable to all premises allowing patrons to BYOB:
(1) Premises allowing patrons to BYOB must comply with all applicable
state, federal and municipal rules, regulations, statutes and
ordinances pertaining to the consumption of wine or malt alcoholic
§ 62-15 ALARMS § 62-16
59:161
beverages on a premises that is not licensed or permitted to sell or
serve alcoholic beverages.
(2) Premises allowing patrons to BYOB shall provide notice in writing
to the Wall Township Municipal Clerk by November 1 of the
preceding year indicating BYOB will be permitted on said premises.
The notice shall include the street address and the lot and block
numbers of the premises on which the restaurant or business is
conducted, and the name and telephone number of the manager of
the restaurant or business.
(3) The consumption of alcoholic beverages, other than wine or malt
alcoholic beverages, shall not be permitted.
(4) There shall be no consumption of wine or malt alcoholic beverages
by employees of the premises, but only by patrons who are seated
for meal service at a table or for art instruction. No person waiting
to be seated for service may consume or possess an open container
of an alcoholic beverage while waiting to be seated for service.
(5) The consumption of alcoholic beverages by patrons may be
permitted in fully enclosed indoor dining areas of the premises.
Outdoor consumption of alcoholic beverages by patrons may be
permitted, provided:
(a) The outdoor area is fully enclosed by a permanent structure or
fence.
(b) Ingress and egress shall be through the main facility.
(c) If ingress and egress cannot be accommodated through the
main facility, then an employee, at least 21 years of age, must
be stationed at the outdoor entrance.
(d) The outdoor seating area must have an emergency-alarmed
exit.
(6) The consumption of wine or malt alcoholic beverages shall be
permitted only during the hours of 12:00 p.m. prevailing time to
11:00 p.m. prevailing time.
(7) No BYOB establishment shall charge any admission fee or cover,
corkage or service charge. Fees may be charged for art instruction.
(8) No BYOB establishment shall advertise inside or outside of the
premises or in any medium whatsoever that patrons may bring and
consume their own wine or malt alcoholic beverages on the
premises.
(9) No BYOB establishment or employee shall be permitted to serve,
handle, pour or distribute alcoholic beverages on the premises.
§ 62-16 WALL CODE § 62-16
59:162
§ 62-17. Prohibited conduct.
No licensee or employee of a licensee shall engage in or allow, permit or
suffer in or upon the licensed premises any lewdness or immoral activity
or any brawl, act of violence, disturbance, or unnecessary noise, nor shall
any licensee allow, permit or suffer the licensed place of business to be
conducted in such a manner as to become a nuisance.
§ 62-18. Reporting of incidents.
All licensees or the agents or employees of licensees on the licensed
premises shall immediately report to the Wall Township Police Department
any act or occurrence of violence, vandalism, theft, destruction of property,
assault or any other act, occurrence or incident, in or upon the licensed
premises, which constitutes a violation of any rule, regulation, ordinance or
statute.
§ 62-19. Additional regulations pertaining to club licenses. [Added
3-13-2002 by Ord. No. 11-2002]
(10) There shall be no storage of alcoholic beverages on the premises.
Patrons shall not be permitted to deliver alcoholic beverages to the
premises in advance or to leave alcoholic beverages on the
premises to be consumed or to be picked up at a later time.
(11) Patrons who desire to consume wine or malt alcoholic beverages in
the premises shall bring such beverages with them to the
establishment. No delivery of alcoholic beverages by any person,
including a licensed alcoholic beverage establishment, shall be
permitted.
(12) Alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted to be stored, displayed
or maintained on a service bar or service table and must be kept by
the patron at the table at which the patron is seated.
(13)No BYOB establishment shall permit a patron or any person to
bring or deliver to the premises a large quantity of alcoholic
beverages intended for consumption at a party or other special
event to be attended by more than one table of patrons. Public or
private parties to be attended by more than four persons and for
which the host of the party provides alcoholic beverages to persons
attending the function are not permitted.
(14)No BYOB establishment or employee shall allow, permit or suffer
any alcoholic beverages to be consumed by any intoxicated person
or by any person under the age of 21 years.
(15) A BYOB establishment shall immediately report to the Police
Department any incident of underage drinking or the presentation
of false identification by an underage person and any incident
involving the excessive consumption of alcohol by a patron.
§ 62-16 ALARMS § 62-19
59:163
A. Location. No club license shall be issued for a clubhouse or other
facility which is located in a residential zone in the Township.
B. No club license shall be issued for a clubhouse or other facility which is
located within 500 feet of a residential zone or an existing residential
use in the Township.
C. No club license shall be issued for a clubhouse or other facility which is
located within 500 feet of a church or a public or private school.
D. The holder of a club liquor license shall be subject to all of the
provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances of the
Township and shall be subject to and strictly regulated by the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 13:2-1 et seq. as those
ordinance, statutory and regulatory provisions may be amended and
supplemented from time to time.
§ 62-19 WALL CODE § 62-19
59:164
ARTICLE IV
Persons Under Legal Age
§ 62-20. Sale or service to minors prohibited.
No licensee shall sell or serve any alcoholic beverages to any person under
the age of 21 years of age.
§ 62-21. Purchase of alcoholic beverages by minors.
No person under 21 years of age shall purchase, attempt to purchase, or
have another purchase for him any alcoholic beverages on any premises
licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 62-22. Purchase of alcoholic beverages for minors by others.
No person shall purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic beverages for a
person under 21 years of age. It shall be unlawful for any person to induce
or attempt to induce any licensee or any employee of a licensee to sell, serve
or deliver alcoholic beverages to a person under 21 years of age.
§ 62-23. Use of alcohol in public places.
No person under 21 years of age shall possess, serve, sell or consume
any alcoholic beverage in any public place within the Township. No person
under 21 years of age shall be under the influence of any alcoholic beverage
in any public place within the Township.
§ 62-24. Alcoholic beverages on private property.
A. No person under 21 years of age shall knowingly possess or consume
any alcoholic beverage while on private property within the Township.
B. This section shall not prohibit an underage person from consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with any religious
observance, ceremony, or rite or consuming or possessing an alcoholic
beverage in the presence of and with the permission of a parent,
guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to purchase and
consume alcoholic beverages; nor prohibit possession of alcoholic
beverages by an underage person engaged in the performance of
employment by an employer licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or
engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary arts or
hotel management program at a county vocational school or post
secondary educational institution.
C. Any person who is found to have violated this section shall be subject to
the following penalties, which shall be imposed in the manner set forth
in N.J.S. 40:48-1.2: a fine of not more than $250 for a first offense; and a
fine of not more than $350 for any subsequent offense. The court, in
addition to imposing a fine may suspend or postpone driving privileges
§ 62-20 ALARMS § 62-24
59:165
for a term of not more than six months, and the court may also require
up to 180 days of community service.
D. All terms used in this section shall have the meanings set forth in N.J.S.
40:48-1.2.
§ 62-24 WALL CODE § 62-24
59:166
ARTICLE V
Revocation of License
§ 62-25. Reasons for revocation.
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 62-26. Proceedings.
Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31 by service of a five-day notice of charges
preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable opportunity for
hearing.
§ 62-27. Additional nature of suspension or revocation.
Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this chapter.
§ 62-25 ALARMS § 62-27
59:167

ARTICLE VI
Geographic Distribution of Alcoholic Beverage Licenses
[Adopted 11-12-2003 by Ord. No. 36-2003]
§ 62-28. Applicability.
§ 62-29. General findings regarding retail license distribution.
Wall Township has determined that geographical location is a critical factor
in the distribution of any new licenses and the redistribution of existing
licenses for the following reasons:
§ 62-30. Retail license distribution goals.
It is hereby determined that it would be in the best interests of the Township
of Wall and its citizens to pursue the following goals in the geographic
distribution of retail alcoholic beverage licenses in the Township:
A. This policy document pertains to two types of liquor licenses that Wall
Township currently controls: Plenary retail consumption licenses and
plenary retail distribution licenses. Consumption licenses are utilized
by bars and restaurants while distribution licenses are utilized by liquor
stores in the retail sale of liquor where liquor is not consumed on-site.
B. Wall Township currently controls 12 plenary retail consumption
licenses and one plenary retail distribution license.
A. Liquor licenses can be used as an incentive to the redevelopment of
commercial areas in need thereof.
B. Liquor licenses should be distributed geographically in a manner that
provides opportunity for commercial zones throughout the Township
and the population that they serve.
C. A concentration of consumption licenses in any one part of the
Township may be undesirable to adjacent neighborhoods, particularly if
they are granted to bars or taverns that typically operate until 2:00 a.m.
A. Foster and maintain a geographical distribution of consumption and
distribution licenses so as to provide opportunities to underserved
areas and areas of future growth.
B. Utilize retail liquor licenses where appropriate to encourage
redevelopment of commercial areas.
C. Consider the potential negative impacts of concentrating retail liquor
licenses into a limited geographical area before permitting new licenses
within already-served areas.
§ 62-28 ALARMS § 62-31
59:169
§ 62-31. Retail license distribution priorities.
The distribution of retail licenses, particularly plenary retail consumption
licenses, will be prioritized in a manner that will meet the goals of the
Township as set forth herein. Only in extraordinary cases, where the
interests of the Township are advanced in a manner not contemplated
herein, will licenses be distributed contrary to the following:
A. Highest priority areas:
(1) Route 71 Redevelopment Area: The Township should use the
distribution of any new or existing liquor licenses as an incentive
for redevelopers in the Route 71 Redevelopment Area to create a
family-style restaurant.
(2) Monmouth Executive Airport and area immediately surrounding:
The creation of an upscale restaurant at the Monmouth Executive
Airport or its immediate vicinity is also found to be desirable.
(3) Route 34 Corridor: Restaurants in the corridor are desired to
provide services to existing and proposed corporate offices in the
corridor.
B. Lowest priority areas:
(1) Route 35 corridor, south of Allaire Road; and
(2) Route 35 corridor, north of Allaire Road. Properties in the Route 35
corridor already hold a majority of the existing retail liquor licenses
in the Township, particularly Route 35 south of Allaire Road. It is
the Township's intention to limit the distribution of additional
licenses to this area, and to Route 35 in general, in order to provide
opportunities elsewhere in the Township.
(3) Private membership clubs. The Township also places a lower
priority on granting licenses to private membership clubs that are
not open to the general public.
§ 62-31 WALL CODE § 62-31
59:170
Chapter 65
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Exemption from dog license fees for members
of fire companies and first aid squads — See
Ch. 18, § 18-7.
Mistreatment of police dogs — See Ch. 164,
§ 164-1U.
Solid waste strewn by animals — See Ch. 191,
Art. I.
§ 62-31 ALARMS § 62-31
59:171

ARTICLE I
Regulation of Pets
§ 65-1. License required.
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age in the
Township shall annually, in the month of January apply for and procure from
the Township Clerk a license and official metal registration tag for each
dog so owned, kept or harbored, and shall place upon each dog a collar or
harness with the registration tag securely fastened thereto.
§ 65-2. Licenses not issued to minors.
No license to own, keep or harbor a dog shall be issued to or in the name of
a minor.
§ 65-3. Definition.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a permanent set of teeth.
§ 65-4. Application for license.
The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the
dog for which the license and registration are sought, and whether it is a
long-haired or short-haired variety and also the name, street and post office
address of the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such dog.
§ 65-5. License fees.
A. The person applying for the license shall pay the Township Clerk the
sum of $17 for the licensing and registration of each spayed dog and
$20 for the licensing and registration of each nonspayed dog. Any
person establishing residency in the Township subsequent to January
31 or acquiring a dog of licensing age or possessing a dog that attains
licensing age subsequent to January 31 shall also be subject to the
reduced fee of $12 for each spayed dog and $15 for each nonspayed
dog. [Amended 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 23-2008]
B. Each license and tag shall be renewed annually, and for each annual
renewal the person applying shall pay the same fee for the license and
registration as hereinbefore provided. For each license tag renewed on
or before January 31 of the year of issuance, the fee for a spayed dog
shall be reduced to $12 and for the licensing and registration of each
nonspayed dog to $15. [Amended 12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 23-2008]
C. The licensing year shall run from January 31 of the year of issuance to
January 31 of the following year.
§ 65-1 ALARMS § 65-6
59:173
§ 65-6. Seeing Eye dogs.
Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "Seeing Eye"
dogs shall be licensed and registered as other dogs hereinbefore provided
for, except that the owner or keeper of such dog shall not be required to pay
any fee therefor.
§ 65-7. Dogs from other municipalities.
Any dog owned in New Jersey and duly licensed for the current licensing
year and bearing the proper registration tag for a New Jersey municipality
shall be exempt from the licensing and tag provisions of this chapter.
§ 65-8. Dogs from out of state.
Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township any
dog licensed in a state other than New Jersey for the current licensing year
and shall keep the same in the Township for a period of more than 90 days
shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag for such dog.
§ 65-9. Unlicensed dogs.
Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township any
unlicensed dog and shall keep the same in the Township for a period of more
than 10 days shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag for
such dog.
§ 65-10. Newly acquired dogs.
The owner or keeper of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any
dog which attains licensing age shall apply for a license and registration tag
for such dog within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment.
§ 65-11. Running at large.
No person shall permit, suffer or allow any dog owned, kept or harbored by
him to run at large off the premises of the person so keeping, owning or
harboring the dog.
§ 65-12. Leashing required; exception.
No dog shall be permitted off the premises of the person owning, keeping or
harboring it unless accompanied by a person who is capable of controlling it
and who has the dog securely confined and controlled by an adequate leash
or chain not more than six feet long. The provisions hereof shall not apply
to the training or use of dogs for hunting purposes, provided that the owner
or handler of the dogs accompanies the dogs in such training or hunting.
§ 65-6 WALL CODE § 65-13
59:174
§ 65-13. Damage to lawns and shrubbery.
No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall permit or suffer it to
do any injury, or to do any damage to any lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds
or property of persons other than the owner or persons having the care,
custody or control of such dog.
§ 65-14. Barking or howling.
§ 65-15. Canvass of dogs.
The Township Committee shall annually cause a canvass to be made of
all dogs, owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the Township in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.15 and make reports required under the
statute.
§ 65-16. Removal of pet excrement. [Amended 3-8-2006 by Ord. No.
7-2006]
A. No person shall permit, suffer or allow any dog owned or harbored by
him to continually and unreasonably bark or howl to such an extent that
such barking or howling shall constitute a nuisance to neighbors and
other persons living in the immediate vicinity, and such barking and
howling shall be deemed to constitute a nuisance prima facie when two
or more persons residing in different houses and within hearing
distance of the dog or dogs shall complain of such barking or howling.
B. Whenever a complaint by two such persons shall be made in writing to
the Chief of Police setting forth that such barking or howling is
continued for unreasonable periods to the annoyance and discomfort of
the complainants and their neighbors and families, so that it can be
established that such barking and howling is a nuisance to the
immediate neighborhood, the Chief of Police shall forthwith notify the
owner or harborer of such dog or dogs of the complaint, and if such
barking and howling again occurs, it shall be deemed a prima facie
violation of this section.
A. No person owning, harboring, keeping, walking, or caring for or having
custody of any pet shall cause, suffer, permit or allow such pet to soil,
defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance on any thoroughfare, street,
sidewalk, passageway, road, bypath, play area, park, or any other place
where people congregate or walk, or upon any public property
whatsoever, or upon any private property without the permission of the
owner of said private property.
B. If any person owning, harboring, keeping, walking, or caring for or
having custody of any pet shall cause, suffer, permit or allow such pet to
soil, defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance on any of the areas
aforesaid, said person immediately shall remove all feces and droppings
deposited by such pet, which removal shall be in a sanitary manner
such as by shovel container or disposal bag, and the feces and
§ 65-13 ALARMS § 65-16
59:175
§ 65-17. Contract for enforcement official.
The Township Committee shall have the power to enter into a contract with
one or more persons for the exercise of the duty of Animal Control Officer
to enforce the provisions of § 65-18.
§ 65-18. Impounding.
It shall be the duty of every police officer, as well as the contractor or
Animal Control Officer appointed, or any person so designated, to enforce
the provisions of this section and to take in custody and impound, or cause
to take into custody and impound the following:
§ 65-19. Disposal of seized dogs.
Any dog seized under this chapter shall be handled and disposed of with
proper notices given, as required by N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16.
§ 65-20. Animals running at large.
No person owning, keeping or harboring horses, cattle, sheep, goats or
swine shall permit their running at large in the streets or highways or
trespassing upon the lands of another, or permit or suffer such animals to
do any injury, or to do any damage to any lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds
or property of persons other than the owner. Any horse, cattle, sheep, goat
droppings shall be removed by the person from the aforesaid
designated areas and disposed of by the person in a manner that will
not endanger the public health, safety or welfare.
C. Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance
animal shall be exempt for the provisions of this section while such
animal is being used for that purpose.
A. Any dog running at large in the Township.
B. Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring the dog, which the official or his agent has reason to believe
is a stray dog.
C. Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring the dog, which is not controlled by a leash or chain as
provided by this chapter.
D. Any dog with fierce, dangerous or vicious propensities or noticeably
infected with rabies or bitten by a dog suspected of having rabies.
E. Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog without a current registration tag on the dog's
collar.
F. Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the person
keeping or harboring such dog.
§ 65-16 WALL CODE § 65-20
59:176
or swine may be impounded under the provisions of this section to prevent
further damage.
§ 65-21. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who violates or who fails or who refuses to comply with the
provisions of §§ 65-1 through 65-10 and 65-17 through 65-20 of this
chapter shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $5, nor more than
$50 for each and every offense, except that for the first offense or
failure to secure a license, the penalty shall be not less than $1 and not
more than $50.
B. Any person who violates or who fails or who refuses to comply with the
provisions of §§ 65-14, 65-15 and 65-16 of this chapter, shall be liable to
a penalty of not less than $25 nor more than $50 for the first violation;
to a penalty of not less than $50 nor more than $100 for the second
violation; and to penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $200 for
the third violation.
C. In any proceeding before a Municipal Judge based upon a complaint
duly made and filed in the Municipal Court, when it has been proven
that on at least one previous occasion a complaint was on file with the
Police Department or the Municipal Court charging the defendant with
committing the same offense, involving the same dog, it shall not be
necessary to prove defendant's knowledge, intention or scienter, it
being intended that a presumption exists that the defendant, owner,
possessor or harborer has suffered or permitted the dog to commit the
prohibited act alleged in the complaint.
§ 65-20 ALARMS § 65-21
59:177

ARTICLE II
Wildlife Feeding
[Added 3-8-2006 by Ord. No. 7-2006]
§ 65-22. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 65-23. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by the Township, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife (for
example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or
confined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 65-24. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this article
or of any rule or regulation adopted hereunder shall be subject to the
following penalties:
§ 65-25. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer and Police Department shall be the officials
responsible for the enforcement of this article and the rules and regulations
established hereunder.
A. A fine of not more than $1,250;
B. Imprisonment for a term of not more than 90 days or community service
in the Township's recycling program for a period of not more than 90
days; or
C. Both a fine and imprisonment or community service.
§ 65-22 ALARMS § 65-25
59:179

ARTICLE III
Sale of Dogs and Cats
[Added 12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 17-2018]
§ 65-26. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CARE FACILITY — Any facility operated by a nonprofit humane
agency, municipal agency, or any other authorized agent for the Township
for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the
authority of this chapter or state law.
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding and/or breeding dogs or cats for sale is carried on, except a pet
shop.
KENNEL OPERATOR — A person who owns or operates a kennel, or both.
LEGALLY EXISTING NONCONFORMING USE — Any pet store or pet store
operator that displayed, sold, delivered, offered for sale, or otherwise
disposed of dogs or cats in the Township prior to August 29,2016.
PET SHOP OPERATOR or PET STORE OPERATOR — A person who owns or
operates a pet store, or both.
PET SHOP or PET STORE — Retail establishments open to the public
wherein animals, including, but not limited to, dogs or cats, are kept or
displayed chiefly for the purpose of sale to individuals for personal
appreciation and companionship rather than for business or research
purposes.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of dogs or other animals
seized either under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 et seq. or otherwise.
RESCUE ORGANIZATION — Any facility where homeless, stray, abandoned,
rescued or unwanted animals are received, harbored, maintained or made
available for adoption to the general public and which is owned, operated or
maintained by a duly incorporated humane society, animal welfare society,
society for the prevention of the cruelty to animals or other nonprofit or
tax-exempt organization devoted to the welfare, protection and humane
treatment of animals.
§ 65-27. Prohibited acts; exceptions.
A. All pet shops, pet shop owners, kennels or kennel operators shall only
sell, offer for sale, barter, auction, breed or otherwise dispose of dogs
and cats in the Township of Wall that were obtained from a licensed
animal shelter or rescue organization or in cooperation with a licensed
animal shelter or rescue organization.
B. No pet shop, pet shop owner, kennel or kennel operator may sell, offer
for sale, barter, auction, breed or otherwise dispose of dogs and cats in
§ 65-26 ALARMS § 65-27
59:181
§ 65-28. Violations and penalties.
the Township of Wall that were acquired from a source other than a
licensed animal shelter or rescue organization, unless said acquisition
was in cooperation with a licensed animal shelter or rescue
organization.
C. No pet shop, pet shop owner, kennel or kennel operator may sell, offer
for sale, barter, auction, breed or otherwise dispose of dogs and cats in
the Township of Wall that are younger than eight weeks old.
D. This section shall not apply to legally existing nonconforming uses or to
the adoption of dogs or cats, or both.
E. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a shelter, pound or other
establishment from keeping, displaying, selling, or otherwise
transferring any dog, cat or both, that has been seized, rescued or
donated.
A. Any person who violates, or fails or refuses to comply with, any one or
more provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine of not more than
$2,000, or up to the maximum amount permitted by state law, for each
separate offense, or confinement in the Monmouth County Jail for a
period of not more than 90 days, or community service for a period of
not more than 90 days, or any combination of fine, imprisonment and/or
community service, as determined at the discretion of the Municipal
Court Judge. The continuation of such violation for each successive day
shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing
or permitting the continuation of the violation may be subject to
penalties as provided herein for each separate offense.
B. The violation of any one or more provisions of this article shall be
subject to abatement, summarily by a restraining order or by injunction
issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 65-27 WALL CODE § 65-28
59:182
Chapter 68
AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 68-1. Compliance required.
No personal property, goods, wares, or merchandise shall be sold or offered
for sale at auction in the Township except in compliance with the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 68-2. Auctioneer's license required.
No person shall sell, offer to sell, cause or permit to be sold, at auction any
personal property, goods, wares, or merchandise unless such sale or offer
to sell is conducted by an individual who has applied for and obtained an
auctioneer's license from the Township.
§ 68-3. Exception.
The provisions of this chapter are not intended to apply to any farmer
selling products raised on his own farm or to any person selling his own
personal effects.
§ 68-4. Application for license.
All applications for an auctioneer's license shall be made to the Clerk on a
form provided by the Clerk which shall require the following information:
A. Name of the applicant.
B. Residence and business address of the applicant.
C. The length of time for which an auctioneer's license is desired.
D. A statement as to whether or not the applicant holds or has held, an
auctioneer's license from any state, municipality, governing body or
licensing authority; a statement as to whether any state, municipality,
governing body or licensing authority has ever refused to issue or to
renew an auctioneer's license to the applicant together with a full and
accurate statement as to the reasons for any such refusal; and a
statement as to whether any state, municipality, governing body or
licensing authority has ever revoked an auctioneer's license held by the
applicant together with a full and accurate statement as to the reasons
for any such revocation.
§ 65-28 AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS § 68-4
68:183
§ 68-5. License fees.
The fees for an auctioneer's license shall be $50 for a period of one year or
$5 per day for any period less than one year, but not more than $50.
§ 68-6. Surety bond.
Every applicant for an auctioneer's license shall file with the Clerk a surety
bond running to the Township in the amount of $1,000 with surety
acceptable to and approved by the Township Attorney. The bond shall be
conditioned that the applicant, if issued an auctioneer's license will fully
comply with all the provisions of this chapter and any other article of the
Code and the statutes of the State of New Jersey regulating and concerning
auctions and auctioneers.
§ 68-7. Investigation by Chief of Police; certification to Clerk.
Before issuing an auctioneer's license to any individual applying therefor,
the Clerk shall refer the application to the Chief of Police who shall cause to
be made such investigation of the applicant's moral character and business
responsibility as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good,
except that the Clerk may waive this requirement with respect to an
application for renewal of an auctioneer's license by any individual holding
an unexpired auctioneer's license issued under this chapter if an
investigation of the applicant's moral character and business responsibility
has previously been made under this section in connection with a prior
application for an auctioneer's license under this chapter. The Chief of
Police shall cause the investigation herein provided for to be made within
a reasonable time and shall certify to the Clerk whether or not the moral
character and business responsibility of the applicant is satisfactory.
§ 68-8. Issuance of license.
The Clerk is hereby authorized to grant or renew an auctioneer's license
for any period of time not exceeding one year to any individual applying
therefor pursuant to this chapter and whose application has been certified
by the Chief of Police and who has paid the required fees and filed the bond
required by this chapter.
§ 68-9. Revocation of license; refusal to renew.
An auctioneer's license may be revoked by the Township Committee or an
application for the issuance or renewal of such a license may be refused by
the Township Committee, if it so determines, after notice and hearing.
E. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted
of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance,
and, if so, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty
assessed therefor.
§ 68-4 WALL CODE § 68-10
68:184
§ 68-10. Notice of hearing.
Notice of a hearing by the Township Committee on the revocation or refusal
to issue or renew an auctioneer's license shall be given in writing to the
applicant or licensee and shall be mailed, postage prepaid, at least five
days prior to the date set for the hearing to the applicant's or licensee's
last known address. The applicant or licensee shall have the right to be
represented by counsel at such hearing.
§ 68-11. Auction sales prohibited in certain zones. [Amended
5-8-2002 by Ord. No. 18-2002]
No auction sale of personal property, goods, wares or merchandise, other
than a one day estate sale, shall be conducted within any of the residential
or business zones of the Township.11
§ 68-12. Restrictions on display of goods.
No merchandise, goods or wares shall be displayed outdoors. No
merchandise, goods or wares shall be sold from the rear of any truck,
wagon, automotive vehicle or other vehicles or conveyance.
§ 68-13. Off-street parking required.
Off-street parking space shall be provided by each applicant for an
auctioneer's license on his own land in the following amounts:
Chapter 72
BOATS AND WATERCRAFT
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
A. For each two employees at least one parking space.
B. A sufficient off-street space for the same and convenient loading and
unloading of merchandise.
C. One parking space for each 35 square feet of the building used in the
operation of this business.
D. Each parking space shall consist of an area not less than 10 feet by 20
feet.
11.Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Land Use and Development.
§ 68-10 BOATS AND WATERCRAFT § 72-1
72:185
§ 72-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTORIZED PERSONAL WATERCRAFT — Includes the class of small,
motorized, non-propeller-driven, personal watercraft, including but not
limited to those registered trade names as Jet Ski, Skidoo and Waverunner.
WATERCRAFT — Includes any ship, vessel, boat, motor boat, said boat or
vehicle used on water, including seaplanes when not airborne, and any
contrivance, vehicle, object, vessel, or matter that can be used both in water
or on land, or in water and in air, or any combination of these uses.
WATERWAY — All that area of the Shark River and Manasquan River within
the boundary lines of the Township.
§ 72-2. State license required.
No person shall operate any watercraft, unless properly licensed, as
required by applicable state regulations on the waterways of the Township.
§ 72-3. Operating regulations.
No person shall operate any watercraft in the aforesaid waterway:
A. Which is not equipped as required by the regulations of the United
States Coast Guard.
B. In a reckless manner, or at any excessive rate of speed, so as to
endanger the life or property of any person, having due regard for the
presence of other boats, or persons, or other objects in or on said
waterway.
C. At a rate of speed which causes or is likely to cause damage to docks,
wharves, seawalls, or watercraft moored to docks or wharves, along
said waterways.
D. At a speed in excess of six miles an hour in the Federal Channel of the
waterway. The limitations on speed, prescribed by this section, shall not
apply to seaplanes in the process of landing or taking off in proper
prescribed areas. Further, the provisions of this section shall not be
construed to prohibit the running of racing or exhibition watercraft,
muffled or unmuffled, during a publicly announced and properly
supervised and adequately patrolled regatta or speed trial or exhibition.
E. While under the influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotics, drugs or
opiates.
F. With an outboard, or inboard motor, unless the same is equipped with
an adequately muffled exhaust.
G. Use any bell, siren, or other noise producing or noise amplifying
instrument in such a manner that the peace, quiet and good order of the
§ 72-1 WALL CODE § 72-3
72:186
§ 72-4. Abandoned boats declared nuisances.
Every boat in the waterway which is abandoned, or which becomes a
menace to navigation or unseaworthy, or sinks, grounds or becomes
otherwise disabled, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and the person
in charge thereof shall abate such nuisance within 48 hours after notice
thereof from the Township Police Department.
§ 72-5. Mooring boats in channel.
No watercraft shall be moored in any channel, except at the edge thereof,
and in no case closer than 50 feet to channel markers, and in no way
as to interfere with the full use of the channel by others, nor shall any
watercraft be moored to any private or public seawall, dock or beach
without permission of the owner or lessee thereof.
§ 72-6. Authority of police to move boat; costs.
The Township Police Department shall have authority to board any
watercraft moored in violation of this chapter, or abandoned, or otherwise
disabled as stated in § 72-4, and move it, or cause it to be moved, to another
location, and to hold such watercraft for payment of costs incurred in its
removal and/or storage.
§ 72-7. Sanitary regulations.
Persons in charge of, or occupying, or being guests or passengers on boats
docked at or moored to land, docks, piers, wharves or areas abutting the
waterway, or sailing or operating in any waters of the Shark or Manasquan
Rivers, shall observe all health and sanitary regulations, and all ordinances
relating to the conduct of persons and prohibiting acts contrary to public
health, morals, safety or public peace. All heads, toilets, toilet and washing
facilities shall be locked, closed and not used on any boat while within
the confines of the Township, whether docked or moored or traveling or
standing still on the waterway or any portion of the Shark or Manasquan
Rivers within the boundary lines of the Township. No feces, excrement,
odor, fecal matter, effluent material, manure, urine, or any impure, nasty,
foul, squalid, dirty, polluted, filthy, unclean, soiled, tarnished, stained,
sullied, rank, fetid, or putrid material or liquid shall be discharged or
neighborhood is disturbed; provided, however, that nothing herein shall
be construed to prohibit the use of whistles, bells or horns as signals
as required by any federal or state law for the safe navigation of
watercraft.
H. In such a manner as to unjustifiably or unnecessarily annoy or frighten
or endanger the occupants of any other watercraft, or throw up a
dangerous wake.
I. Shall use searchlights indiscriminately or in such a manner, as to annoy
or disturb other persons on land or water, or any other watercraft.
§ 72-3 BOATS AND WATERCRAFT § 72-7
72:187
released or placed in the waterway, or on any land, docks, piers, wharves
or areas abutting the waterway, or in any portion of Shark or Manasquan
Rivers located within the boundary lines of the Township.
§ 72-8. Hours of operation of engines restricted.
No person shall run or operate any watercraft engine for the purpose of
charging batteries, running auxiliary equipment or testing between the
hours of 12:01 a.m. and 6:30 a.m. prevailing time, in any day.
§ 72-9. Maintenance of dock area.
All persons in charge of, or occupying any watercraft, at all times, keep
docks, piers, seawalls and premises adjacent to such watercraft in a neat
and orderly manner and free from all trash, rubbish, repair parts,
machinery, equipment and debris of all kinds.
§ 72-10. Disposal of garbage and trash.
No person in charge of or occupying any watercraft shall dump or throw
garbage, paper, bottles, cans, refuse, trash or debris into the waterways.
Persons in charge of the watercraft moored or docked in the waterway,
or along the same, or persons from whom they rent piers, docks, slips or
wharves, shall provide garbage cans of sufficient size to hold garbage, trash
and refuse to be collected daily in the summer time and twice weekly at
other times of the year.
§ 72-11. Swimming or skin diving.
No person shall swim or skin-dive in any area of the waterway, or from any
of its adjoining docks, piers, or walls, except where specifically designated
for such use by the Township Committee.
§ 72-12. Trailer parking.
Boat trailers, and vehicles attached to the same, shall be parked only in
specific areas designated for the same by the Township Committee.
§ 72-13. Prohibited uses.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to launch, bring, beach or place,
whether temporarily or permanently, any watercraft or motorized
personal watercraft on or from the Manasquan Park boat ramp, located
on property known as Lot 9 in Block 85, as shown on the Tax Map of the
Township of Wall, without first receiving a permit from the Township of
Wall Department of Operations. There shall be no fee for the issuance of
a permit.
B. All registered owners of watercraft and motorized personal watercraft
shall be required to obtain a permit from the Township of Wall
Department of Operations. No such permit shall be issued unless:
§ 72-7 WALL CODE § 72-13
72:188
Chapter 79
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 79-1. Applicability.
All dwelling houses, stores or other buildings within the Township of Wall
shall display numbers in conformance with the street numbers on the
official records of the Township as they appear on file in the office of the Tax
Assessor of the Township.
§ 79-2. Assignment of numbers.
Said street numbers shall be assigned, placed on the official maps and
allotted to the owner of each lot by the Tax Assessor or such other person
as may be designated from time to time by resolution of the Township
Committee. When assignment of a number takes place, all property owners
shall take due notice thereof and shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter. The Tax Assessor or such other person as may be designated
shall also have the power and duty to correct any errors with respect to
assignment of street numbers.
(1) The registered owner is a Wall Township resident.
(2) The registered owner submits a written application to the
Department of Operations setting forth the name, address and
telephone number of the registered owner of the watercraft and
the type and registration number of the boat. All applications must
be signed by the registered owner.
(3) The registered owner of the watercraft executes an indemnity
agreement, on a form to be provided by the Township, indemnifying
and holding the Township harmless with respect to any damage to
or loss of watercraft and with respect to any and all claims and
suits for property damage and/or bodily injuries arising out of the
ownership, use, maintenance or operation of the watercraft.
(4) The registered owner submits a homeowner's policy, certificate of
insurance or some other acceptable proof that the registered
owner and, in the case of motorized personal watercraft, the
Township are insured against liability for property damage and
bodily injuries arising out of the ownership, use, maintenance, and
operation of the watercraft in an amount not less than a combined
single limit of $300,000.
C. All permits shall be issued on a first-come, first-serve basis. The
director of operations shall have the right to limit the number of
permits that are issued for each class of watercraft. No more than one
permit shall be issued to any one person for each class of watercraft.
§ 72-13 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 79-3
79:189
§ 79-3. Application for street number.
Any owner or occupant of property may apply to the Tax Assessor, who shall
furnish them with the correct street number assigned to such property.
§ 79-4. Numbering of subdivision lots.
The Tax Assessor and Township Engineer shall be responsible for assigning
proper number sequences to each lot which is created as the result of
a subdivision or resubdivision. Said number shall be in proper municipal
sequence in relation to the number assigned to other lots fronting on the
same street and shall be properly recorded on the Official Map of the
Township.
§ 79-5. Specifications.
In order to comply with this chapter, house numbers shall be Arabic in
design, shall have a minimum height of three inches and shall be mounted
in a secure fashion to the building's front wall, or to a porch or other
fixed appurtenance in front of the building, in the general vicinity of the
entryway or path of travel which leads to the main entrance from a public
street, or otherwise separately mounted in an approved manner upon the
face of a wall or upon a post in the front yard of the premises. Auxiliary
numbers shall be mounted at a height between four feet and 10 feet upon
the adjacent grade or exterior landing beneath, but never higher than
15 feet above the adjoining grade. They shall be sufficiently legible as
to contrasting background, arrangement, spacing, size and uniformity of
integers so that the numbers may be read with ease during daylight hours
by a person possessing at least 20/40 vision, if viewed from the center line
of the facing street. The numbers shall be so placed that trees, shrubs and
other obstructions do not block the line of sight of the numbers from the
center of the street.
§ 79-6. Violations and penalties.
The absence of house numbers, the insecure fastening or absence of any
integers thereof, the use of any number not assigned by the Tax Assessor,
the attempt to comply by using the numbers on or attached to a mailbox
or the failure of a number to meet the elevation or visibility requirements
hereof shall be considered a violation of this chapter. Failure on the part
of the property owner to comply with the provisions of this chapter within
a period 15 days from the date of issuance of a notice of violation shall
be sufficient cause for the Tax Assessor, the Code Enforcement Officer or
a police officer to issue a summons for violation of this chapter, and upon
conviction thereof a fine of not more than $100 may be imposed at the
discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
§ 79-3 WALL CODE § 79-6
79:190
Chapter 81
BUILDINGS, UNFIT
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Occupancy of dwellings — See Ch. 101.
Housing standards — See Ch. 132.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 171.
§ 81-1. Administration by Construction Official.
The Construction Official of the Township is hereby designated as the officer
to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter, and he shall serve in such
capacity without any additional salary.
§ 81-2. Determination of unfitness.
For the purpose of this chapter the Construction Official may determine that
a building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, if he finds
that conditions exist in such building which are dangerous or injurious to
the health or safety of the occupants of such building, the occupants of
neighboring buildings or other residents of the Township, such conditions
may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing):
defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident, or other calamities;
lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation;
disrepair, structural defects or uncleanliness.
§ 81-3. Adoption of State Housing Code.
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 21, P.L. 1946 (N.J.S.A. 40:49-51)
the "New Jersey State Housing Code" as approved by the Departments
of Health and Conservation and Economic Development and filed in the
Secretary of State's office is hereby accepted, adopted and established as a
standard to be used as a guide in determining the fitness of a building for
human habitation or occupancy or use.
§ 81-4. Copies of Housing Code on file.
Three copies of the New Jersey State Housing Code have been placed on file
in the office of the Township Clerk and are available to all persons desiring
to use and examine the same.
§ 81-5. Complaint; notice of hearing.
Whenever a petition is filed with the Construction Official by a public
authority as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.4 or by at least five residents of
the Township charging that any building is unfit for human habitation
or occupancy or use as herein defined, or whenever it appears to the
Construction Official (on his own motion) that any building is unfit for
§ 79-6 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 81-5
81:191
human habitation or occupancy or use, as herein defined, he shall, if his
preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause
to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such building, a
complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that
a hearing will be held before the Construction Official (or his designated
agent) at a place therein fixed not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days
after the serving of the complaint; that the owner and parties in interest
shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear
in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the time and place fixed in
the complaints; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or
equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the Construction Official.
§ 81-6. Order of Construction Official to repair or demolish.
§ 81-7. Noncompliance of owner; Township to demolish.
A. If, after such notice and hearing, the Construction Official determines
that the building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use, as herein defined, he shall state in writing his
findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and
cause to be served upon the owner thereof and parties in interest an
order requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of the building to
be made by the owner, within a reasonable time, which time shall be set
forth in the order or at the option of the owner to vacate or to have said
building vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order.
B. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails
to repair, alter or improve the building within the time specified in the
order:
(1) That the owner remove or demolish the building within a
reasonable time as specified in the order of removal.
(2) That if the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or
improve or, at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the
building, the Construction Official may cause such building to be
repaired, altered or improved, or to be vacated and closed; that the
Construction Official may cause to be posted on the main entrance
of any building so closed, a placard with the following words: "This
building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use; the use
or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful."
A. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the Construction Official may cause such building to be
removed or demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition
thereof after advertisement for, and receipt of, bids therefor.
B. That the amount of:
§ 81-5 WALL CODE § 81-7
81:192
§ 81-8. Manner of serving complaints.
Complaints or orders issued by the Construction Official pursuant to this
chapter shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered
mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same
cannot be ascertained by the Construction Official in the exercise of
reasonable diligence, and the Construction Official shall make an affidavit to
that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon such persons
may be made by publishing the same once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the Township, or if no such
newspaper exists, then in a newspaper printed in the County of Monmouth
and circulating in the Township. A copy of such complaint or order shall be
duly recorded or lodged for record with the county recording officer of the
county in which the dwelling is located.
(1) The cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses' fees, search
fees and advertising charges, incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this chapter determined in favor of the
Township, and
(2) Such cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating
and closing, or removal or demolition if any, or the amount of the
balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any
realized from the sale of materials derived from such building or
from any contract for removal or demolition thereof, shall be a
municipal lien against the real property upon which such cost was
incurred. If the building is removed or demolished by the
Construction Official he shall sell the materials of such building.
There shall be credited against the cost of the removal or
demolition thereof, the proceeds of any sale of such materials or
any sum derived from any contract for the removal or demolition of
the building. If there are no such credits or if the sum total of such
costs exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed statement of the
aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall be filed with the
Township Tax Assessor or other custodian of the records of tax liens
and a copy thereof shall be forthwith forwarded to the owner by
registered mail. If the total of the credits exceed such costs, the
balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the
Township, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by
such court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order
or judgment of such court; provided, however, that nothing in this
section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of
the Township to define and declare nuisances and to cause their
removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise. Any
owner or party in interest may, within 60 days from the date of the
filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the
Superior Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount or the
accuracy of the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
§ 81-7 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 81-9
81:193
§ 81-9. Powers of Construction Official.
The Construction Official is hereby authorized and empowered to exercise
such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate
the purposes and provisions of this chapter, including the following in
addition to others herein granted:
§ 81-10. Powers not impaired.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the power
of the Township or any officer or department to enforce any provisions of its
charter, or its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations
thereof, and the powers conferred by this chapter shall be in addition and
supplemental to the powers conferred upon the Township by any other law
or ordinance.
Chapter 90
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 81.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 113.
Housing standards — See Ch. 132.
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 140.
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See
Ch. 153.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 222.
§ 90-1. Enforcing agency.
A. To investigate the dwelling conditions in the Township in order to
determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation;
B. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witness and receive
evidence;
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the person in possession;
D. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as
he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter; and
E. To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to such
officers and agents as he may designate.
A. There is hereby established in the Township a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the Building
Department of the Township of Wall, consisting of a Construction
Official, Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official,
§ 81-9 WALL CODE § 90-1
81:194
§ 90-2. Construction Board of Appeals. [Amended 10-25-2017 by
Ord. No. 14-2017]
The Construction Board of Appeals to hear appeals from decisions by the
enforcing agency shall be the Monmouth County Construction Board of
Appeals.
§ 90-3. General fees. [Amended 11-22-2005 by Ord. No. 36-2005;
3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 6-2013; 4-24-2013 by Ord. No. 11-2013]
Electrical Subcode Official, and Fire Protection Subcode Official, and
such other subcode officials for such additional subcodes as the
Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, State of New
Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction
Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief administrator of the
enforcing agency.
B. All personnel employed in the Building Department of the Township
shall be subject to the requirements and provisions of Chapter 33,
Personnel Policies.
C. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1976. c. 217, as
amended and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such
position.
D. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location during regular business hours except for
emergencies and unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances.
A. The fees to be charged for permits issued by the Building Department
under the State Uniform Construction Code shall be as provided in the
Fee Schedule as set forth in Schedule I, which is located after § 90-6B.12
All fees shall be rounded to the nearest whole dollar. A copy of the Fee
Schedule shall be maintained on file in the Building Department and in
the office of the Township Clerk. [Amended 10-25-2017 by Ord. No.
14-2017]
B. Plan review fee. The fee for plan review shall be 20% of the amount to
be charged for the construction permit. The plan review fee shall be
paid at the time the permit is granted, in the case where a permit
application is withdrawn or abandoned and the plan review has been
completed the plan review fee shall be paid at that time. There shall be
an additional fee of $75 per hour or part thereof per subcode having
assigned plan review responsibility for review of an amendment or
12.Editor's Note: The Fee Schedule is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 90-1 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 90-3
81:195
§ 90-4. Repealer.13
All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting or inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter, other than the Zoning Ordinance, which conflict
with or are inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby
expressly repealed to the extent of each conflict or inconsistency.
change to a plan that has already been released. This fee may be waived
at the discretion of the Construction Official in the event the work
and review is of a minor nature. [Amended 10-25-2017 by Ord. No.
14-2017]
C. The basic construction fee shall be the sum of the parts computed on
the basis of the volume or the cost of construction, the number of
plumbing fixtures and pieces of equipment, the number of electric
fixtures and devices and the number of sprinklers, standpipes and
detectors (smoke and heat) at the unit rates and/or the applicable flat
fees provided herein plus any special fees. The minimum fee for a basic
construction permit covering any or all of building, plumbing, electric
or fire protection work shall be $75 per subcode except as herein noted.
The minimum fee for a permit update to a permit that has already been
issued shall be $50 per subcode. The fee for a permit update solely for a
change of contractor shall be $50 regardless of the number of subcodes
being updated. [Amended 10-25-2017 by Ord. No. 14-2017]
D. All applicable fees shall be paid before a permit is issued, except that
the payment of all fees shall be waived for the following:
(1) All work to be performed by the Monmouth County Energy
Conservation Program.
(2) The construction, erection or alteration of any fence within a farm
which is to be located more than 25 feet from any street line.
(3) In the case of any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement designed and undertaken solely to promote
accessibility by handicapped persons to an existing public or
private structure or any of the facilities contained therein, the
enforcing agency fee shall be waived. For purposes of this section,
the phrase "handicapped person" shall have the same meaning as is
set forth in N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq., as the same may be
amended and supplemented.
E. In addition to the fees charged by the municipality, a surcharge in the
amount provided by N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19 shall be charged, collected and
remitted by the Building Department to the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs.
13.Editor's Note: Former § 90-4, Fire Limits, was repealed 10-25-2017 by Ord. No. 14-2017.
This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of §§ 90-5 and 90-6 as §§ 90-4 and 90-5,
respectively.
§ 90-3 WALL CODE § 90-5
81:196
§ 90-5. Plumbing permits.
Chapter 93
CURFEW
A. No person shall engage in the business of contracting or rendering
plumbing services within the Township, unless such person holds a
valid master plumber's license pursuant to the provision of N.J.S.A.
45:14C-1 et seq., as amended and supplemented.
B. No plumbing permit shall be issued to any person who is not licensed
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:14C-1 et seq., except a single-family homeowner
who may perform plumbing work on his own dwelling.
§ 90-5 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 90-5
81:197

ARTICLE I
Halloween Curfew
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 3-23 of the Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 93-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GUARDIAN — A person other than a parent to whom legal custody of the
juvenile has been given by court order or who is acting in place of the parent
or is responsible for the care and welfare of the juvenile.
JUVENILE — An individual who is under the age of 18.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including
but not limited to any public street, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk, bridge,
alley, plaza, park, recreation or shopping area, public transportation facility,
vehicle used for public transportation, parking lot or any other public
building, structure or area.
§ 93-2. Curfew hours.
It shall be unlawful for a juvenile to be on any public street or in any
public place between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on October
29, 30, 31 and November 1 of each year, unless accompanied by the
juvenile's parents or guardian, or unless engaged in or traveling to or from
a business occupation, engaged in an errand involving a medical emergency
or attendance at an extracurricular school activity; an activity sponsored by
a religious or community based organization. It shall be unlawful for any
parent or guardian to allow an unaccompanied juvenile to be on any public
street or in any public place during those hours.
§ 93-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this article
shall be subject to either or both of the following penalties:
A. A fine of not more than $1,000.
B. Community service of not more than 30 days.
§ 93-1 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 93-3
81:199
Chapter 96
DONATION BINS
§ 96-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLOTHING DONATION BIN — Any receptacle or container made of metal,
steel, or any other material designed or intended for the collection and
temporary storage of donated clothing or other materials.
§ 96-2. Permit required.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no person shall
place, use or employ a clothing donation bin, within the Township of Wall,
for solicitation purposes, unless:
§ 96-3. Annual permit fee. [Amended 6-24-2015 by Ord. No.
11-2015]
The annual permit fee is $50 per bin and will be used to offset the costs
involved in enforcing P.L. 2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq.).
Registered charitable organizations located within Wall Township are
exempt from paying this annual permit fee but must still apply for and
secure a permit.
§ 96-4. Application requirements. [Amended 6-24-2015 by Ord. No.
11-2015]
The application for obtaining a permit shall include:
A. He or she has obtained a permit for a period of one year issued by the
Township Clerk.
A. The location where the bin would be situated, as precisely as possible;
B. The manner in which the person anticipates any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin would be used, sold, or dispersed, and
the method by which the proceeds of collected donations would be
allocated or spent;
C. Confirmation that the bin(s) shall be of the type that are enclosed by use
of a receiving door and locked so that the contents of the bin(s) may not
be accessed by anyone other than those responsible for the retrieval of
the contents. In addition, each bin must be regularly emptied of its
contents so that it does not overflow.
D. The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of any person or
entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin, at which such person can be reached during
§ 93-3 WALL CODE § 96-4
81:200
§ 96-5. Renewal application requirements. [Amended 6-24-2015 by
Ord. No. 11-2015]
An expiring permit may be renewed upon application and payment of a
renewal fee of $50 per bin. Permits issued under this chapter shall be
valid from October 1 to September 30 of the following year and renewable
for one-year periods thereafter. In addition to the above application
requirements, renewal applications must include:
§ 96-6. Placement of bins. [Amended 6-24-2015 by Ord. No.
11-2015]
Wall Township shall not grant an application for a permit to place, use,
or employ a donation clothing bin if it determines that the placement of
the bin could constitute a safety hazard. Such hazards shall include, but
not be limited to, the placement of a clothing donation bin within 100
yards of any place which stores in excess of 250 gallons, or sells, fuel
or other flammable liquids or gases, or the placement of a bin where it
interferes with vehicular or pedestrian circulation. The person placing,
using or employing a clothing donation bin shall maintain the bin and
the area surrounding the bin such that there shall be no accumulation
of clothing or other donations outside the bin. In addition, each bin shall
not cover a ground surface area in excess of five feet by five feet and be
more than six feet in height. Nonresidential commercial premises devoted
to nonprofit purposes and churches are permitted to have four used clothing
donation bins. Placement of bins shall not be in any front yard area.
normal business hours. For the purposes of this chapter, an answering
machine or service unrelated to the person does not constitute a bona
fide office; and
E. Written consent from the property owner to place the bin on his or her
property.
A. A statement of the manner in which the person has used, sold, or
dispersed any clothing or other donations have been allocated or spent,
and any changes the person anticipates it may make in these processes
during the period covered by the renewal;
B. The name and telephone of the bona fide office of any entity which
shared or profited from any clothing or other donations collected via
the bin and of any entities which may do so during the period of the
renewal; and
C. If the location of the bin is to be moved, the new location where the bin
is to be situated, as precisely as possible and written consent from the
property owner of the new location.
§ 96-4 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 96-7
81:201
§ 96-7. Display of permit. [Amended 6-24-2015 by Ord. No.
11-2015]
A permit issued to a registrant shall be affixed to the bin prior to placement.
In addition, the following information shall be clearly and conspicuously
displayed on the exterior of the clothing donation bin:
§ 96-8. Complaints.
§ 96-9. Violations and penalties; remedies.
In addition to any other penalties or remedies authorized by the laws of
this state, any person who violates any provision of this chapter or the
A. The permit number, its date of expiration, and a statement that a copy
of the permit application is on file with the Township Clerk;
B. The permit shall be placed on the same side of the bin as the chute used
for the deposit of the clothing. Next to the permit there shall be placed
in clear lettering the name and telephone of the registrant;
C. The telephone number of the owner's bona fide office, and, if applicable,
the telephone number of the bona fide office of any other entity which
may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected via
the bin. For the purposes of this subsection, an answering machine or
service unrelated to the person does not constitute a bona fide office;
and
D. Upon the sale or transfer of a bin, a permit issued to the new owner
shall be affixed to the bin prior to placing it for service.
A. The Code Enforcement Office shall receive and investigate, within 30
days, any complaints from the public about the bin. Whenever it
appears that a person has engaged in, or is engaging in, any act or
practice in violation of this chapter, the person who placed the bin shall
be issued a warning, stating that if the violation is not rectified or a
hearing with the appropriate municipal agency is not requested within
45 days, the bin will be seized or removed at the expense of the person
who placed the bin, and any clothing or other donations collected via
the bin will be sold at public auction or otherwise disposed of. In
addition to any other means used to notify the person who placed the
bin, such warning shall be affixed to the exterior of the bin itself.
B. In the event that the person who placed the bin does not rectify the
violation or request a hearing within 45 days of the posting of the
warning, Wall Township may seize the bin, remove it, or have it
removed, at the expense of the person who placed the bin, and sell at
public auction or otherwise dispose of any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin. Any proceeds from the sale of the donation
collected via the bin shall be paid to the Chief Financial Officer of the
Township.
§ 96-7 WALL CODE § 96-9
81:202
provisions of P.L. 2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq.), which results in
seizure of the clothing donation bin shall be:
Chapter 98
DRUG-FREE ZONES
§ 98-1. Adoption of map as official finding and record.
Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7, the Drug-Free School Zone
Map prepared by Glenn R. Gerken, Township Engineer, and dated August
24, 1994, be and the same is hereby approved and adopted as an official
finding and record of the location and boundaries of the areas within the
Township which are used for school purposes and which are owned by or
leased to the Board of Education of the Township and of the areas on or
within 1,000 feet of such properties.
§ 98-2. Map to include public housing, public parks, public
facilities, and public buildings.
Pursuant to authority of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-5, the drug-free school zone map
prepared by Glenn R. Gerken, Township Engineer, and dated August 24,
1999, be and the same is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding
on record of the location and boundaries of the real property within the
Township which are comprised of public housing facilities, public parks,
libraries, museums and public buildings, and the areas within 500 feet of
such properties.
A. Subject to a penalty of up to $20,000 for each violation. The Township
may bring this action in the Wall Township Municipal Court or the
Superior Court of New Jersey as a summary proceeding under the
Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999, P.L. 1999, c. 274 (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10
et seq.), and any penalty monies collected shall be paid to the Chief
Financial Officer of the Township; and
B. Deemed ineligible to place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin for
solicitation purposes pursuant to this section and P.L. 2007, c. 209
(N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61). A person disqualified from placing, using, or
employing a clothing donation bin by violating the provisions of P.L.
2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq.), may apply to the Township
Committee to have that person's eligibility restored. The Township
Committee may restore the eligibility of a person who:
(1) Acts within the public interest; and
(2) Demonstrates that he or she has made a good faith effort to comply
with the provisions of this chapter and P.L. 2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.60 et seq.), and all other application laws and regulations,
or had no fraudulent intentions.
§ 96-9 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 98-3
98:203
§ 98-3. Drug-Free School Zone Map established.
The Drug-Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 98-1
of this chapter shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as
to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board
which is used for school purposes until such time if any that this chapter
shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the
location and boundaries of school property and drug-free school zones.
§ 98-4. School official to notify of changes.
The school board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Township Engineer and the Township
Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and
boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 98-5. Township Clerk's duties.
The Clerk of the Township is hereby directed to receive and keep on file
the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 98-1 of this
chapter and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any
person, agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy,
along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved
and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true
copy of such map and of this chapter shall be provided without cost to the
County Clerk and to the office of the Monmouth County Prosecutor.
§ 98-6. Use of map as evidence.
It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 98-1
of this chapter was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state, and that pursuant
to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of the following:
§ 98-7. Ownership of school property.
Except as is otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved and
adopted map, all of the property depicted on the map approved and adopted
A. The location of elementary and secondary schools within municipality;
B. The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to such
schools or a school board;
C. That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes; and
D. The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000 feet
of such school property.
§ 98-3 WALL CODE § 98-7
98:204
herein as school property was owned by or leased to a school or school
board and was being used for school purposes as of July 9, 1987, that being
the effective date of L. 1987, c. 101 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7).
§ 98-8. Other evidence allowed.
Pursuant to the provisions of L. 1988, c. 44, a prosecutor is not precluded
from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or testimony to
establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute, including use of
a map or diagram other than the one approved and adopted pursuant to
§ 98-1 of this chapter. The failure of the map approved herein to depict the
location and boundaries of any property which is, in fact, used for school
purposes and which is owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary
school or school board, whether the absence of such depiction is the result
of inadvertent omission or the result of any changes in the location and
boundaries of such property which have not yet been incorporated into a
revised approved map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and
record that such property is not owned by or leased to a school or school
board, or that such property is not used for school purposes.
§ 98-9. Procedural requirements satisfied.
All of the requirements set forth in L. 1988, c. 44, concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free School Zone Map have
been complied with.
Chapter 101
DWELLINGS, OCCUPANCY OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 140.
§ 101-1. Findings.
A. The use and occupancy of dwelling units by others than a family, as
defined herein, has caused and resulted in acts of rowdyism, excessive
noise, intoxication, vice, immorality, breach of public peace and order,
and similar acts disturbing the peace and quiet of the neighborhood,
and has adversely affected the peace and quiet of citizens of the
Township, and such use and occupancy has caused an overcrowding of
dwelling units and increased traffic congestion in the streets.
B. Such use and occupancy has greatly increased the need for police
protection and surveillance; such use and occupancy tends to
depreciate property values to the detriment of citizens of the Township;
§ 98-7 DWELLINGS, OCCUPANCY OF § 101-1
101:205
§ 101-2. Occupancy permitted by families.
Under and by virtue of the authority granted under N.J.S.A. 40:48-1(6)
and 40:48-2, the rental, use and occupancy of any dwelling unit, as herein
defined, by any person or persons other than a family as herein defined are
hereby prohibited.
§ 101-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms or any part thereof located
within a building and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which
are used or designed to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating.
FAMILY — A collective group of persons related by kinship, adoption,
blood or marriage, living together under the same roof, in a common
household, whose relationship is of a permanent and distinct domestic
character and not resort or seasonal in character or nature, including any
domestic servants, lodgers, boarders or guests.
§ 101-4. Prohibited uses.
No house, dwelling, building, structure or enclosure shall be used, or be
permitted to be used, or be rented for use, as living quarters or sleeping
quarters or for living purposes or sleeping purposes, by or to any society,
club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, combine, federation, group,
coterie or organization, or to any person or member on behalf of the same,
or to any group or collection of persons who are unmarried or who do not
qualify as a family as defined in this chapter.
§ 101-5. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to rooming houses, hotels, motels or other
places or public accommodations in the Township, which places are duly
licensed as such by the Township, or convents, rectories, or parish houses
or manses utilized in conjunction with any church or synagogue or similar
house of worship.
§ 101-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or persons, corporation or group who aids, abets, counsels,
commands, induces or procures another to violate the provisions of this
chapter shall, for each and every violation, suffer the penalty as stated in
Chapter 1, Article I.
and such use and occupancy adversely affects the general welfare of
the community.
§ 101-1 WALL CODE § 101-7
101:206
§ 101-7. Exception.
This chapter shall not apply to a person living alone whose residence in
the Township is permanent and not resort or seasonal in character or
nature, including domestic servants or guests. A person's residence shall
be deemed permanent if it is his permanent home, or such person resides
therein for a period of at least eight months or more during a calendar year.
Chapter 105
FARMING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use — See Ch. 140.
§ 101-7 DWELLINGS, OCCUPANCY OF § 101-7
101:207

ARTICLE I
Right to Farm
[Adopted 9-8-2010 by Ord. No. 14-201014]
§ 105-1. Purpose.
The right to farm all land is hereby recognized to exist as a natural right
and is also hereby ordained to exist as a permitted use everywhere in the
Township of Wall, subject only to size requirements and to Township health
and sanitary codes. The right to farm, as it is used in this section, includes
the use of irrigation pumps and equipment, aerial and ground seeding and
spraying, tractors, farm laborers and the application of chemical equipment
and modern procedures, all for the purpose of producing from the land
agricultural products such as vegetables, grains, hay, fruits, fibers, wood,
trees, plants, shrubs, flowers and seeds, as well as the propagation and
maintenance of horses, cows and other grazing stock.
§ 105-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the meanings indicated:
COMMERCIAL FARM —
FARM MANAGEMENT UNIT — A parcel or parcels of land, whether
contiguous or noncontiguous, together with agricultural or horticultural
buildings, structures and facilities, producing agricultural or horticultural
products, and operated as a single enterprise.
FARM MARKET — A facility used for the wholesale or retail marketing of
the agricultural output of a commercial farm, and products that contribute
to farm income. If a farm market is used for retail marketing, at least
51% of the annual gross sales of the retail farm market shall be generated
from sales of agricultural output of the commercial farm or at least 51%
of the sales area shall be devoted to the sale of agricultural output of the
commercial farm; and if a retail farm market is located on land less than five
acres in area, the land on which the farm market is located shall produce
annually agricultural or horticultural products worth at least $2,500.
A farm management unit of no less than five acres producing
agricultural or horticultural products worth $2,500 or more annually
and satisfying the eligibility criteria for differential property taxation
pursuant to the Farmland Assessment Act of 1964, N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et
seq.; or
A.
A farm management unit of less than five acres, producing agricultural
or horticultural products worth $50,000 or more annually and
otherwise satisfying the eligibility criteria for differential property
taxation pursuant to the Farmland Assessment Act of 1964, N.J.S.A.
54:4-23.1 et seq.
B.
14.Editor's Note: This article was originally adopted as Ch. 151 but was renumbered to
maintain the alphabetical sequence of the Code.
§ 105-1 DWELLINGS, OCCUPANCY OF § 105-2
101:209
PICK-YOUR-OWN OPERATION — A direct marketing alternative wherein
retail or wholesale customers are invited onto a commercial farm in order
to harvest agricultural, floricultural or horticultural products.
§ 105-3. Permitted activities.
§ 105-4. Conditions for engaging in permitted activities.
Commercial farms located within the Township may engage in permitted
activities so long as they satisfy the following requirements:
A. The right to farm is granted to commercial farms so that they may
engage in the following activities, subject to the requirements specified
in this chapter:
(1) Produce agricultural and horticultural crops, trees and forest
products, livestock and poultry and other commodities as described
in the Standard Industrial Classification for agriculture, forestry,
fishing and trapping;
(2) Process and package the agricultural output of the commercial
farm;
(3) Provide for the operation of a farm market, including the
construction of building and parking areas in conformance with
municipal standards;
(4) Replenish soil nutrients and improve soil tilth;
(5) Control pests, predators and diseases of plants and animals;
(6) Clear woodlands using open burning and other techniques, install
and maintain vegetative and terrain alterations and other physical
facilities for water and soil conservation and surface water control
in wetland areas;
(7) Conduct on-site disposal of organic agricultural wastes;
(8) Conduct agriculture-related educational and farm-based
recreational activities, provided that the activities are related to
marketing the agricultural or horticultural output of the
commercial farm; and
(9) Engage in any other agricultural activity as determined by the
State Agriculture Development Committee and adopted by the rule
or regulation pursuant to the provisions of the Administrative
Procedure Act, P.L. 1968, c. 410 (N.J.S.A. 52:14B-1 et seq.).
B. The manufacture, cultivation or farming of marijuana is prohibited.
[Added 2-28-2018 by Ord. No. 2-2018]
A. The commercial farm is located in an area within the Township in which
agriculture is a permitted use under the Township Zoning Ordinance
§ 105-2 WALL CODE § 105-4
101:210
§ 105-5. Notice of proximity to commercial farm required.
The seller of any property located within 1,000 feet of a commercial farm as
defined in this article must include in the contract of sale a provision which
states that the prospective buyer has been notified of the proximity of the
subject property to the commercial farm.
§ 105-6. Posting of regulations.
A copy of this article shall be prominently posted at Town Hall, the offices of
the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment, local real estate offices
and within the sales office at subdivision construction sites. A copy of this
article shall also be provided by the Construction Department to each and
every individual who requests a copy.
and is consistent with the Township's Master Plan or which was in
operation as of the effective date of N.J.S.A. 4:1C-3 et seq. (July 2,1998);
B. The farm's operation conforms to agricultural management practices
recommended by the State Agriculture Development Committee and
adopted pursuant to the provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act,
N.J.S.A. 52:14B-l et seq., or whose specific operation or practice has
been determined by the Monmouth County Agriculture Development
Board to constitute a generally accepted agricultural operation or
practice;
C. The farm's operation is in compliance with all relevant federal or state
statutes or rules and regulations; and
D. The farm's operation does not pose a direct threat to public health and
safety.
§ 105-4 DWELLINGS, OCCUPANCY OF § 105-6
101:211
Chapter 108
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Turkey shoots — See Ch. 211.
§ 108-1. District established.
No person shall, at any time, discharge firearms within the districts set forth
in Subsection (25) of 140-140 of Chapter 140, Land Use and Development
Regulations.
Chapter 110
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
§ 110-1. Certification of payment of liens and charges required
prior to payment of claims.
No insurer issuing fire insurance policies in the Township shall pay any
claim for fire damages in excess of $2,500 on any real property located
within the Township, unless it is in receipt of an official certificate of search
for municipal liens issued by the Township, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-12,
which certificate certifies that all taxes, assessments, and other municipal
liens or charges levied and assessed, and due and payable against the
property have been paid.
§ 110-2. Demolition costs to be paid.
No insurer issuing fire insurance policies in the Township shall pay any
claims for fire damages in excess of $2,500 on any real property located
within the Township, unless it is in receipt of an official certificate, certified
by the Construction Official, that no demolition is required as a result
of the fire loss or, if demolition is required, that the costs of demolition
have been paid. If the demolition has not yet occurred on the date the
aforesaid certificate is issued, the certificate shall provide an estimate of
the anticipated costs of demolition, which shall be paid to the Township by
the insured, and such money shall be held in an interest bearing escrow
account as provided by N.J.S.A. 17:36-8.
§ 110-3. Payment of liens and charges by insurer.
Except in a case in which a resolution is adopted by the Township
Committee providing for installment payment of taxes, assessments, liens,
or demolition costs pursuant to N.J.S.A. 17:36-11, an insurance company
writing fire insurance policies in the Township shall pay to the Township,
§ 105-6 WALL CODE § 110-3
108:212
prior to the making of any payment of the claim to the insured person, all
taxes, assessments, liens, or related charges as are contained on the official
certificate, in the manner provided by N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq.
Chapter 113
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire companies — See Ch. 18.
Fire Districts — See Ch. 20.
Key boxes — See Ch. 59, Art. II.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 110.
Costs for cleaning up hazardous materials
spills — See Ch. 125, Art. I.
§ 113-1. Uniform Fire Code as Local Fire Prevention Code.
There is hereby adopted by the Township for the purpose of prescribing
minimum requirements and controls to safeguard life, property and public
welfare from the hazards of fire and explosion, the Uniform Fire Code and
the New Jersey State Uniform Fire Safety Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.),
and all amendments and supplements thereto, and those amendments set
forth in § 113-5 hereof. This shall be known as the "Local Fire Prevention
Code."
§ 113-2. Enforcement by Joint Board; inspectors; annual report.
§ 113-3. Local enforcement agency designated; appeals; inspection
and permit fees.
A. The Local Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire
Prevention as established through mutually executed shared service
agreements between the three Township-based fire districts. Per the
shared service agreements, the Bureau of Fire Prevention will be
governed by Fire District No. 1.
B. Annual report. A report of the Fire Official shall be made annually and
transmitted to the chief executive officer of the Township; it shall
contain all proceedings under this code, with such additional statistics
as the Fire Official may wish to include therein. The Fire Official shall
also recommend any amendments to the code, which, in his judgment,
shall be necessary and/or appropriate.
A. Local enforcement. Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety
Act, P.L. 1983, c. 383 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202), the New Jersey Uniform
Fire Code shall be enforced locally in the Township of Wall.
B. Agency designation. The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of
Fire Prevention as established by the shared service agreement
§ 110-3 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 113-3
110:213
between the three Township fire districts and managed by the Board of
Fire Commissioners Wall District No. 1.
C. Duties of Bureau of Fire Prevention. The Bureau of Fire Prevention, as
established by the shared service agreement between the three
Township fire districts and managed by the Board of Fire
Commissioners Wall District No. 1, shall enforce the Uniform Fire
Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code, and the codes and regulations
adopted thereunder, in all structures within the Township, and shall
faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act
and the Uniform Fire Code. The Bureau of Fire Prevention, as
established by the shared service agreement between the three
Township fire districts and managed by the Board of Fire
Commissioners Wall District No. 1, shall also enforce the Local Fire
Prevention Code in the Township.
D. Life hazard uses. The Bureau of Fire Prevention, as established by the
shared service agreement between the three Township fire districts and
managed by the Board of Fire Commissioners Wall District No. 1, shall
carry out the periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the
Uniform Fire Code.
E. The Bureau of Fire Prevention.
(1) The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be established by the Board of
Commissioners of Wall District No. 1. Through the shared service
agreements, a Fire Bureau Committee has been established. The
Committee, consisting of two commissioners from each of the
Township's three fire districts, will act in a policy advisory role and
will have oversight on major operating issues such as budget
development, report review, etc.
(2) The Fire Official shall be appointed by the Board of Fire
Commissioners of Wall District No. 1, with the advice of the Fire
Bureau Committee. The term of office of the Fire Official shall be at
the pleasure Wall Fire District No. 1 with the consent of the Fire
Bureau Committee. The Fire Official shall supervise the
enforcement of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Local Fire
Prevention Code within the Township and any and all subordinate
employees retained to carry out the requirements thereof.
(3) The Fire Official may be removed from office for cause by the Board
of Fire Commissioners of Wall District No. 1 after having been
given at least 10 days' notice of a hearing to be held by the Fire
Bureau Committee, at which time the Fire Official shall have the
opportunity to be heard on any charge against him.
(4) Such inspectors or other employees as may be necessary to enforce
and administer the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Local Fire
Prevention Code shall be appointed by the Board of Fire
Commissioners Wall District No. 1 with the advice of the Fire
Bureau Committee. The salaries of all employees of the Bureau of
§ 113-3 WALL CODE § 113-3
110:214
Fire Prevention shall be established by the Board of Fire
Commissioners Wall District No. 1 at the recommendation of the
Fire Bureau Committee.
F. Board of Appeals. Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire
Safety Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and 52:27D-208), any person aggrieved
by any action of the local enforcing agency shall have the right to
appeal such action to the Construction Board of Appeals having
jurisdiction in the municipality in which the building, structure or
premises is located.
G. Fees; inspections. [Amended 12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 23-2018]
(1) The permit fees established by the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code,
as established in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9, shall be followed. The Fire
Official may waive the permit fees in certain instances when such
fees are applied for the following:
(a) Religious, charitable, and nonprofit organizations and/or
government agencies. When the permit is for an activity of an
occasional nature (not exceeding three times per year) and is
part of religious observations and/or training, and/or
charitable organizations and/or other nonprofit organizations,
and/or governmental agencies of the Township. Additional
documentation verifying status of the organization may be
required.
(b) Such organizations mentioned in Subsection G(1)(a) above
shall be responsible for submitting all applications as required
by the code and conforming with all provisions of this chapter.
The waiver applies directly to the applicant to be named on the
permit, which must be a qualifying organization from
Subsection G(1)(a) above. The waiver is only for the payment of
otherwise required permit fees.
(2) In addition to the inspections and fees required for life-hazard uses
pursuant to the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the regulations of the
Department of Community Affairs, the following fees will be
assessed for inspections of all non-life-hazard uses by the Bureau of
Fire Prevention:
(a) All commercial building inspections:
[1] Buildings:
Square Footage Fee
Under 1,000 $65
1,001 to 2,000 $90
2,001 to 3,000 $120
3,001 to 5,000 $150
§ 113-3 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 113-3
110:215
Square Footage Fee
5,001 to 7,000 $185
7,001 to 10,000 $275
10,001 and over $280 for first 10,001 square feet;
$25 for each additional 1,000
square feet
[2] Common areas: $80. Common area inspections shall
include, but not be limited to, fire protection systems,
basements, laundry rooms, corridors, vestibules
accessible to occupants, exterior property grounds,
utilities, building maintenance, fire lanes and zones, and
all other requirements set forth within the State Uniform
Fire Code.
[3] Five-year state inspection, per unit: $50.
[4] Unoccupied or vacant building, premises, structure. Such
units must be inspected annually. Such units of 2,500
square feet or less shall be charged an inspection fee of
$42; spaces in excess of 2,500 square feet shall be charged
an inspection fee to be determined by the permit type.
Square footage will determine the permit type and
associated fee pursuant to the New Jersey Fire Code.
(b) Certificate of smoke alarm, carbon monoxide alarm, portable
fire extinguisher compliance (CSACMAPFEC).
[1] The fee for any CSACMAPFEC and issuance of a
certificate, as required by N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3, will be indexed
to the scheduled inspection date as it relates to the
anticipated contract closing date as follows:
Scheduled Inspection Date
Type
More Than 5
Days Before
Closing
5 or Fewer Days
Before Closing
Initial inspection $75 $125
First reinspection $30 $40
Second and
subsequent reinspections
$40 $40
[2] This fee will also be charged for failure to maintain the
scheduled appointment or entry to the structure. The Fire
Prevention Bureau will make every attempt to schedule
the inspections in a timely manner in order to avoid any
escalation of these fees.
§ 113-3 WALL CODE § 113-3
110:216
§ 113-4. Limits of districts for storage of flammable liquids and
explosives.
[3] All currently active volunteer members of any Township
fire company or first aid squad shall be entitled to an
exemption from payment of the CSACMAPFEC required
for the sale of their primary residence, which they are
listed on the municipal tax records as the owner and have
occupied on a full-time basis for a minimum of 24 months
prior to certificate issuance. At time of CSACMAPFEC
application, the applicant is required to provide the
Bureau of Fire Prevention a letter from the applicable
organization's fire chief/first aid captain, and/or president
or commissioner, confirming that the individual is an
active member in good standing for at least one year prior
to date of inspection. This exemption does not apply to
reinspection fees.
H. Enforcement; violations and penalties. Enforcement, violations and
penalties shall be assessed, levied and collected as set forth in the
Uniform Fire Safety Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-207 et seq.), the Uniform Fire
Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.10 et seq.) and all other applicable laws of the
State of New Jersey.
I. This fee schedule outlines the reimbursement of cost for standby fire
protection services as deemed necessary by the Fire Official which
applies to an event/situation, not conducted by a government agency or
municipality sponsored nonprofit organization, that has the potential to
cause a danger to public safety and well-being.
Resource Fees
Type
Fee
(per hour)
Fire engine* $85
Brush/utility truck* $50
Command/support vehicle* $16
Fire suppression personnel* $25
Fire Inspector (vehicle included)** $45
NOTES:
* To be paid directly to fire district in which assignment is taking
place
** To be paid directly to Wall Township Bureau of Fire Prevention
A. Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of flammable
liquids in outside aboveground tanks is to be prohibited.
§ 113-3 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 113-4
110:217
§ 113-5. Supplementation of Fire Code.
The Local Fire Prevention Code is supplemented as follows: Chapter 59,
Alarms, Article II, Key Boxes of the Code of the Township of Wall.
§ 113-6. Designation of fire zones.
Fire zones shall be established and enforced in accordance with the Local
Fire Prevention Code, the Uniform Fire Code and the New Jersey State
Uniform Fire Safety Act.
§ 113-7. Effect on land use authority.
This chapter shall not be deemed to effect or interfere in any manner
with the authority conferred by Chapter 140, Land Use and Development
Regulations, of the Code of the Township of Wall upon the Wall Township
Planning Board or the Wall Township Zoning Board of Adjustment to review
and approve applications for site plan review.
§ 113-8. Open burning.
No person shall kindle or maintain any fire or authorize any fire without first
securing the appropriate written permit in accordance with the provisions
of the Uniform Fire Code and/or the State Bureau of Forest Fire
Management.
(1) Storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground storage tanks
shall be prohibited in all zones except industrial zones, and such
storage must comply with the Local Fire Prevention Code, the
Uniform Fire Code and the New Jersey State Uniform Fire Safety
Act.
(2) New bulk, processing or industrial plants, refineries or other plants
and distilleries and all buildings, tanks and equipment used for
storage, processing, distillation, refining or blending of flammable
or combustible liquids shall be prohibited in all zones except
industrial zones and must comply with the Local Fire Prevention
Code, the Uniform Fire Code and the New Jersey State Uniform
Fire Safety Act.
B. Establishment of limits of in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum
gases is to be restricted. The bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas
shall be prohibited in all zones except the industrial zones, and such
storage must comply with the Local Fire Prevention Code, the Uniform
Fire Code and the New Jersey State Uniform Fire Safety Act.
C. Establishment of limits in which storage of explosives and blasting
agents is to be prohibited. Storage of explosives and blasting agents is
prohibited in all zones except industrial zones, and such storage must
comply with the Local Fire Prevention Code, the Uniform Fire Code and
the New Jersey State Uniform Fire Safety Act.
§ 113-4 WALL CODE § 113-8
110:218
Chapter 116
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 90.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 140, Art.
XXXIII.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 222.
§ 116-1. Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and
objectives.
A. Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has
in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq., delegated the responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote public
health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the
Township Committee of the Township of Wall, of New Jersey does ordain
as follows:
B. Findings of fact:
(1) The flood hazard areas of the Township of Wall are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health
and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
service, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and
relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect
the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(2) These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazard which increase flood
heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes
damage in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed,
elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute
to the flood loss.
C. Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and
private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions
designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general
public;
§ 113-8 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 116-1
110:219
§ 116-2. Word usage; definitions.
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize
future flood blight areas;
(7) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
(8) Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
D. Methods of reducing flood losses: In order to accomplish its purposes,
this chapter includes methods and provisions for:
(1) Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which
result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or
velocities;
(2) Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;
(3) Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or
channel floodwaters;
(4) Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development
which may increase flood damage; and
(5) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood
hazards in other areas.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, or VO Zone
on a community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a
§ 116-1 WALL CODE § 116-2
110:220
one-percent-annual-or-greater chance of flooding to an average depth
of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist,
where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may
be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of
flooding in any given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage
to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the
area of special flood hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING —
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
A nonbasement building:
Built in the case of a building in an area of special flood hazard
to have the top of the elevated floor elevated above the ground
level by means of piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear
walls parallel to the flow of the water; and
(a)
Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of
the base flood.
(b)
(1)
In an area of special flood hazard, "elevated building" also includes
a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter
walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of floodwaters.
(2)
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
§ 116-2 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 116-2
110:221
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance
and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power.
The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than 0.2 foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure,
useable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage
in an area other than a basement is not considered a building's lowest
floor provided that such enclosure is not built so to render the structure
in violation of other applicable nonelevation design requirements.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 116-2 WALL CODE § 116-2
110:222
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the
required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a
"recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into
two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation
adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348) includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
(3)
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
(4)
§ 116-2 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 116-2
110:223
§ 116-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Wall.
§ 116-4. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or
a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement officer and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
"historic structure."
(2)
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of Wall, Community
No. 340333, are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study,
Monmouth County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated September
25, 2009.
(2) "Flood Insurance Rate Map for Monmouth County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions)" as shown on Index and panel numbers
34025C0169F, 34025C0310F, 34025C0320F, 34025C0326F,
34025C0328F, 34025C0329F, 34025C0333F, 34025C0340F,
§ 116-2 WALL CODE § 116-4
110:224
§ 116-5. Violations and penalties.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, for
each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township of Wall from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
§ 116-6. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and any other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 116-7. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 116-8. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
34025C0341F, 34025C0342F, 34025C0343F, 34025C0435F,
34025C0455F, and 34025C0456F; the effective date of which is
September 25, 2009.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at 2700
Allaire Road, Wall, New Jersey, 07719.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
§ 116-4 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 116-8
110:225
§ 116-9. Establishment of development permit.
§ 116-10. Designation of local administrator.
The Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying building permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 116-11. Duties and responsibilities of Administrator.
The duties of the Construction Official shall include, but not be limited to:
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of
Wall, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
A. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins within any area of special flood hazard established
in § 116-4. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Construction Official and may include, but not be
limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or
proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and
the location of the foregoing.
B. Specifically the following information is required:
(1) Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has
been floodproofed;
(3) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
the floodproofing criteria in § 116-15; and
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review. The Construction Official shall:
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
government agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions of § 116-16A(1) are met.
§ 116-8 WALL CODE § 116-11
110:226
§ 116-12. Variance procedure; appeals.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data:
(1) When base flood elevation and floodway data has not been provided
in accordance with § 116-4, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard, the Construction Official shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, in order to
administer § 116-15A, the specific standards for residential
construction, and § 116-15B, specific standards for nonresidential
construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained. The Construction Official
shall:
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level).
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in § 116-9B.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses. The Construction Official shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. The Construction Official shall
make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual
field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in § 116-12.
§ 116-11 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 116-12
110:227
A. The Board of Adjustment as established by the Township Committee
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
B. The Board of Adjustment as established by the Township Committee
shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Construction
Official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment or any
taxpayer may appeal such decision to the Superior Court.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Board of Adjustment shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use of
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(11) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection D of this section and
the purposes of this chapter, the Board of Adjustment may attach such
§ 116-12 WALL CODE § 116-12
110:228
§ 116-13. Conditions for variances.
§ 116-14. General standards for flood hazard reduction.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further
the purposes of this chapter.
F. The Construction Official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances to
the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided that § 116-12D(1)
through (11) has been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond
the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as
an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
C. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
D. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public as identified in § 116-12D, or conflict
with existing local laws or ordinances.
F. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation.
A. Anchoring.
§ 116-12 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 116-14
110:229
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground
anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and
local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvement shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) Electrical heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
§ 116-14 WALL CODE § 116-14
110:230
§ 116-15. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 116-4 or in § 116-11B, the following
standards are required:
E. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices, provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest structural member of the lowest
floor, including basement together with the attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities, elevated to or above base flood elevation.
(2) Require within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified), and require adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
B. Nonresidential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either:
(a) Have the lowest floor, including basement together with the
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated to the level
of the base flood elevation; and
(b) Require within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM that all
new construction and substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall
either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is
§ 116-14 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 116-15
110:231
§ 116-16. Floodway.
specified), and require adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures;
(2) Or together with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, shall:
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 116-11C(2).
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 116-14A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation, such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
A. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 116-4 are
areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris,
potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:
(1) Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other development unless a
technical evaluation demonstrates that encroachments shall not
result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
(2) If § 116-16A(1) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of §§ 116-14 through 116-16.
(3) In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation
data has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
0.2 of a foot at any point.
§ 116-15 WALL CODE § 116-16
110:232
Chapter 119
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Land use and development — See Ch. 140.
§ 119-1. Board of Health license requirements.
It shall be unlawful for any person or any body corporate to conduct a retail
food establishment as defined in and governed by N.J.A.C. 8:24-1 et seq.
without first having procured a license from the local Board of Health so
to do or without complying with any or all of the provisions concerning
operation and maintenance of the same as contained in the aforementioned
N.J.A.C. 8:24-1 et seq.
§ 119-2. Fees. [Amended 2-14-2007 by Ord. No. 2-200715;
11-23-20110 by Ord. No. 21-2010]
Fees for annual licensing of retail food establishments are hereby fixed as
follows:
A. Fee schedule.
Fee
Mobile vehicles $40 per year
Special events lasting one week in duration
or less
$50 per event
Establishments other than licensed
restaurants:
Minimum fee all establishments $65 per year
Between 4,000 and 10,000 square feet $175 per year
Over 10,000 square feet $325 per year
Restaurants:
Seating capacity up to 50 $65 per year
Seating capacity from 51 to 100 $115 per year
Seating capacity over 100 $185 per year
B. Food license late fee; reinspection fee.
(1) A late fee charge will be levied by the licensing municipality on
those food establishment owner(s) and/or operator(s) who do not
renew their license on the anniversary date. The late fee charge
15.Editor's Note: The provisions of this ordinance are retroactive to 1-1-2007.
§ 116-16 FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS § 119-2
110:233
§ 119-3. Expiration of license; suspension or revocation.
Any license issued under the terms and provisions of this chapter shall
expire on December 31 of each year and may be suspended or revoked
by the Board of Health of the Township for the violation by the licensee
of any provision of this chapter or the Retail Food Establishment Code of
New Jersey (1965) or whenever it shall appear that the business, trade,
calling, profession or occupation of the person to whom such license was
issued is conducted in a disorderly or improper manner or in violation of any
law of the United States, the State of New Jersey, or any ordinance of this
Township, or that the person conducting the retail food establishment is of
an unfit character to conduct the same, or that the purpose for which the
license has been issued is being abused to the detriment of the public, or is
being used for a purpose foreign to that for which the license was issued.
§ 119-4. Hearing.
A license issued under the terms and provisions of this chapter shall not
be revoked, canceled or suspended until a hearing thereon shall have been
had by the Board of Health. Written notice of the time and place of such
hearing shall be served upon the licensee at least three days prior to the
date set for such hearing. Such notice shall also contain a brief statement
of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking, canceling or suspending
such license. Notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the
person to be notified or be deposited in the United States Post Office in a
sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at
the business address appearing upon the license. At the hearing before the
Board of Health the person aggrieved shall have an opportunity to answer
and may thereafter be heard, and upon due consideration and deliberation
by the Board of Health, the complaint may be dismissed, or if the Board of
Health concludes that the charges have been sustained and substantiated,
it may revoke, cancel or suspend the license held by the licensee.
§ 119-5. Approval by Board of Health of license application after
revocation.
If any such license shall have been revoked, neither the holder thereof
nor any person acting for him, directly or indirectly, shall be entitled to
will be in addition to the cost of the establishment's annual food
licensing fee. The late fee charge is set as follows: the late fee
equals 20% of the food establishment's annual licensing fee, except
that the minimum late fee charge shall be set no lower than $20.
(2) If, upon reinspection, the establishment is rated conditional or
below for the same or similar violation, there will be a reinspection
fee of $100. Establishments are still subject to additional penalties
upon inspector's discretion.
C. All public primary, elementary and secondary schools shall be exempt
from the fees set forth herein.
§ 119-2 WALL CODE § 119-5
110:234
another license to carry on the same business within the Township unless
the application for such license shall be approved by the Board of Health.
§ 119-6. Restrictions on applicability of chapter.
No provision on this chapter shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or federal
government.
§ 119-7. Payment of taxes.
No license for a retail food establishment shall be issued until the Township
Clerk is in receipt of a certification from the Tax Collector that all real
property taxes and assessments pertaining to the property on which the
retail food establishment is located are current and that no such taxes or
assessments are then due and owing.
Chapter 125
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 113. Household hazardous waste — See Ch. 191,
Art. I.
§ 119-5 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 119-7
125:235

ARTICLE I
Reimbursement for Cleanup Costs
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 3-26 of the Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 125-1. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:42-1 et seq., which directs
municipalities to act to provide for the health, welfare and safety of its
citizens.
§ 125-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall be defined as set forth
herein:
COLLECTING AGENCY — The Township of Wall.
DISCHARGE — Any intentional or unintentional action or omission resulting
in the releasing, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying
or dumping of hazardous substances into any sanitary or storm sewers or
waters which flow within the jurisdiction of the Township or any land or any
indoor or outdoor air within the jurisdiction of the Township.
EXPENDABLE ITEMS — Any items used to extinguish or prevent any
hazardous material fire, or stop or contain any discharge involving any
hazardous material, which cannot be reused or cannot be replenished
without cost after that particular incident. These expendable items include,
but are not limited to, fire-fighting foam, chemical extinguishing agents,
absorbent materials, sand, recovery drums, and any protective equipment
and clothing to include, but not restricted to, chemical protective suits,
chemical protective gloves, goggles, and any other item owned or controlled
by the Township.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, solid, liquid or gas, listed as
such under the NFPA Guide of Hazardous Materials, the Department of
Transportation Guide Book, the list of hazardous substances adopted by the
Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), pursuant to Section 311 of
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendment of 1972, as amended
by the Clean Water Act of 1977 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and the list of
toxic pollutants designated by Congress or the EPA, pursuant to Section
307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, any regulated medical
waste, including, but not limited to, syringes, bandages and discarded
pharmaceutical products, and any material warranting removal or cleanup
in the judgment of the Township's Emergency Management Coordinator.
TOWNSHIP — Includes the Township of Wall's employees, agents, officers,
officials and supporting units as directed by the Office of Emergency
Management, including volunteer fire and first aid companies.
VEHICLE — Any motorized equipment, registered or unregistered,
including, but limited to, a passenger car, motorcycle, truck, tractor trailer,
construction equipment, farm machinery, watercraft, aircraft and trains.
§ 125-1 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 125-2
125:237
VESSEL — Any container, drum, box, cylinder or tank used to hold or
contain or carry or store any hazardous materials, whether or not said
container was manufactured for the containment of a hazardous material.
§ 125-3. Purpose.
§ 125-4. Discharge of hazardous materials prohibited.
§ 125-5. Responsible parties.
Reimbursement to the Township for expendable items used shall be made
by the owner or operator of the vehicle responsible for the hazardous
A. This article provides for the reimbursement for, or the replacement of,
any and all equipment utilized by the Township or costs expended,
without regard to ownership, for the purpose of mitigating, controlling,
or containing any incident in which a hazardous material is involved in
a fire or discharge, or where the potential thereof exists, or for the
prevention of same.
B. This article also provides for the reimbursement for the expenses
incurred by the Township for the wages, (regular or overtime) paid to
its employees, agents, independent contractors, or servants as a result
of an incident involving a hazardous material fire or discharge of a
hazardous material and for the costs of medical and hospital treatment
for injuries incurred by agents, servants and employees of the Township
or its supporting units.
C. This article also provides for a penalty for the violation of the article for
either committing a spill or discharge or for failure to report the same.
A. The discharge of hazardous materials is prohibited. This article shall
not apply to discharge of hazardous materials pursuant to and in
compliance with the conditions of a federal or state permit.
B. Any person who may be subject to liability for a discharge, or becomes
aware of a discharge which occurred prior to or after the effective date
of this article shall immediately notify the Township Office of
Emergency Management at (732)449-4500.
C. Whenever any hazardous material is discharged, the Township may in
its discretion act to remove or arrange for the removal of such
discharge.
D. Any person who has discharged a hazardous material, or who has failed
to report a discharge or who is in any way responsible for any
hazardous material which has been or shall be removed by the
Township, shall be strictly liable, jointly and severally, without regard to
fault, for all cleanup and removal costs and shall be liable for the wages,
(regular and overtime) paid and the costs of medical and hospital
treatment for injuries incurred by the agents, servants and employees
of the Township or its supporting units.
§ 125-2 WALL CODE § 125-5
125:238
material fire or discharge of hazardous material; the owner or person
responsible for the vessel containing the hazardous material involved in
such fire or discharge on public or private property, whether stationary
or in transit and whether accidental or through negligence; the owner or
person responsible for any property from which any discharge of hazardous
material emanates, whether accidental or through negligence; and the
person responsible for the hazardous material fire or discharge of
hazardous material on public or private property, whether accidental or
through negligence.
§ 125-6. Reimbursement for services of recovery company, towing
company or technical assistance.
Any person responsible for any hazardous material fire or discharge
involving a hazardous material must provide reimbursement for services
rendered by any recovery company, towing company or any other technical
assistance called for by the Township to handle such incident. In the event
of a vehicle having been involved in an incident, such vehicle shall be
impounded until such time as it has been deemed safe to proceed by the
responsible official in conjunction and cooperation with the Township, and
until such time as arrangements have been made to reimburse the Township
and the towing company for their expenditures under the terms of this
article.
§ 125-7. Billing and collection of costs; time limit.
The person or entity responsible for any hazardous material fire or
discharge of hazardous materials shall reimburse the Township the full
price of expendable items and costs used to extinguish such fire, or to
stop or contain such leak, or to control such spill, within 45 days after
receipt of a bill therefor. The collecting agency shall utilize its best efforts
to collect costs hereunder and shall reimburse its agents or the supporting
local units of amounts collected. In the event that the collecting agency is
not able to collect said costs or only a portion thereof, the collecting agency
shall be responsible to its agents or its local supporting units for only their
proportionate amount of costs recovered.
§ 125-8. Violations and penalties.
The person or entity responsible for any hazardous material fire or
discharge of hazardous material, who fails to reimburse the Township
within the time required, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,250
per day, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or
both. The person or entity responsible for committing a spill, or who fails to
report same, will be liable for the same penalties as aforesaid.
§ 125-5 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 125-8
125:239
Chapter 129
HOTELS AND MOTELS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Land use and development — See Ch. 140.
§ 129-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any person who is employed either full or part time, at any
hotel or motel, in any capacity.
HOTEL — Any building, including but not limited to any related structure,
accessory building, and land appurtenant thereto, and any part thereof,
which contains 10 or more units of dwelling space or has sleeping facilities
for 10 or more persons and is kept, used, maintained, advertised as, or held
out to be a place where sleeping or dwelling accommodations are available
to transit guests.
MOTEL — A "hotel" with individual entrances from the exterior of the
building to each room or unit.
OWNER — Any person who owns, purports to own or exercise control of any
hotel or motel.
PERSON — Any individual, group of individuals, corporation, association or
other legal entity.
§ 129-2. Prohibitions.
The following acts or activities be and the same are hereby prohibited at
any hotel or motel:
§ 129-3. Hotel and motel room occupancy tax. [Added 3-9-2005 by
Ord. No. 8-200516]
A. No owner or employee shall rent a room or unit in any hotel or motel to
any person, nor permit, suffer or allow the renting of any room or unit
to any person for less than a period of 12 hours.
B. No owner or employee shall rent a room or unit in any hotel or motel to
any person, nor permit, suffer or allow the renting of any room or unit
to any person for a period of time which exceeds 90 days.
16.Editor's Note: This ordinance also stated that: "a copy of this ordinance shall be
transmitted to the State Treasurer and to each hotel or motel located within the Township
of Wall.”
§ 125-8 WALL CODE § 129-3
125:240
§ 129-4. Keeping of registry. [Added 7-14-2010 by Ord. No. 8-2010]
A. There is hereby established a hotel and motel room occupancy tax in
the Township of Wall which shall be a fixed uniform percentage rate of
3% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in
the Township of Wall after May 1, 2005, in a hotel or motel subject to
taxation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3.
B. The hotel and motel room occupancy tax shall be in addition to any
other tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute, local ordinance or
resolution by any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel
room.
C. The hotel and motel room occupancy tax authorized herein shall not be
imposed on the rent for an occupancy if the purchaser, user or
consumer is an entity exempt from the tax imposed on an occupancy
under the Sales and Use Tax Act pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:32B-9(a).
D. In accordance with the requirements of P.L. 2003, c. 114:
(1) All taxes imposed by this section shall be paid by the purchaser.
(2) A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this
section.
(3) A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any
person or to the public in general, in any manner, directly or
indirectly, that the tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor,
that the tax will not be separately charged and stated to the
customer, or that the tax will be refunded to the customer.
(4) Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be
deemed a separate offense and each representation or
advertisement by a vendor for each day that the representation or
advertisement continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(5) The penalty for violation of the foregoing provisions shall be a fine
of not less than $300 and not more than $1,250 for each offense.
E. The tax imposed by this section shall be collected on behalf of the
Township by the person collecting rent from the hotel or motel
customer. Each person required to collect the tax herein imposed shall
be personally liable for the tax imposed, collected or required to be
collected hereunder. Any such person shall have the same right in
respect to collecting the tax from a customer as if the tax were a part of
the rent and payable at the same time; provided that the Chief Financial
Officer of the Township shall be joined as a party in any action or
proceeding brought to collect the tax.
A. Every person operating a hotel or motel in the Township shall keep
therein at all times a standard hotel register in which shall be printed
legibly the true name and home address of each and every guest or
§ 129-3 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 129-4
125:241
person renting or occupying a room or rooms therein. The names
of such guests shall be written upon the register by the persons
themselves, and if they cannot write, the names shall be written in
by the person renting the room or rooms, stating that the persons
occupying such room could not sign their names. The person renting
the room shall also require each person or head of the party who
is occupying such room or rooms to display to the person in charge
of the register one government-issued photo identification or not less
than two other forms of valid identification. The form of identification
that is produced shall be recorded, as well as any information from
the identification that differs from the information supplied by said
person renting the room. The register shall also include the registrant's
home address and telephone numbers and the state license number of
any motor vehicle then being used by or operated by the registrant,
including the make, model and color of the vehicle, and the person
renting the room shall thereupon write, opposite the name so
registered, the number of the room or rooms assigned to each guest
and the time when the same is rented, whether a.m. or p.m. The
register shall be signed by the person renting the rooming unit and
shall show the date of registration and the date when the occupant of
each room shall surrender the room. Until all such entries have been
made in such register, no guest shall be permitted to occupy privately
any room in the house. If the registrant does not write in the register
the information herein required as to the motor vehicle, it shall be the
duty of the operator or a duly authorized employee to write in said
information. At any time any room or rooms are surrendered, it shall be
the further duty of the agent to enter the time thereof in the register
opposite the names of all official persons making such surrender.
B. The register shall be available at all times to any code enforcement or
police officer of the Township upon request.
C. No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted to rent a room without
the permission of a parent or legal guardian. If the parent is not present
at the time the room is rented, the minor shall present proof, in writing,
of parental consent, the parent’s name and telephone number and a
legal form of identification, as set forth in Subsection A above, of the
parent authorizing the registration.
D. The Construction Official or his or her designee is hereby designated as
the local enforcing agency of the provisions of this ordinance applicable
to motels, hotels or rooming houses having 10 or more sleeping rooms
for guests under the authority vested in him or her at N.J.A.C. 5:10-23.1
The Police Department and any law enforcement agency in whose
jurisdiction any of the above-mentioned places may be located may
inspect such place at any hour to see that the register requirements of
this ordinance are being complied with (N.J.S.A. 29:4-2).
E. The penalty for violation of the foregoing provisions shall be a fine not
less than $100 nor more than $2,000.
§ 129-4 WALL CODE § 129-4
125:242
Chapter 132
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 81.
Occupancy of dwellings — See Ch. 101.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 153.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 171.
Solid waste — See Ch. 191.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 222.
§ 132-1. Enforcing official.
The Construction Official of the Township is hereby designated as the officer
to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter, and he shall serve in such
capacity without any additional salary.
§ 132-2. Adoption of State Housing Code.
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 21, P.L. 1946 (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1) the
New Jersey State Housing Code as approved by the Departments of Health
and Conservation and Economic Development and filed in the Secretary of
State's office is hereby accepted, adopted and established as a standard to
be used as a guide in determining whether dwellings in this Township are
safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation and rental. Three copies of the
New Jersey State Housing Code have been placed on file in the office of the
Township Clerk and are available to all persons desiring to use and examine
the same.
§ 132-3. Inspections by Construction Official.
The Construction Official is hereby authorized and directed to make
inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming
units and premises located within the Township in order that he may
perform his duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants
of dwellings and of the general public. For the purpose of making such
inspections the Construction Official is hereby authorized to enter, examine
and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming
units, and premises. The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling
unit and rooming unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the
Construction Official free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming
unit and its premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of such
inspection, examination and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling or
dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access
to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit, or its premises at all
reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations
as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter
or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful order issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 129-4 HOUSING STANDARDS § 132-4
132:243
§ 132-4. Notice of violation.
§ 132-5. Hearing.
Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with
the enforcement of any provision of this chapter or of any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto may request and shall be granted a hearing on the
matter before the Construction Official, provided such person shall file in
the office of the Township Clerk, a written petition requesting such hearing
and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within 10 days
after the day the notice was served. Upon receipt of such petition the
Construction Official shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall
give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing the petitioner
shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice
should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later
than 10 days after the day on which the petition was filed, provided that
upon application of the petitioner the Construction Official may postpone
the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period,
if in his judgment the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason
for such postponement.
§ 132-6. Action of Construction Official.
After such hearing the Construction Official shall sustain, modify, or
withdraw the notice depending upon his findings as to whether the
provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto have been complied with. If the Construction Official sustains or
A. Whenever the Construction Official determines that there are
reasonable ground to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this chapter, or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person
responsible therefor as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be put in writing.
(2) Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued.
(3) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires.
(4) Be deemed to be properly served upon provided that such notice
shall be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the
case may require, such owner or agent, or the occupant, if a copy
thereof is served upon him personally; or if a copy thereof is sent by
registered mail to his last known address; or if a copy thereof is
posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by
the notice; or if he is served with such notice by any other method
authorized or required under the laws of this state.
B. Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, it taken,
will affect compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with rules
and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 132-4 WALL CODE § 132-6
132:244
modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice served
pursuant to this chapter shall automatically become an order if a written
petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the Township Clerk within
10 days after such notice is served.
§ 132-7. Hearing proceedings to become public record.
The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision of the
Construction Official, shall be summarized, reduced to writing, and entered
as a matter of public record in the office of the Township Clerk. Such record
shall also include a copy of every notice to order issued in connection with
the matter.
§ 132-8. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Construction Official may seek
relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the
laws of the state.
§ 132-9. Emergency; immediate action.
Whenever the Construction Official finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, or safety, he may
without notice or hearing issue an order reciting the existence of such an
emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems necessary
to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding, the other provisions of this
chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such
order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to
the Construction Official shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible.
After such hearing, depending upon his findings as to whether the
provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto have been complied with, the Construction Official shall continue
such order in effect, or modify it, or revoke it.
§ 132-10. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The Construction Official is hereby authorized and empowered to make and
adopt such written rules and regulations as he may deem necessary for the
proper enforcement of the provisions of this chapter; provided, however,
that such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of
this chapter, nor in anyway alter, amend, or supersede any of the provisions
thereof. The Construction Official shall file a certified copy of all rules
and regulations which he may adopt in his office and in the office of the
Township Clerk.
§ 132-11. Compliance with Housing Code required.
No person shall occupy as owner, occupant or rent to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does
not conform to the provisions of the New Jersey State Housing Code
§ 132-6 HOUSING STANDARDS § 132-11
132:245
established hereby as the standard to be used in determining whether a
dwelling is safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation.
Chapter 136
JUNK SHOPS AND JUNK DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Land use and development — See Ch. 140.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 171.
§ 136-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNK or SECOND HAND MATERIALS OR MERCHANDISE — Includes rags,
scrap iron, shavings, borings, old rope, old iron, brass, copper, tin, lead,
or any of their composites, or other old metals or materials, unregistered
automobiles or wrecked automobiles which are unfit for reconditioning for
highway use or transportation, used parts of automobiles, old bottles, glass,
tinware, old or used lumber, plumbing fixtures, piping, shingles, or other
used materials, articles or things, or rags, or old paper or cardboard.
§ 136-2. License required.
No person shall maintain, operate or conduct a junk shop, junkyard or
secondhand yard in, or upon which, junk or secondhand materials, or
merchandise shall be purchased, sold, stored, repaired, renovated or
restored, within the Township without having first obtained a license
therefor from the Township Committee as provided in this chapter.
§ 136-3. Investigation fee; public hearing.
Before any license shall be granted, each applicant shall pay as an
investigation fee the sum of $10 to the Treasurer, whereupon a public
hearing will be held by the Township Committee not more than 15 days or
less than five days from the filing of the application with the Clerk.
§ 136-4. Posting notices of public hearing.
Immediately upon the setting of the date for hearing, the applicant shall
post at three public places fronting on a road or highway, within a radius
of 500 feet from the proposed site of such business, a notice setting forth
that he has made application for a permit to conduct a junkyard and setting
forth the time when and the place where the hearing will be held, and shall,
prior to such hearing, file an affidavit of such posting with the Clerk at least
four days prior to the hearing.
§ 132-11 WALL CODE § 136-5
136:246
§ 136-5. License fee.
The license fee to be paid for the license, in addition to the fee for
investigation, shall be the sum of $100, which shall cover a period from the
issuance thereof until the expiration date thereof as hereinafter set forth.
The application, together with all fees, shall be filed with the Clerk.
§ 136-6. Expiration of licenses.
Each license issued hereunder shall expire on January 1 of each year at 1:00
p.m.
§ 136-7. License not transferable.
The license shall authorize the licensee to conduct the business at the place
specified in the license, and the same shall not be transferable to another
location, nor shall the license be assigned or transferred to any person other
than the person to whom the license is issued.
§ 136-8. Revocation of license.
Any license issued by the Township Committee as herein provided may be
revoked by the Township Committee, in addition to any other penalty, upon
violation of any part of this chapter by any licensee.
§ 136-9. Effect of chapter on dump operations.
This chapter shall not be construed to require the licensing or regulation
of any person licensed by the Township to conduct a dump, provided that
all such junk stored or sold by a licensed dumper shall not be permitted
to accumulate for a longer period than one week, between May 30 and
October 1, and two weeks between October 1 and May 30 and provided
further that it shall not be removed from the dump operated by such
licensed dumper, to any other place in the Township except licensed
premises.
§ 136-10. Property owner's consent required.
If the applicant is not the owner of the site whereon the business is to
be conducted, the owners consent to the conduct of the business shall be
endorsed upon the application.
§ 136-11. Fence required.
A. Each lot or any part thereof used in any of the businesses as
hereinbefore set forth shall be enclosed within a board fence as
provided in Chapter 140, § 140-206, and so constructed that no dust, or
other materials may pass through the same. Such enclosures shall be
maintained in good condition at all times, and no articles shall be piled
as to protrude above such enclosure. The fence shall be painted as shall
be directed by the Township Committee and shall not be used for
§ 136-5 JUNK SHOPS AND JUNK DEALERS § 136-11
136:247
§ 136-12. Inspection.
§ 136-13. Burning of materials.
No licensee shall burn or permit, suffer or allow to be burned upon the
licensed premises any materials in such a manner that the same create a
nuisance to the surrounding neighborhood by excessive smoke or odor or
in such a manner that such burning might tend to extend a conflagration,
either by the location of the fire or by reason of high winds. Such fire shall
be under the continual supervision of the licensee or his employees.
§ 136-14. Number limited; imposition of rules and regulations.
The Township Committee may restrict the number of such licensed
premises within the Township and may impose such rules and regulations
with regard to such business so to be conducted as the Township Committee
may deem necessary and proper for the good government, order, protection
of persons or property, and for the preservation of the public health, safety
and welfare of the Township and its inhabitants.
§ 136-15. Payment of taxes.
No license under this chapter shall be issued for any property until the
Township Clerk receives a certification from the Tax Collector that all real
property taxes and assessments pertaining to the property for which the
license is applied are current and that no such taxes or assessments are
then due and owing.
Chapter 139
LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS: GENERAL
PROVISIONS
advertising purposes except to the extent authorized by the Township
Committee.
B. All goods, articles, merchandise, motor vehicles, or other material
constituting junk or secondhand material or merchandise shall be
stored at all times within the confines of the board fence or enclosure
described in Subsection A above.
A. All licensed premises shall be subject to inspection at all times by the
members of the Police Department and other representatives of the
Township.
B. The contents of each of such licensed premises shall be arranged in an
orderly manner, with all similar things located together so as to
facilitate inspection by the proper authorities.
§ 136-11 WALL CODE § 139-1
139:248
§ 139-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of Wall
pertaining to land use and development adopted by the Township
Committee of the Township of Wall, as revised, codified and consolidated
into Chapter 140 and sections thereof by General Code Publishers Corp.,
and consisting of Chapter 140 of said Code, together with an Appendix, are
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as Chapter 140, "Land use
and Development Regulations," of the Code of the Township of Wall.
§ 139-2. Chapter supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and Chapter 140 of the Code shall supersede the 1977
Revised General Ordinances and all other general and permanent
ordinances pertaining to land use and development regulations enacted
prior to the enactment of this chapter, except such ordinances as are
hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or continued in force.
§ 139-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 139-4. Copy of chapter on file.
A copy of Chapter 140 in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of
the Township Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Township
of Wall by impressing thereon the Seal of the Township, as provided by law,
and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of the
Township, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Chapter 140 is in effect.
§ 139-5. Amendments to chapter.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to Chapter 140, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such chapter so that reference to the "Land Use and Development
Regulations of the Township of Wall" shall be understood and intended
to include such additions and amendments. Whenever such additions,
amendments or supplements to Chapter 140 shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf
book containing said chapter as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 139-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Township of Wall, pursuant to law, shall cause this Adopting
Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township. Sufficient copies of Chapter 140 shall
§ 139-1 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 139-6
139:249
be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public at all
times during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of this
Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of Chapter 140 for
inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the chapter for all purposes.
§ 139-7. Chapter 140 book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by the
Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing Chapter
140 required to be filed in the Clerk's office for the use of the public.
All changes in said chapter and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the
effective date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as
part of Chapter 140 shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements
to said Chapter 140 book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted
therein.
§ 139-8. Sale of Chapter 140 book.
Copies of Chapter 140 may be purchased from the Clerk, or an authorized
agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee to be set by the Township
Committee. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures for the periodic
supplementation of the chapter.
§ 139-9. Altering or tampering with Chapter 140; penalties for
violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of Chapter 140 or to alter or tamper
with such chapter in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of
the Township of Wall to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this
section or any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to
one or more of the following: a fine of not more than $1,250, imprisonment
for not more than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding
90 days, in the discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 139-10. Severability of Chapter 140 provisions.
Each section of Chapter 140 and every part of each section is an
independent section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or
a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall
not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections
or parts thereof.
§ 139-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 139-6 WALL CODE § 139-12
139:250
§ 139-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in Chapter 140 adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Township of Wall which is not
in conflict with the provisions of Chapter 140 shall be deemed to remain in
full force and effect.
§ 139-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of Chapter 140 and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 140-5 of this chapter shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 139-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to December 10, 2003.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
H. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of Chapter 140 pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Township Committee that all such
changes be adopted as part of Chapter 140 as if the ordinances so
changed had been previously formally amended to read as such.
§ 139-12 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 139-14
139:251
Chapter 140
LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Environmental Advisory Committee — See Ch.
6, Art. II.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 90.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 113.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 116.
Hotels and motels — See Ch. 129.
Junk shops and junk dealers — See Ch. 136.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 153.
Soil removal — See Ch. 188.
Solid waste — See Ch. 191.
B. In addition, the following revisions have been made throughout Chapter
140:
(1) Statutory references have been amended to consistently use the
N.J.S.A. citation form and to update repealed or superseded
citations as appropriate by changing them or adding them to the
text or footnoting the new statute.
(2) References to the "Revised General Ordinances" or to "this
Revision" have been changed to the "Code of the Township of Wall"
or "this Code."
(3) The references to the Department of Environmental Protection and
Energy (DEPE) have been changed to Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP).
§ 139-14 WALL CODE § 139-14
139:252
Part 1
General Provisions
ARTICLE I
Title; Authority; Purpose; Interpretation
§ 140-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Use and
Development Regulations of the Township of Wall."
§ 140-2. Legislative authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority provided by the Municipal
Land Use Law, Chapter 291, Laws of New Jersey 1975 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.).
§ 140-3. Purpose.
The intent and purpose of this chapter is to exercise the authority delegated
to municipalities under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. to regulate development
and to promote good planning practices. The intent of the chapter is:
A. To guide the appropriate use or development of all lands in the
Township, in a manner which will promote the public health, safety,
morals, and general welfare;
B. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters;
C. To provide adequate light, air and open space;
D. To ensure that the development of the Township does not conflict with
the development and general welfare of neighboring municipalities, the
county and the state as a whole;
E. To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons,
neighborhoods, communities and regions and the preservation of the
environment;
F. To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds
by the coordination of public development with land use polices;
G. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
residential, recreational, industrial, and commercial uses and open
space, both public and private, according to their respective
environmental requirements in order to meet the needs of all the
citizens of the Township;
§ 140-1 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-3
139:253
§ 140-4. Minimum standards and interpretation.
In the application and interpretation of this chapter, all provisions hereof
shall be held to be minimum standards or requirements adopted for the
promotion of the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of
the Township. Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance
with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or
ordinances, the most restrictive or those imposing the higher standard shall
govern.
§ 140-5. Repealer.
Chapter XIV, Land Use Procedures; Chapter XV, Zoning, Chapter XVI, Site
Plan; and Chapter XVII, Land Subdivision, are hereby repealed. Any other
ordinance of the Township of the Revised General Ordinances of the
Township of Wall, 1977, as amended and supplemented, which contains
provisions inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent
of such inconsistency of such ordinance, permit or approval; provided,
however, that any building permit, variance, special use permit, conditional
use permit, or other permit validly issued pursuant to any such ordinance
shall remain valid and effective and shall continue to be governed by the
terms and conditions of such ordinance.
§ 140-6. Effective date.
H. To encourage the location and design of transportation routes which
will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging location of such
facilities and routes which result in congestion or blight;
I. To promote a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and good civic design and arrangements;
J. To promote the conservation of historic sites and districts, open space,
energy resources and valuable natural resources and to prevent urban
sprawl and degradation of the environment through improper use of
land;
K. To encourage planned developments which incorporate the best
features of design and relate the type, design, and layout of residential,
commercial, and recreational development of the particular site;
L. To encourage senior citizen community housing and affordable housing
of various types for low and moderate income households;
M. To encourage coordination of the various public and private procedures
and activities shaping land development with a view of lessening the
cost of such development and to the more efficient use of land;
N. To promote utilization of renewable energy sources; and
O. To promote the maximum practicable recovery and recycling of
recyclable materials from municipal solid waste.
§ 140-3 WALL CODE § 140-6
139:254
A. This chapter shall take effect on January 1, 2004.
B. After the effective date of the ordinance adopting this chapter, all new
applications for development and all pending applications which have
not been granted preliminary approval shall be subject to the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 140-6 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-6
139:255

ARTICLE II
Violations and Penalties; Enforcement
§ 140-7. Enforcement.
The duties of administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter
are hereby conferred upon the Land Use Officer and the Code Enforcement
Officer, who shall have such powers as are conferred by this chapter, and
as reasonably may be implied. In no case shall a development permit be
granted for a subdivision or the construction of or alteration of any building
or site where the proposed construction, alteration or use thereof would
be in violation of any provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of
such officials or his designee to cause any building, plans or premises to
be inspected or examined and to order in writing the remedying of any
conditions found to exist in violation of this chapter, and shall have the
right to enter any buildings or premises during the daytime, or other normal
business hours of the premises, in the course of performing these duties.
§ 140-8. Violations and penalties.
For any and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, the applicant,
subdivider, developer, owner, general agent or contractor of a building
or premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist, and
the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises where such
violations have been committed or shall exist, and the owner, general
agency, contractor, lessee or tenant of any part of a building or premises in
which part such violation has been committed or shall exist, and the general
agent, architect, building contractor or any other person who commits,
takes part or assists in such violation or who maintains any building or
premises in which any such violation shall exist, shall for each and every
day that such violation continues, be subject to a fine as stated in Chapter
1, Article I. The following shall not be construed to be an exhaustive list of
those actions or omissions which constitute violations of this chapter. Other
activities prohibited by this chapter shall also be considered violations.
§ 140-9. Enumeration of acts considered violations.
It shall be a violation of the provisions of this chapter to:
A. Erect any building or structure or move, alter, add to or enlarge any
building or structure or use, design or arrange any land, building or
portion of a building or structure except in conformity with all
regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
B. Engage in any of the activities for which a development permit is
required prior to the issuance of the development permit.
C. After issuance of a development permit, fail to follow, during
construction, the approved site or subdivision plans, the requirements
of this chapter, the conditions of approval contained in the resolution of
a municipal agency.
§ 140-7 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-9
139:257
§ 140-10. Unapproved subdivisions.
It shall be unlawful, before final subdivision approval has been granted, for
any person to transfer, sell or agree to transfer or sell, except pursuant to
an agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision approval, any land
which forms a part of a subdivision for which municipal approval is required
by this chapter.
§ 140-11. Failure to maintain detention facilities.
In the event that a detention or retention facility becomes a danger to public
safety or public health, or if it is in need of maintenance, the municipality
shall so notify in writing the responsible person. The responsible person
shall have 14 days to effect such maintenance and repair of the facility in a
manner that is approved by the Township Engineer or his designee. Should
the responsible person fail or refuse to perform such maintenance or repair,
the Township may effect the necessary work and the cost thereof shall be
charged to the responsible person.
§ 140-12. False swearing.
Should it be discovered, after final approval, that there was any
misrepresentation of any statements or proofs contained in any application
for approval or in any representations made to induce approval, the
Township may, revoke such approval, which shall be void and of no effect.
§ 140-13. Administration and enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the
Land Use Officer and the Code Enforcement Officer. It shall also be the
duty of the Police Department and Fire Prevention Bureau to report any
violations of the provisions of this chapter in writing to the Land Use Officer
and at the same time to send a copy of such report to the Township Clerk.
The Land Use Officer shall not issue any permit or certificate of occupancy
for any structure or use which does not conform with the provisions of this
chapter. It shall be the duty of the Land Use Officer upon the filing with him
D. Fail to observe any direction of the Land Use Officer or his designee
with regard to the suspension of any work not in conformance with this
chapter, the approved plans or the conditions of any resolution of a
municipal agency or of a development permit.
E. Fail to observe any direction of the Land Use Officer or his designee
with regard to the correction, of any work not in conformance with the
approved plans or the conditions of any resolution of a municipal
agency or of the development permit.
F. After completion of a development, fail to operate and maintain the site
in conformance with the approved plans, any condition of resolution of
a municipal agency or of the development permit or any of the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 140-9 WALL CODE § 140-13
139:258
of any application for a zoning permit or certificate of occupancy for any
structure or use which does not conform with all provisions of this chapter
to notify the applicant in writing to that effect, stating in what respect such
structure or use is nonconforming.
§ 140-13 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-13
139:259

ARTICLE III
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 140-14. Word usage.
§ 140-15. Hierarchy of definitions.
Words or word groups which are not defined below shall first have the
meaning set forth in the Municipal Land Use Law, next have the meaning
set forth in the Uniform Construction Code and finally have the meaning as
given in Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
§ 140-16. Abbreviations.
Certain abbreviations and acronyms in this chapter are defined for the
purpose herein as follows:
ANSI — The American National Standards Institute.
ASCE — The American Society of Civil Engineers.
ASTM — The American Society for Testing Materials.
AWWA — The American Water Works Association.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, as established under the Fair
Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.).
A. Words used in the present tense include the future.
B. The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
C. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" indicates a permissive
action.
D. The term "such as," where used herein, shall be considered as
introducing typical or illustrative, rather than an entirely exclusive or
inclusive, designation.
E. The word "zone" includes the word "district."
F. The word "occupied" includes the phrase "designed to be occupied" and
the phrase "intended to be occupied."
G. The word "abut" shall include the words "adjacent" and "next to."
H. The word "used" shall include "arranged to be used", "designed to be
used," or "intended to be used."
I. The word "person" shall include "corporation" as well as "individual."
J. The word "demonstrate" shall mean "to provide such visual, written or
oral information as will enable the designated reviewing agency or
official to ascertain the scope and nature of a proposed use or
operation, and to render an informed opinion or decision thereon."
§ 140-14 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-16
139:261
DBH — Diameter breast height.[Added 5-10-2006 by Ord. No. 12-2006]
GFA — See "gross floor area."
GLA — See "gross leasable area."
IES — The Illuminating Engineering Society.
NJDEP — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
NJDOT — The New Jersey Department of Transportation.
SCS — The Soil Conservation Service.
§ 140-17. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein shall
be interpreted or defined as follows unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE — A building, structure
or use, the nature of which is related to and customarily incidental and
subordinate to that of the principal use on the lot. Where an accessory
building is attached to the principal building by a wall or roof, such
accessory building shall be considered a part of the principal building for
the purpose of determining the required setback dimensions.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Land Use Officer of the Township of
Wall, or his designee.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Housing which is subject to restriction as to
sales or rental price and occupancy set forth by COAH such that it will be
available for purchase or rent by and occupied by low- and/or moderateincome
households and will qualify as an affordable housing unit by COAH
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:91 and 5:92.
AIRPLANE HANGER, PRIVATE — A hangar for the storage of four or fewer
single-motor planes in which volatile or flammable oil is not handled, stored
or kept other than that which is contained in the fuel storage tank of the
plane.
AIRPLANE HANGER, PUBLIC — A building for the storage, care or repair of
private or commercial airplanes not included in the term "private airplane
hangar."
ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building or structure, means a change or
rearrangement in the structural supports; or a change in the exterior form
or a change in height, width or depth; or moving a building or structure
from one location or position to another; or changing, adding to or removing
from or otherwise affecting the exterior form of a building or structure.
AMUSEMENT ARCADE — Any place of business which derives its income
primarily from the operation of amusement devices.
AMUSEMENT DEVICES — Any machine, contrivance, or device, which,
upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disk or key to a slot, crevice,
or other openings, or by the payment of any price, is operated or may
§ 140-16 WALL CODE § 140-17
139:262
be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment, or
amusement, whether or not registering a score, and shall include, but not
be limited to electronic games and devices or other types of electronically
operated game devices, Skee-Ball, mechanical games operations or
transactions similar thereto, by whatever name they may be called and shall
not include pool or billiard tables.
APARTMENT — A dwelling unit in a multifamily building.
APARTMENT, EFFICIENCY — A dwelling including the following separate
rooms or a combination thereof: a bathroom with toilet and bath facilities
and a combination living room and bedroom, with a combination kitchen
and dining room; or a combination living room, bedroom and dining room
with separate kitchen; or a combination living room, bedroom, dining room
and kitchen.
APARTMENT, ONE-BEDROOM — A dwelling including the following
separate rooms or a combination thereof: a kitchen; a dining room; a living
room; or a combination kitchen and dining room with a separate living
room; or a separate kitchen with combined living room and dining room
area (provided that in no case shall a kitchen be combined with a living
room); a bathroom with a toilet and bath facilities; and a bedroom. No
additional room shall be provided, except hallways and suitable closet and
storage space.
APARTMENT, THREE-BEDROOM — A dwelling including the following
separate rooms or a combination thereof: a kitchen; a dining room; a living
room; or a combination kitchen and dining room with a separate living
room; or a separate kitchen with a combined living room and dining area
(provided that in no case shall a kitchen be combined with a living room);
a bathroom with toilet and bath facilities; a master bedroom, a second
bedroom, a third bedroom. No additional room shall be provided, except
hallways and suitable closet and storage space.
APARTMENT, TWO-BEDROOM — A dwelling including the following
separate rooms or combination thereof: a kitchen; a dining room; a living
room; or a combination kitchen and dining room a separate living room; or
a separate kitchen with a combined living room and dining area (provided
that in no case shall a kitchen be combined with a living room); a bathroom
with toilet and bath facilities; a master bedroom; a second bedroom. No
additional room shall be provided, except hallways and suitable closet and
storage space.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-34 or 40:55D-36.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board unless a different agency
is designated by ordinance when acting pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A.
40:55D.1 et seq.
§ 140-17 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-17
139:263
ATTACHED RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — A residential building physically
attached to the principal building with a length of common wall between
the two which is at least 30% as long as the length of the wall of the
principal building, at grade, where the attachment occurs, but no less than
10 feet in length. A physical interior doorway access between the two
buildings in compliance with the International Residential Code shall be
provided.[Added 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 29-2006]
ATTIC — The space between the ceiling beams of the top story and the roof
rafters.
ATTIC, HABITABLE — An attic which has a stairway as a means of access
and egress and in which the ceiling area at a height of 7 1/3 feet (2,235 mm)
above the attic floor is not more than 1/3 of the area of the next floor below.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building which partly or completely below
grade. (See "story above grade.")
BILLBOARD — A structure utilized for advertising an establishment, an
activity, a product, a service or entertainment, which is sold, produced,
manufactured, available or furnished at a place other than on the property
on which the structure is located.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Board of Adjustment of the Township of
Wall established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69.
BUFFER — A landscaped area containing no structures other than those
specifically permitted hereto designed to act as a visual screen between
a potentially unsightly or otherwise undesirable or incompatible use and
adjacent properties and to preserve the character of each use.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to
permanent, temporary, or continuous use or occupancy and having a roof.
BUILDING AREA — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the
main grade level of the principal building and on all accessory buildings
excluding uncovered porches, terraces and steps.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The ratio of building area to lot area, expressed
as a percentage.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — That central portion of any lot between required
yards and/or setback lines.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the finished grade at all corners of the building to the highest
point of the roof for flat roofs; the average distance between the eaves
and ridge level for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs; and to the deck level for
mansard roofs. Notwithstanding the above, where any finished grade at a
building corner shall be three feet or more above the original grade, the
original grade at such building corner shall be utilized in the calculation of
the average elevation of the finished grade.
BUILDING LINE — A line formed by the intersection of a horizontal plane
and a vertical plane that coincides with the most projected exterior of the
building.
§ 140-17 WALL CODE § 140-17
139:264
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued for the alteration or erection of
a building or structure in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform
Construction Code. 17
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which it is situated.
BULK STORAGE — The stockpiling or warehousing of materials, which
may or may not be enclosed within a structure, including, but not limited
to, sand, gravel, dirt, asphalt, lumber, pipes, plumbing supplies, metal,
concrete and insulation.
CABLE TELEVISION COMPANY — A cable television company as defined
by N.J.S.A. 48:5A-3.
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches, six inches
above ground level for trees up to four inches in diameter, and measured 12
inches above ground level for trees over four inches in diameter.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — A governmental acquisition of real property or
a major construction project undertaken by the Township.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM — A proposed schedule of future
projects listed in order of construction priority together with cost estimates
and the anticipated means of financing each project.
CAPPED SYSTEM — A completed water supply and/or sewerage system put
in place for future use, rather than to meet immediate development needs.
CAR WASH — A facility for the washing and cleaning of motor vehicles
using production line methods with a conveyer, blower and other
mechanical devices or providing space, material and equipment to
individuals for self-service washing and cleaning of motor vehicles.
CEILING HEIGHT — The clear vertical distance from the finished floor to
the finished ceiling.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETENESS — A certificate issued by the
Administrative Officer after all required submissions have been made in
proper form, certifying that an application for development is complete.
CERTIFICATE OF NONCONFORMANCE — A document issued by the Land
Use Officer for a nonconforming use or structure existing at the time
of passage of the Zoning Ordinance or any amendment thereto which,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48, may be continued upon the lot or in the
building so occupied. Such certificate may be obtained at the owner's
request upon any change of ownership for a nonconforming use, structure
or lot.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued by the Code
Enforcement/Construction Official upon completion of construction or
alteration of any building; or change in use of any building; or change in
occupancy of a nonresidential building. Said certificate shall acknowledge
17.Editor's Note: See Ch. 90, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 140-17 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-17
139:265
compliance with all requirements of this chapter, the approvals granted by
a municipal agency and any other applicable requirements.
CHANGE OF USE — An alteration in the use of a building or property
heretofore existing to a different use as distinguished in the Zoning
Ordinance by NAICS subsector and any increase in the number of dwelling
units in a structure.[Amended 4-4-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012]
CHILD DAY-CARE SERVICES — This industry comprises establishments
primarily engaged in providing day care of infants or children. These
establishments generally care for preschool children, but may care for older
children when they are not in school and may also offer prekindergarten
educational programs.
CHURCH — See "place of worship."
CIRCULATION — Systems, structures and physical improvements for the
movement of people, goods, water, air, sewage or power by such means
as streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers, airways, pipes and
conduits, and the handling of people and goods by such means as terminals,
stations, warehouses, and other storage buildings or transshipment points.
CLUBHOUSE — A building to house a club or social organization not
conducted for profit and which is not an adjunct to or operated by or in
connection with a public tavern, cafe or other public place.
COASTAL AREA FACILITIES REVIEW ACT (CAFRA) PERMIT — A permit
issued for a specific development within the coastal area of New Jersey in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 13:19-1 et seq. and in accordance with rules and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
COMMITTEE — The Township Committee of the Township of Wall.
COMMON LATERAL — A lateral serving more than one unit.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to a
site designated as a development, and designed and intended for the use
or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. Common open
space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as
are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents and
owners of the development.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED —
Any community residential facility licensed pursuant to P.L. 1977, c. 448
(N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et seq.) providing food, shelter, and personal guidance,
under such supervision as required, to not more than 15 developmentally
disabled or mentally ill persons, who require assistance, temporarily or
permanently, in order to live in the community, and shall include, but not
be limited to group homes, halfway houses, intermediate care facilities,
supervised apartment living arrangements and hostels. Such a residence
shall not be considered a health care facility within the meaning of the
Health Care Facilities Planning Act (P.L. 1971, c. 136; N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et
seq.).
§ 140-17 WALL CODE § 140-17
139:266
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE — Any
shelter approved for a purchase of a service contract and certified pursuant
to standards and procedures established by regulation of the Department
of Human Services pursuant to P.L. 1979, c. 337 (N.J.S.A. 30:14-1 et seq.)
providing food, shelter, medical care, legal assistance, personal guidance,
and other services to not more than 15 persons who have been victims of
domestic violence, including of children to such victims, who temporarily
require shelter and assistance in order to protect their physical or
psychological welfare.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application for development which
complies in all respects with the appropriate submission requirements set
forth in this chapter, and the rules and regulations of the municipal agency,
and all accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of
the application for development, provided that the municipal agency may
require such additional information not specified in this chapter, or any
revisions in the accompanying documents, as are reasonably necessary to
make an informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for
approval of the application for development have been met. The application
shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional information.
An application shall be certified as complete immediately upon the
satisfaction of all requirements of this chapter and the rules and regulations
of the municipal agency, and shall be deemed complete as of the day it is so
certified by the Administrative Officer for purposes of the commencement
of the time period for action by the municipal agency.
CONCEPT PLAN — A preliminary presentation and attendant
documentation of a proposed development of sufficient accuracy to be used
for the purpose of discussion.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as
contained in this chapter, and upon the issuance of an authorization therefor
by the Planning Board.
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — Development other than planned
development as defined herein.
COUNTY MASTER PLAN — A composite of the Comprehensive Plan or
Master Plan for the physical development of Monmouth County with the
accompanying maps, plats, charts, and descriptive and explanatory matter
adopted by the Monmouth County Planning Board.
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the County of
Monmouth.
COURT or COURTYARD — An unoccupied open space on the same lot with
a building, which is bounded on three or more sides by building walls.
CUL-DE-SAC — A local street with only one outlet and having the other end
for the reversal of traffic movement.
DAY(S) — Calendar day(s).
§ 140-17 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-17
139:267
DAY CAMP — A licensed, organized and supervised daytime facility used for
recreational purposes.
DECK — An exterior floor system supported on at least two opposing sides
by an adjoining structure and/or fort, piers or other independent supports.
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross acre of land
to be developed.
DEVELOPABLE AREA — Land area excluding wetlands and wetland
transition areas, beaches, one-hundred-year floodplains, water areas, slopes
of 15% or greater and easements exceeding 25 feet in width.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure, or of any
mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension or use of land, for which
permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and this
chapter.
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT — The same as "zoning permit."
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — This chapter, the Official Map or other
municipal regulation of the use and development of land.
DOG KENNEL — A lot or building use for the breeding for sale or boarding
of dogs.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means and includes control of runoff during and
after construction or development to minimize erosion and sedimentation,
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges, to
induce water recharge into the ground where practical, to lessen nonpoint
pollution, to maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions as well as for drainage and the means necessary for water supply
preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY/EASEMENT — The lands required for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, or required along a
natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for
the flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage.
DRIVEWAY — A paved or unpaved area used for ingress or egress of
vehicles, and allowing access from a street to a building or other structure
or facility.
DUPLEX — A residential building containing two dwelling units, which are
separated from each other by a floor which is unpierced except for access to
the outside or to a common foyer, a common cellar or a common basement.
§ 140-17 WALL CODE § 140-17
139:268
DWELLING — Any building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively
for one or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, ATTACHED — A building containing one dwelling unit, located
on a separate building lot, separated by vertical common walls from
dwellings located on two sides.
DWELLING, DETACHED — A detached building designed for or containing
one dwelling unit on a separate building lot.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE — A building designed for, or containing three
or more dwelling units, which are entirely separated from each other by
vertical walls or horizontal floors, unpierced, except for access to outside or
a common area.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A residential dwelling with a single
driveway and garage; a single main entrance at the front of the dwelling
facing the street; common utilities and one distinct set of living facilities,
which is occupied by a family as defined herein.[Added 9-9-1998 by Ord.
No. 20-1998]
DWELLING UNIT — A building or part thereof having cooking, sleeping,
and sanitary facilities designed for, or occupied by one household, and
which is entirely separated from any other dwelling unit in the building
by vertical waits, or horizontal floors, unpierced, except for access to the
outside or a common area.
EASEMENT — The grant of a right to use land for certain private, public or
quasi-public purposes.
ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE — An advisory board
appointed in accordance with Chapter 6, Article I, of the Code of the
Township of Wall.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT(EIS) — A compilation of studies,
reports, documents and findings of fact prepared by an applicant as part
of and for a development application; an environmental impact statement
meeting the requirements of the N.J.S.A. 13:19-1 et seq., Costal Area Facility
Review Act, and specifically outlined in N.J.A.C. 7:7E-1 et seq. of said rules
and regulations promulgated in compliance with said Act may be accepted
in lieu of the EIR.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock by water, wind,
ice and gravity.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Underground gas, electrical, telephone,
telegraph, steam or water transmission or distribution systems, including
mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables; and including normal above
ground appurtenances such as fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, light
standards, poles, traffic signals, and hydrants, and other similar equipment
and accessories in connection therewith, reasonable necessary for the
furnishing of adequate service by public utilities or municipal or other
governmental agencies or for the public health, safety or general welfare.
§ 140-17 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-17
139:269
EXEMPT DEVELOPMENT — That site plan and/or subdivision approval
shall not be required prior to issuance of a development permit for the
following:
FAMILY — One or more persons living together as a single entity or
nonprofit housekeeping unit which exhibits the kind of stability,
permanency and functional life-style which is equivalent to that of the
traditional family unit, as distinguished from individuals or groups
occupying a hotel, club, fraternity or sorority house. The family shall be
deemed to include necessary servants when servants share the common
housekeeping facilities and services.
FARM — Any parcel of land, five acres or larger in size, used for gain
for the raising of agricultural products, livestock, nursery plants or
silvicultural.[Amended 7-13-2005 by Ord. No. 20-2005]
FAST-FOOD CONVENIENCE STORE — A relatively small food market
where prepackaged foods, magazines and newspapers, cigarettes, dairy
products, and/or similar foods and items are sold for consumption or use
elsewhere, including those establishments where, as a secondary use of the
premises, prepared foods (e.g., meats, cheeses, salads, etc.) are sold over
the counter in sandwiches or are packaged to take out.
Construction, additions, or alterations related to single-family or twofamily
detached dwellings or their accessory structures on individual
lots.
A.
Any change in occupancy which is not a change in use (as herein
defined).
B.
Individual applications for accessory mechanical equipment, whose
operation and location conforms to the design and performance
standards of this chapter, and whose installation is on a site already
occupied by an active principal use for which site plan approval is not
otherwise required.
C.
Sign(s) to be installed on a site already occupied by a principal use for
which site plan approval is not otherwise required and provided such
signs) conform to the applicable design and zoning district regulations
of this chapter.
D.
E. Construction or installation of essential services (as defined herein).
Consolidation of property and conveyances so as to combine existing
lots, which are not considered to be subdivisions in accordance with the
definition of "subdivision" herein.
F.
Demolition of any structure or building not listed on the State or
National Register of Historic Places or identified as a historic site on the
Master Plan, provided that the demolition does not involve changes to
the site outside the limits of the structure or building nor does it create
any nonconformity.
G.
§ 140-17 WALL CODE § 140-17
139:270
FENCE — A structure forming an enclosure of an open area and designed
to prevent straying from within or intrusion from without said enclosure, or
to provide a visual barrier for the purposes of assuring privacy.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action taken on a preliminarily approved
major subdivision or site plan after all conditions, engineering plans and
other requirements have been completed or fulfilled and the required
improvements have been installed or guarantees properly posted for their
completion, or approval conditioned upon the posting of such guarantees.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of a subdivision which
is submitted to the Planning Board for final approval in accordance with
procedures and requirements contained herein, and which if approved,
shall be filed with the proper county recording officer.
FLAG LOT — A lot not meeting the minimum frontage requirements of
this chapter, which lot has access to a public road provided by a relatively
narrow, private right-of-way, easement or driveway. The lot will generally
but not exclusively be in the shape of an "L" or "T," with the larger buildable
portion of the lot being known as the "flag" and the right-of-way being
known as the "staff."
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Those portions of the Township of Wall comprised
of those areas designated as A, A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, and A6 on the Flood
Insurance Rate Maps 1-01-04, Township of Wall, New Jersey, Monmouth
County (effective date February 16, 1977) most recently issued and
approved by the Federal Insurance Administration, Department of Housing
and Urban Development, as the same may, from time to time, be amended
by the Federal Insurance Administration in accordance with the procedure
provided by law.
FLOODPLAIN — The area of relatively flat land adjoining a watercourse and
subject to flooding from an overflow of said watercourse, including lands
mapped by the Soil Conservation Service on maps entitled "Classes of Land
According to Use Capability" filed in the office of the Soil Conservation
Service in Freehold, New Jersey, as any one or all of the following:
C-231,
A-O
C540,
A-O
C540,
A-+
and C540
B-+
FLOOR — A horizontal surface within an enclosed building or structure
having an interior clearance of seven feet or greater.
FLOOR AREA —
The total enclosed floor area of a building used for residential purposes
or for business or commercial activities which, in the case of the
latter includes customer facilities, showcase facilities, storage and sales
facilities.
A.
Habitable floor area shall be computed as follows:
Habitable floor area shall be considered as such any time ceilings
and walls are covered,
(1)
B.
§ 140-17 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-17
139:271
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The sum of the area of all floors of buildings or
structures compared to the area of the total site.
FOWL — A bird of any kind.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building used for storage of vehicles and
materials accessory to the principal building on the lot. Accessory garages
shall be permitted to have a bathroom that includes a toilet and sink, except
that no bathing facilities shall be permitted. Under no circumstance is a
private garage permitted for habitation.[Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord.
No. 29-2006; 4-24-2019 by Ord. No. 4-2019]
GARAGE, REPAIR — Any building other than a private garage, available to
the public, operated as a business and which is used for storage, repair,
rental, lubrication, washing, servicing, adjusting, or equipping of
automobiles or other motor vehicles, but not including the storage or sale
of gasoline or other fuels or auto body repair.
GENERAL INDUSTRIAL PARK — A comprehensively planned development
of one or more lots used as permitted in the BI-10 Zone and by this chapter,
with internal common access to an arterial or collector road.
GOVERNING BODY — The Township Committee of the Township of Wall.
GRADE — A reference plane consisting of the average finished ground level
adjacent to a structure, building or facility at all visible exterior walls.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The floor area within the perimeter of the outside
walls of the building under consideration without deduction of hallways,
stairs, closets, thickness of walls, columns or other features. Open areas
above a floor which are considered open atrium areas and which do not add
to the physical area of floors above shall not be considered as gross floor
area.[Amended 11-24-2009 by Ord. No. 29-2009]
GROSS LEASABLE AREA — The sum of rentable area of all floors of
a building under consideration. Rentable area shall be measured in
accordance with ANSI Z65.1-1980 which measures to the inside finished
surface of the dominant portion of the permanent outer building walls,
excluding any major vertical penetrations. The finished surface shall
exclude the thickness of any special surfacing materials such as paneling,
furring strips or carpet. The dominant portion of the outer wall shall mean
Ground floor area shall be considered as the overall dimensions of
the dwelling exclusive of porches, garages, patios and cellars.
(2)
Second floor areas shall be considered as floor area only where the
sidewalls are at least four feet in height over a finished floor and
reach a ceiling height of at least seven feet.
(3)
Split level dwelling shall be considered as one story or ground level
dwellings unless a third level is constructed. To be considered a
split level dwelling a building shall contain three or more floor
levels each separated from the adjoining floor level by a vertical
distance of more than one foot three inches but less than seven
feet.
(4)
§ 140-17 WALL CODE § 140-17
139:272
that portion which is 50% or more of the vertical floor-to-ceiling dimension
or else the portion that intersects the finished floor. "Major vertical
penetrations" shall mean stairs, elevator shafts, flues, pipe shafts, vertical
ducts and the like and their enclosing walls but shall not include stairs,
dumbwaiters, lifts and the like exclusively serving areas intended to be used
by multifloor occupants.
GROUP HOME — Any "group home," "community residence for the
developmentally disabled," "community shelter for victims of domestic
violence," "community residence for persons with head injuries," or
"community residence for the terminally ill," as defined at N.J.S.A
40:55D-66c, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.2.[Added
12-28-2016 by Ord. No. 14-2016]
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Materials including, but not limited to,
inorganic mineral acids of sulfur, fluorine, chloride, nitrogen, chromium,
phosphorus, selenium and arsenic and their common salts; lead, nickel, and
mercury and their inorganic salts or metallo-organic derivatives; coal tar
acids, such as phenols and cresols, and their salts; petroleum products; and
radioactive materials.
HEALTH CARE FACILITY — A facility or institution, whether public or
private, engaged principally in providing services for health maintenance
organizations, diagnosis, or treatment of human disease, pain, injury,
deformity, or physical condition, including, but not limited to, a general
hospital, special hospital, mental hospital, public health center, diagnostic
center, treatment center, rehabilitation center, extended or long-term care
facility, skilled nursing home, nursing home, intermediate bio-analytical
laboratory (except as specifically excluded hereunder) or central services
facility serving one or more such institutions but excluding institutions
that provide healing solely by prayer and excluding such bio-analytical
laboratories as are independently owned and operated, and are not owned,
operated, managed, or controlled, in whole or in part, directly or indirectly,
but any one or more health care facilities, and the predominant source of
business of which is not by contract with health care facilities within the
State of New Jersey and which solicit or accept specimens and operate
predominantly in interstate commerce.
HIGH-WATER LINE — A line showing the upper inland wetlands boundary
(a biological "high-water line") on a series of maps prepared by NJDEP in
accordance with the provisions of the Wetlands Act, N.J.S.A. 13:9A-1 et seq.,
said line being established from photographs and each of these maps being
on file in the office of the County Clerk, Monmouth County, New Jersey, and
in the office of the Clerk of the Township of Wall, New Jersey.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — One or more historic sites and intervening or
surrounding property significantly affecting or affected by the quality and
character of a historic site or sites.
HISTORIC SITE — Any real property, man-made structure, natural object
or configuration or any portion or group of the foregoing which as been
formally designed in the Township Master Plan as being of historical,
archaeological, cultural, scenic or architectural significance.
§ 140-17 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-17
139:273
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — A professional office conducted as a
conditional use within the place by this of residence of a member of a
recognized profession, as specified by NAICS Sector 54 and listed as
permitted uses in the HB Zones of this chapter.
HOSPITAL — A building or series of buildings, primarily for treatment of
patients to be housed on the premises, and providing health, medical and
surgical care for sick or injured human beings, including as an integral
part of the building, such related facilities as laboratories, outpatient
departments, clinics, training facilities, central service facilities and staff
offices. The definition of "hospital" shall also include nursing homes.
HOTEL — A building containing rooms used, rented out or hired for
sleeping purposes by guests where a general kitchen, dining room, banquet
room and/or ancillary facilities such as a swimming pool and guest service
facilities are provided within the building, but where separate kitchen
facilities are not permitted in each individual room.
HOUSEHOLD — The person or persons occupying a dwelling unit.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — The ratio of all surfaces covered by impervious
materials, including building coverage, to the total lot area, expressed as a
percentage.
IMPROVED PUBLIC STREET — Any street which has been dedicated and
accepted prior to the adoption of this chapter, or which complies in width
and construction with the standards set forth in this chapter and any
amendments thereto and has been accepted by the Township of Wall.
INDUSTRIAL PARK — A planned industrial development, developed in
accordance with a comprehensive plan which includes detailed provisions
for streets and essential services.
JUNK- OR SALVAGE YARD — The use of any area and/or structure for
the keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metal, glass, paper,
cordage, or other scrap material, or for the dismantling, demolition or
abandonment of structures, automobiles or other vehicles, equipment and
machinery, or parts thereof.
LAND — Any real property including improvements and fixtures on, above
or below the surface.
LAND USE OFFICER — The person empowered by Township ordinances to
administer and enforce the provisions of the Land Use and Development
Regulations of the Township of Wall. The Land Use Officer shall also serve
as the Zoning Officer and the Administrative Officer of the Township.
LIVERY STABLE — Keeping horses for hire.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT AREA — The size of the lot measured within the lot lines and expressed
in terms of acres or square feet, but excluding that part of a lot included
within a street right-of-way.
§ 140-17 WALL CODE § 140-17
139:274
LOT, CORNER — A parcel of land at the intersection of and fronting on two
or more streets.
LOT COVERAGE — The percentage of a lot occupied by buildings.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear
of lot lines, measured in the general direction of its side lot lines. For
corner lots, the depth shall be measured from the front property line to
the most opposite property line. For corner lots, see the definition of "lot
width."[Added 5-9-2007 by Ord. No. 11-2007]
LOT FRONTAGE — The horizontal distance measured along a continuous
uninterrupted lot line which is coexistent with a street right-of-way
line.[Added 2-9-2000 by Ord. No. 2-2000]
LOT LINE — Any line designating the extent or boundary of a lot which shall
further be defined as follows:
LOT, THROUGH — A lot that fronts upon two parallel streets or that fronts
upon two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.[Added
11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 29-2006]
LOT WIDTH — The shortest horizontal distance between the side lot lines,
measured through the midpoint of a line parallel to the front lot line located
at the minimum building setback line required in the zone in which the lot is
located. On corner lots, one front lot line shall be considered a side lot line
only for the purpose of determining lot width and lot depth. The property
line along a frontage which is to be considered the side lot line shall be the
one with the shortest distance to its most opposite interior lot line, which
shall also be considered a side lot line. The line opposite to the other front
line shall be considered the rear lot line. For corner lots with equivalent
distances between the front lot lines and their most opposite interior lot
lines, lot width and lot depth may be determined from either front property
line, and the side and rear lot lines shall be determined by the approving
authority. On through lots, the lot width shall be determined as described
herein, but only on that portion of the lot with frontage on the street that
the building or structure faces or addresses.[Added 2-9-2000 by Ord. No.
2-2000; amended 5-9-2007 by Ord. No. 11-2007]
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest level (including basement, crawl space and
garage) of the lowest enclosed area.
FRONT LOT LINE — A lot line or portion thereof which is coexistent
with a street line and along which the frontage is calculated. On
residential properties, a lot line which is coexistent with a restrictedaccess
state highway for which access to the lot is prohibited shall
not be considered a front lot line. [Amended 8-8-2012 by Ord. No.
13-2012]
A.
REAR LOT LINE — The lot line most distant and generally opposite and
parallel to the front lot line.
B.
C. SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
§ 140-17 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-17
139:275
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Any security, which may be acceptable to
the Township Committee for the maintenance of any improvements required
by this chapter, including but not limited to surety bonds, letters of credit
under the circumstances specified in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.5, and cash.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a "minor
subdivision."
MANUFACTURED HOME — A unit of housing which:
MARINA — Any waterfront facility wherein berthing spaces for any and all
watercraft or boats are provided. A "marina" shall be deemed to include, in
addition, automobile parking facilities; sanitary facilities; motor fuel sales;
boat sales, repairs, maintenance and service, excluding, however, facilities
for the construction of new boats.
MARINE ACTIVITY — Any facility or activity associated with fishing or
boating, either for sport or for commercial gain.
MASSAGE PARLOR — Any establishment devoted to the providing of
massage services to persons not in connection with any medical,
osteopathic, chiropractic, prescribed therapeutic or athletic or calisthenic
activities.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals
for the development of Wall Township as set forth and adopted pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
MAYOR — The Mayor of the Township of Wall.
MEZZANINE(S) — An intermediate level or levels between the floor and
ceiling of any story with an aggregate floor area of not more than 1/3 of the
area of the room in which the level or levels are located.
MINOR SITE PLAN — A development proposal defined as
follows:[Amended 7-13-2005 by Ord. No. 20-2005; 8-8-2012 by Ord.
No. 10-2012]
Consists of one or more transportable sections which are substantially
constructed off site and, if more than one section, are joined together
on site;
A.
B. Is built on a permanent chassis;
Is designed to be used, when connected to utilities, as a dwelling on
permanent or nonpermanent foundation; and
C.
Is manufactured in accordance with the standards promulgated for a
manufactures home by the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development pursuant of the "National Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974," P.L. 93-383
(42 U.S.C. § 5401 et seq.) and the standards promulgated for a
manufactured or mobile home by the Commissioner of the New jersey
Department of Community Affairs pursuant to the State Uniform
Construction Code Act, P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.).
D.
§ 140-17 WALL CODE § 140-17
139:276
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land containing not more than
one new lot, provided that such subdivision does not involve a planned
development, any new street or the extension of any off-tract improvement,
the cost of which is to be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42. A minor
subdivision shall not adversely affect the development of the remainder
of the parcel or adjoining properties and shall not be in conflict with
any provision or portion of the Master Plan, the Official Map, or this
chapter. A minor subdivision shall not involve property which was formerly
part of a tract for which subdivision approval has been granted previously
dividing the original tract into two or more lots, except that the latter
provision may be waived by the Planning Board if it determines that the
proposed subdivision will not be detrimental to the intent and purposes of
this chapter.
MLUL — The Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.)
MOBILE HOME — See "manufactured home."
The development types as noted below may be considered exempt from
formal site plan review and approval by the Planning Board and eligible
for administrative minor site plan review and approval by the Land Use
Officer upon the jurisdictional recommendation of the Planning Board
pursuant to the procedural requirements described in § 140-79, Minor
site plan procedure, of this chapter. Permitted development types are
limited to the following:
The construction of an addition to an existing building, the floor
area of which will not exceed the lesser of 50% of the floor area of
the existing building or 10,000 square feet.
(1)
The change of use of an existing single-tenant or owner-occupied
commercial building from a nonconforming use to a conforming
use, or from one conforming use to another conforming use,
provided that the gross floor area of the building does not exceed
10,000 square feet.
(2)
The change of use of a portion of an existing building from a
nonconforming use to a conforming use, or from one conforming
use to another conforming use, provided that the gross floor area
for the change of use does not exceed 10,000 square feet of the
gross floor area of the entire building.
(3)
(4) The interior or exterior renovation or improvement of a building.
The addition of accessory structures (excluding principal buildings)
and site improvements to a developed property, provided the
structures and improvements are incidental and accessory to the
principal use of the property.
(5)
Freestanding accessory buildings on developed properties,
provided the building is accessory to the principal use of the
property and that the building does not exceed 2,500 square feet of
gross floor area.
(6)
A.
§ 140-17 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-17
139:277
MOTEL — A building containing rooms for sleeping purposes by guests
providing individual entrances from the exterior of the building to each
room or unit and providing parking spaces convenient to each individual
entrance, with or without a dining room, swimming pool and/or guest
service facilities, except that separate kitchen facilities shall not be
permitted in each individual room.
MULTIFAMILY — Any use involving three or more dwelling units within
a structure or attached structure. Dwelling units within a multifamily
buildings are classified as multifamily dwellings.
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The Planning Board or Board of Adjustment when
acting pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and this chapter.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Wall.
NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING CENTER — A shopping center having such
stores as drugstore, hardware store, barbershop, beauty salon,
delicatessen, liquor store, store and similar small shops and stores designed
and intended to primarily serve the needs of the population residing within
approximately a three-mile radius.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter,
or a prior Zoning Ordinance of the Township but which fails to conform to
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such
adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure the size, dimension or
location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment
of this chapter, or a prior Zoning Ordinance but which fails to conform to
the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reasons of
such adoption, revision, or amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to
the adoption, revision, or amendment of this chapter, or a prior Zoning
Ordinance but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
OCCUPANCY — The specific purpose for which land or a building is used,
designed or maintained.
OFFICE BUILDING — A building, the occupancy of which is limited to
professional offices.
OFFICE BUILDING COMPLEX — A group of office buildings, planned,
developed, owned and managed as a unit.
OFFICE/LIGHT INDUSTRIAL PARK — A comprehensively planned
development of one or more lots, used as permitted in the OLI-10 Zone and
by this chapter with internal common access to an arterial or collector road.
§ 140-17 WALL CODE § 140-17
139:278
OFFICE PARK — A comprehensively planned development of one or more
lots, used as permitted in the OP-10 Zone and by this chapter, with internal
common access to an arterial or collector road.
OFFICIAL MAP — The Zoning Map adopted by ordinance by the Township
Committee pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq.
OFF SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question, but within
the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of a
development application or contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OFF TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
ON SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use
or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of
land adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided that such areas
may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and other
improvements that are designed to be incidental to the natural openness of
the land.
OWNER — Any individual, group of individuals, firm, association, syndicate,
cooperative partnership or corporation having sufficient proprietary
interest in land which is the subject of a development proposal.
PARKING SPACE — The area required for the parking of one automobile,
exclusive of passageways appurtenant thereto and giving access thereto.
PARKING SPACE, LARGE VEHICLE — A large on-site parking space
designed to accommodate an oversized customer/employee vehicle, which
parking space is separate and distinct from the standard size on-site
parking spaces provided and which is separate and distinct from all drive
aisles, loading zones and fire zones on the property, which parking space is
sized pursuant to this chapter.
PARKING SPACE, STANDARD VEHICLE — A standard size on-site parking
space used to accommodate a standard customer/employee vehicle, which
parking space is sized pursuant to this chapter.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — For purposes of notice any
applicant for development, the owners of the subject property and all
owners of property and government agencies entitled to notice under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
PATIO — A level paved surface normally or customarily used as an exterior
sitting area and having no integral structural connection to any building.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security, which may be acceptable to
the Township Committee to guarantee the proper and total completion of
§ 140-17 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-17
139:279
required improvements, including but not limited to surety bonds, letters of
credit under the circumstances specified in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.5, and cash.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS — Standards, requirements, rules and
regulations adopted by this chapter pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65d
regulating noise levels, glare, airborne or sonic vibrations, heat, electronic
or atomic radiation, noxious odors, toxic matters, explosive and inflammable
matters, smoke, and airborne particles, waste discharge, screening of
unsightly objects or conditions and such other similar matters as may be
reasonably required by the Township by applicable federal or state laws or
regulations.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material that permits full or partial absorption
of stormwater into previously unimproved land.
PESTICIDE — Any substance or mixture of substance labeled, designed,
or intended for use in preventing, destroying, repelling, sterilizing or
mitigating any insects, rodents, nematodes, predatory animals, fungi, weeds
and other forms of plant or animal life or viruses, except viruses on or
in living humans or animals. The term "pesticide" shall also include any
substance or mixture of substances labeled, designed or intended for use as
a defoliant, desiccant, or plant regulator.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS — Oil or petroleum of any kind and in any form
including crude oils and derivatives of crude oils, whether alone, as sludge,
oil refuse or oil mixed with other wastes.
PLACE OF WORSHIP — A building or group of buildings, used by
congregations as the regular site of services for public worship of an
organized, recognized religious body including cathedrals, chapels, places
of worship, meeting houses, mosques, synagogues, temples, and similarly
used buildings, as well as accessory uses such as Sunday schools, social
halls, parish houses, and similar type buildings.
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum
contiguous size as specified by this chapter to be developed according to a
plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with appurtenant
common areas to accommodate commercial or office uses or both and any
residential or other uses incidental to the predominant use as may be
permitted by this chapter.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Planned unit development, planned unit
residential development, residential cluster, planned commercial
development or planned industrial development.
PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area with a specified
minimum contiguous acreage of five acres or more to be developed as a
single entity according to a plan containing one or more residential clusters,
which may include appropriate commercial, or public or quasi-public uses
all primarily for the benefit of the residential development.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Township of Wall.
PLAT — A map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
§ 140-17 WALL CODE § 140-17
139:280
PLAT, FINAL — The map or maps of all or a portion of the development
prepared and submitted to the approving authority for final approval. Final
plat shall also include and be synonymous with the term "final site plan."
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — The plat prepared and submitted to the approving
authority as a part of the application for preliminary approval. Preliminary
plat shall also include and be synonymous with the term "preliminary site
plan."
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46, 40:55D-48, and 40:55D-49 prior to final approval, after
specific elements of a development plan have been agreed upon by the
approving authority and the applicant.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Architectural
drawings prepared during early and introductory stages of the design of a
project illustrating, in a schematic form, its scope, scale and relationship to
its site and immediate environs.
PREMISES — A lot or tract of land or any combination thereof held under a
single ownership or control.
PRINCIPAL USE — A primary or principal purpose for which a building,
structure or lot is used. Any use which is distinct from and independent
of other uses on a lot by virtue of its purpose or the persons involved is a
principal use and a lot may accommodate more than one such use.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building within which is conducted a principal
use of a lot. In any district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be a principal
building.
PUBLIC AREAS — Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other
recreational areas; other public open spaces; scenic and historic sites; and
sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, or required along
a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the biological as well as
drainage function of the channel and providing for the flow of water to
safeguard the public against flood damage, sedimentation, and erosion and
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges,
to induce water recharge into the ground where practical, and to lessen
nonpoint pollution.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to the Township, a municipal agency, the Board of Education, an
federal, state, or county agency, or other public body for recreational or
conservational uses.
PUBLIC STREET — Any public right-of-way.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any public utility regulated by the Board of Regulatory
Commissioners and defined pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:2-13.
QUORUM — The majority of the full authorized membership of a municipal
agency.
§ 140-17 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-17
139:281
RADIOACTIVE USE — Any natural or artificially produced substance or
combination of substances which emits radiation spontaneously.
RECYCLING and RESOURCE RECOVERY — The separation and reuse of
solid waste materials including paper, cardboard, glass, aluminum, metals,
used motor oil, used rubber tires, used clothing and rags, and used
household items.
REPAIR — The reconstruction or renewal of any part of any existing building
for the purpose of its maintenance.
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — An area to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing residential housing units which have a
common or public open space area as an appurtenance.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number or dwelling units per gross acre of
residential land area including streets, easements and open space portions
of a development.
RESTAURANT — Any establishment, however designated, at which food
and drink is sold primarily for consumption on the premises and within a
building and in which no other business, except such as is incidental to such
establishment, is conducted.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD/CARRY-OUT — Any restaurant which has drivethrough
window service; or any retail food establishment such as a
restaurant; refreshment stand; snack bar; dairy bar; hot dog or hamburger
stand where food and drink are prepared in advance and are available for
immediate purchase or consumption and which serve food on or in paper,
polyfoam, or other nonceramic plates and cups, with plastic eating utensils.
Those restaurants where food is cooked to order, is consumed only at tables
on the premises and is served by waiters or waitresses at said tables shall
not be deemed "fast-food restaurants."
RESUBDIVISION —
ROOMING OR BOARDING HOUSE — Any dwelling for hire in which more
than two persons are housed or lodged, with or without meals.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA or SATELLITE ANTENNA — A parabolic
reflector antenna which is designed for the purpose of receiving signals
from and/or transmitting signals to a transmitter relay located in planetary
orbit.
The further division or relocation of lot lines of any lot or lots within
a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded according to
law; or
A.
The alteration of any streets or the establishment of any new streets
within any subdivision previously made and approved or recorded
according to law, but does not include conveyances so as to combine
existing lots by deed or by other instrument.
B.
§ 140-17 WALL CODE § 140-17
139:282
SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of soil that has been transported from
its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity, or other natural means as a
product of erosion.
SETBACK — The horizontal distance between a building or structure and
any front, side or rear lot line, measured perpendicular to such lot lines at
the point where the building is closest to such lot lines.
SETBACK LINE (BUILDING LINE) — The line beyond which a building shall
not extend unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
SHOPPING CENTER — An integrated development of uses, such as retail
stores and shops, personal service establishments, professional and
business offices, banks, post offices, and restaurants listed in the schedule
of permitted and conditional uses, (see 140 Attachment 3) housed in an
enclosed building or buildings, utilizing such common facilities as customer
parking, pedestrian walkways, truck loading, and unloading space, utilities,
and sanitary facilities. Gasoline service stations, those prohibited uses set
forth in § 140-140, and those uses not listed in the schedule of permitted
and conditional uses shall not be permitted in any shopping
center.[Amended 8-24-2016 by Ord. No. 12-2016]
SIGHT TRIANGLE — The triangular area formed by two intersecting street
lines or the projection of such lines which border a corner property, and by
a line connecting a point on each such line located a designated distance
from the intersection of the street lines, which is intended to remain free of
visual obstructions to prevent potential traffic hazards.
SIGN — Any writing (including letter, word or numeral), pictorial
presentation (including illustration), decoration (including any material or
color forming an integral part of other sign elements or used to differentiate
such decoration from its background), emblem (including device, symbol or
trademark), flag (including banner, balloon or pennant), or any other device,
figure, logo, or similar character which:
SIGN, FACADE — Any sign which is affixed, on a parallel plane, to an
exterior wall of any building.
SIGN FACE — The area made available by a sign structure for the purpose
of displaying a message.
SIGN, GROUND — A sign supported by uprights or braces in or upon the
ground surface.
Is located and maintained as a freestanding structure or any part of a
structure, or located and maintained on a building or other structure
or device by being placed, installed, attached, fastened, pasted, posted,
painted, printed, nailed, tacked or affixed in any other manner thereon;
and
A.
B. Is used to announce, direct attention to, identify or advertise; and
C. Is visible from outside any building or structure; and
D. Is illuminated or nonilluminated.
§ 140-17 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-17
139:283
SIGN, MARQUEE — A sign attached to or hung from a marquee, canopy or
other covered structure, projecting from and supported by the building and
extending beyond the building wall, building line or street lot line.
SIGN, PROJECTING — A display sign which is attached directly to the
building wall.
SIGN, ROOF — A sign which is erected, constructed and maintained above
the roof of the building.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign constructed of cloth, fabric or other
lightweight temporary material with or without a structural frame intended
for a limited period of display, including decoration displays for holidays or
public demonstrations, and includes movable or transportable signs.
SIGNS, WALL — A sign which is painted on or attached directly to a fence
or on the surface of masonry, concrete, frame or other approved building
walls.
SITE PLAN — Any site plan not classified as a minor site plan or exempt site
development. The "site plan" means a development plan of one or more lots
on which is shown:[Amended 8-8-2012 by Ord. No. 10-2012]
SKETCH PLAT — See "concept plan."
SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Freehold Soil Conservation
District, a governmental subdivision of the state, organized in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:24-2 et seq.
SPECIMEN TREE (INCLUDING SIGNIFICANT, EXTRAORDINARY AND
HISTORIC TREES) — Any trees or shrubs, evergreen or deciduous, which
are:[Added 5-10-2006 by Ord. No. 12-2006]
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not
necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
wetlands, wetlands transition areas, and waterways;
A.
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting, screening
devices; and
B.
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed determination pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter requiring review and approval of site plans by the approving
authority and Board of Adjustment.
C.
Living deciduous trees having a trunk diameter breast height of 16
inches or more.
A.
Living coniferous trees having a trunk diameter breast height of 12
inches or more.
B.
§ 140-17 WALL CODE § 140-17
139:284
STEEP SLOPES — Areas where the average slope equals or exceeds 15%.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the upper surface
of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above. (See also
"mezzanine.")
STORY ABOVE GRADE — Any story having its furnished floor surface
entirely above grade except that a basement shall be considered as a story
above grade when the finished surface of the floor above the basement is:
STORY, HALF — That portion of a building under a gable, hip or gambrel
roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite sides are not more
than two feet above the floor of such half story.
STREAM — Any natural course of running water whether improved,
unimproved, enclosed, or realigned which presently or prior to any
improvement, enclosure or realignment, had, cut by the erosion of running
water, a channel with defined banks and a bottom and through which water
flows ordinarily, but not necessarily, continually.
STREAM CORRIDORS — Those areas which include the floodway and
permanent channel of brooks and streams.
STREET — Any street, highway, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct,
alley, drive, or other way:
Living flowering dogwood (Cornus florida) of American holly (Ilex
opaca) trees having a trunk diameter breast height of three inches or
more.
C.
Living flowering dogwood (Kalmia latifolia) shrubs having a root crown
of three inches or more at the soil or surface level.
D.
E. Fifteen years or older.
Living flowering mountain laurel (Kalmia latifolia) having a root crown
of two inches or more at the soil or surface level.
F.
A. More than six feet (1,829 mm) above grade plane;
More than six feet (1,829 mm) above the finished ground level for more
than 50% of the total building perimeter; or
B.
More than 12 feet (3,658 mm) above the finished ground level at any
point.
C.
Which is an existing state, New Jersey Highway Authority, county or
municipal roadway; or
A.
Which is shown as a street upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to
law; or
B.
Which is approved by official action as provided by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.; or
C.
§ 140-17 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-17
139:285
STREET FURNITURE — Man-made, aboveground items that are usually
found in street rights-of-way, including benches, kiosks, plants, canopies,
shelters, and phone booths.
STREET HARDWARE — The mechanical and utility systems within a street
right-of-way such as hydrants, manhole covers, traffic lights and signs,
utility poles and lines, parking meters and the like.
STREET LINE — The line determining the limit between the highway rights
of the public and adjoining private property.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person or legal entity commencing proceedings under
this chapter to effect the subdivision of land.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of
this act, if no new streets are created:
SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN COMMITTEES — Committees appointed
by the Chairperson of the Planning Board for the purpose of reviewing,
commenting and making recommendations with respect to site plan and
subdivision applications.
Which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the
county recording officer prior to the establishment of the Planning
Board and the grant to such Board of the power to review plats;
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines. Streets
shall be classified as designated in the Master Plan.
D.
Divisions of land found by the Planning Board or Subdivision Committee
thereof appointed by the Chairman to be for agricultural purposes
where all resulting parcels are five acres or larger in size;
A.
B. Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
Divisions of property upon court order, including, but not limited to,
judgments of foreclosure;
C.
Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument;
and
D.
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land,
owned by the same person or persons and all of which are found and
certified by the Administrative Officer to conform to the requirements
of the Township Land Use and Development Regulations and are shown
and designated as separate lots, tracts, or parcels on the Tax Map
of the Township. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term
"resubdivision."
E.
§ 140-17 WALL CODE § 140-17
139:286
SWIMMING POOL, COMMERCIAL — A swimming pool that is operated
for profit and open to the public of to a limited number of members and
their guests, upon payment of an hourly, daily, weekly, monthly, annual or
other fee or operated as a service rendered by a hotel, motel, or apartment
development.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — A swimming pool that has the ability to
contain water more than 24 inches in depth located on and accessory to
a single-family lot with a residence on it, and said pool is utilized with no
admission charges and not for the purpose of profit.[Amended 7-24-2019
by Ord. No. 9-2019]
TIDAL MARSH — A low, swampy area adjoining tidal rivers, subject to
periodic flooding including lands mapped by the Soil Conservation Service
on maps entitled, "Classes of Land According to Use Capability" filed in the
office of the Soil Conservation Service in Freehold, New Jersey as follows:
C85 A-O.
TIDELANDS — Lands which are washed by tidal flows in accordance with
the NJDEP Tidelands Council maps which are on file with the NJDEP and
Township Clerk.
TOWNHOUSE — A multifamily residential building containing three or
more dwellings characterized by a linear arrangement of the units along
one axis and at approximately the same grade, each with its own exclusive
entrance and each with two or more floor levels above grade.
TRACT — An area of land which is the subject of a development application
or a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
TRAILER COURT, CAMP or PARK — An area designated for or used for the
accommodation of two or more vehicles or portions thereof, in use as or
capable of use as dwelling facilities which are commonly known as house
trailers or mobile homes.
TWO-FAMILY — A residential building containing two dwelling units, which
are separated from each other by vertical walls, unpierced, except for
access to the outside or to a common foyer, common cellar or common
basement.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE — The New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code. (N.J.S.A. 40A:12-27; N.J.A.C. 5.23-1.1 et seq.) 18
USE — The specific purposes or activities for which a parcel of land or a
building or a portion of a building is designed, arranged, intended, occupied
or maintained.
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of the
regulations of this chapter.
WETLANDS, FRESHWATER — An area regulated by the New Jersey
Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act (N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.) that is
inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and
18.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq., the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
§ 140-17 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-17
139:287
duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does
support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated
soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. (See Wall
Township Hydric Soils Map, December 1988, for general location of hydric
soils and New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection maps
prepared pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.).
WETLANDS, TIDAL — Areas known as marshes, swamps or other lowlands
subject to tidal action or any area now or formerly connected to tidal
waters, whose surface is at or below an elevation of one foot above local
extreme high water and of which vegetation unique to tidal marshes,
swamps or lowlands has become adapted. This definition shall include, but
is not limited to, all the mapped New Jersey State Wetlands pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.
WINDOW SIGNS — A sign which is part of or affixed or attached to the
interior or exterior of a window or otherwise part of a window and located
within 18 inches of the interior of the window and which can be seen from
a public street or public parking facility.
YARD — An open space between a principal building and the nearest lot
line.[Amended 8-8-2012 by Ord. No. 13-2012]
YARD, FRONT — A yard lying between the front line of the lot and the
principal building. [Amended 8-8-2012 by Ord. No. 13-2012]
YARD, REAR — A yard lying between the rear line of the lot and the
building.
YARD, SIDE — A yard lying between the side line of the lot and the building.
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the Administrative Officer which
is required by ordinance as a condition precedent to the commencement of
a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion or
installation of a structure or building, and which acknowledges that such
use, structure or building complies with the provisions of this chapter or
variance approved by a municipal agency.
§ 140-17 WALL CODE § 140-17
139:288
Part 2
Administration
ARTICLE IV
Planning Board
§ 140-18. Purpose of Part 2.
The provisions set forth in this Part 2 provide for the administration of this
chapter.
§ 140-19. Establishment.
The Planning Board presently in existence pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 is
hereby continued to consist of nine members of the following four classes
and two alternates:
§ 140-20. Terms.
A. Class I: the Mayor.
B. Class II: one of the officials of the Township other than the Mayor or a
member of the Township Committee to be appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by the Committee.
C. Class III: a member of the Township Committee to be appointed by it.
D. Class IV: six other citizens of the Township to be appointed by the
Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other Township office,
position or employment, except that one Class IV member may be a
member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and one Class IV member
may be a member of the Board of Education. For the purpose of this
section, membership on a municipal board or commission whose
function is advisory in nature, and the establishment of which is
discretionary and not required by statute, shall not be considered the
holding of municipal office.
E. Alternates. The Mayor shall also appoint two alternate members who
shall meet the qualifications of Class IV members. Alternate members
shall be designated by the Mayor at the time of appointment as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2."
A. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond to his/her
official tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class
III shall be for one year or terminate at the completion of their
respective terms of office whichever occurs first.
B. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-23 shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable
extent the expiration of such term shall be evenly distributed over the
first four years after their appointment as determined by resolution of
the Township Committee; provided, however, that no term of any
§ 140-18 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-20
139:289
§ 140-21. Conflicts of interest.
No member or alternate member of the Planning Board shall be permitted
to act on any matter in which he/she has, either directly or indirectly, any
personal or financial interest.
§ 140-22. Lack of quorum.
If the Planning Board lacks a quorum because any of its regular or alternate
members is prohibited by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23b or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.1 from
acting on a matter due to the member's personal or financial interests
therein, regular members of the Board of Adjustment shall be called upon
to serve, for that matter only, as temporary members of the Planning Board
in order of seniority of continuous service to the Board of Adjustment until
there are a minimum number of members necessary to constitute a quorum
to act upon the matter without any personal or financial interest therein,
whether direct or indirect. If a choice has to be made between regular
members of equal seniority, the Chairman of the Board of Adjustment shall
make the choice.
§ 140-23. Vacancies.
If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term,
it shall be filled by appointment, as above provided, for the unexpired term
only.
§ 140-24. Removal.
Any member other than a Class I member may be removed by the Township
Committee pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-12.1.
member shall exceed four years and further provided that nothing
herein shall affect the term of any present member of the Planning
Board, all of whom shall continue in office until the completion of the
term for which they were appointed. Thereafter, all Class IV members
shall be appointed for terms of four years, except as otherwise herein
provided. All terms shall run from January 1 of the year in which the
appointment was made.
C. The terms of alternate members shall be two years, except that the
terms of the alternate members shall be such that the term of not more
than one alternate member shall expire in any one year; provided,
however, that in no instance shall the terms of the alternate members
first appointed exceed two years.
D. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings,
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member of any class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular
member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a
choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate
No. 1 shall vote.
§ 140-20 WALL CODE § 140-25
139:290
§ 140-25. Organization of Board.
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from the
members of Class IV and select a Secretary who may be either a member of
the Planning Board or Township municipal employee designated by it.
§ 140-26. Planning Board Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of Planning Board Attorney. The Planning
Board may annually appoint, fix the compensation of or enter into a written
agreement for a rate of compensation of the Planning Board Attorney who
shall be an attorney other than the Township Attorney. The Board shall not
expend an amount, exclusive of gifts or grants, in excess of the amount
appropriated by the Township Committee for its use.
§ 140-27. Expenses, experts and staff.
The Township Committee shall make provisions in its budget and
appropriate funds for the expenses of the Planning Board. The Planning
Board may employ or contract for the services of experts and other staff
and services as it may deem necessary. The Planning Board shall not,
however, exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by
the Township Committee for its use.
§ 140-28. Powers and duties.
The Planning Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be
necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter.
The Planning Board shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To prepare, and after public hearing, adopt or amend a master plan or
component parts thereof, to guide the use of lands within the Township
in a manner which protects public health and safety and promotes the
general welfare, in accordance with the MLUL.
B. To administer site plan and land subdivision reviews in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter and the MLUL.
C. To grant exceptions from certain requirements for subdivision and site
plan approval pursuant to this chapter and the MLUL.
D. To approve conditional use applications in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and the MLUL.
E. To consider and make a report to the Township Committee within 35
days after referral as to any proposed development regulation
submitted to it pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a. The
report shall include identification of any provisions in the proposed
development regulation, revision or amendment which are inconsistent
with the Master Plan and recommendations concerning these
inconsistencies and any other matters as the board deems appropriate.
The Township Committee when considering the adoption of a
§ 140-25 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-28
139:291
development regulation, revision or amendment thereto, shall review
the report of the Planning Board and may disapprove or change any
recommendation by a vote of a majority of its full authorized
membership and shall record in its minutes the reasons for not
following such recommendation. Failure of the Planning Board to
transmit its report within the thirty-five-day period provided herein
shall relieve the Township Committee from the requirements of this
subsection in regard to the proposed development regulation, revision
or amendment thereto referred to the Planning Board. Nothing in
this section shall be construed as diminishing the application of the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 to any Official Map or an amendment
or revision thereto or of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62 to any Zoning Ordinance,
development regulations or any amendment or revision thereto.
F. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulations.
G. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuing planning
process.
H. To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvement
projects over a term of six years, and amendments thereto, and
recommend same to the Township Committee pursuant to the MLUL.
I. Granting variances, etc.
(1) When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, to grant to the same extent and subject to
the same restrictions as the Zoning Board of Adjustment:
(a) Variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
(b) Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for issuance of permit
for building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
(c) Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure not related to a street.
(2) Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, notice of
a hearing on the application for development shall include
reference to the request for a variance or direction for issuance of a
permit as the case may be.
J. Review of capital projects pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-31.
K. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the Township Committee for the aid and assistance of
the Township Committee or other Township bodies, agencies, or
officers.
§ 140-28 WALL CODE § 140-28
139:292
§ 140-29. Simultaneous review.
The Planning Board shall have the power to review and approve or deny
conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with review for subdivision
approval without the developer being required to make further application
to the Planning Board, or the Planning Board being required to hold further
hearings. The longest time period for action by the Planning Board, whether
it be for subdivision, conditional use or site plan approval, shall apply.
Whenever approval of a conditional use is requested by the developer,
notice of the hearing on the plat shall include reference to the request for
such conditional use.
§ 140-30. Referrals from Zoning Board of Adjustment.
L. The Township Committee may, by ordinance, provide for the reference
of any matters or class of matters to the Planning Board before final
action thereon by a municipal body or municipal officer having final
authority hereon, except for any matter under the jurisdiction of the
Board of Adjustment. Whenever the Planning Board shall have made a
recommendation regarding a matter so authorized to another municipal
body, such recommendation may be rejected only by a majority of the
full authorized membership of such body.
A. The Planning Board shall receive and act on all referrals from the
Zoning Board of Adjustment in a timely manner so that the Zoning
Board will receive the advice of the Planning Board within 45 days of
the referral.
B. The Planning Board shall review the material referred and may make
recommendations to the Zoning Board of Adjustment in writing and/or
at the public hearing on the application. The Planning Board's
recommendations may contain the Planning Board's opinion as to the
compatibility of the proposal to the Master Plan; applications which
may have been or are currently being processed by the Planning Board
for similar uses; land use, traffic and other data relevant to the
application which the Planning Board has in its files, and what
conditions, if any, the Planning Board recommends be imposed on the
applicant to improve compatibility with the Master Plan and this
chapter should the Zoning Board of Adjustment grant the variance.
§ 140-28 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-30
139:293

ARTICLE V
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 140-31. Establishment.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment presently in existence pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69 is hereby continued to consist of seven regular members and two
alternate members who shall be residents of the Township and who shall be
appointed by the Township Committee. No member may hold any elective
office or position under the Township.
§ 140-32. Terms.
The members of the Board of Adjustment shall continue until their
respective terms expire. Thereafter, the term of each member shall be
four years from January 1 of the year of their appointment. The terms of
members first appointed under this article shall be so determined that,
to the greatest practicable extent, the expiration of such terms shall be
distributed, in the case of regular members, evenly over the first four years
after their appointment and, in the case of alternate members, evenly over
the first two years after their appointment, provided that the initial term
of no regular member shall exceed four years and that the initial term of
no alternate member shall exceed two years. Thereafter, the term of each
regular member shall be four years and the term of each alternate member
shall be two years.
§ 140-33. Alternates.
§ 140-34. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Board of Adjustment shall be permitted to act on any
matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or
financial interest.
§ 140-35. Lack of quorum.
If the Board of Adjustment lacks a quorum because any of its regular or
alternate members is prohibited by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 from acting on a
matter due to the member's personal or financial interest therein, Class
A. The Mayor may appoint and the Township Committee confirm two
alternate members who shall be designated at the time of their
appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." Alternate
members shall meet the same qualifications as regular members.
B. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings,
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote.
§ 140-31 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-35
139:295
IV members of the Planning Board shall be called upon to serve, for that
matter only, as temporary members of the Board of Adjustment. The Class
IV members of the Planning Board shall be called upon to serve in order
of seniority of continuous service to the Planning Board until there are the
minimum number of members necessary to constitute a quorum to act upon
the matter without any personal or financial interest therein, whether direct
or indirect. If a choice has to be made between Class IV members of equal
seniority, the Chairman of the Planning Board shall make the choice.
§ 140-36. Vacancies.
A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled for
the unexpired term only, as herein provided.
§ 140-37. Removal.
A member other than a Class I member may be removed by the Township
Committee pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-12.1.
§ 140-38. Officers.
The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from
its members and shall select a Secretary who may or may not be a board
member or another municipal employee.
§ 140-39. Zoning Board of Adjustment Attorney. [Amended 3-8-2006
by Ord. No. 4-2006]
There is hereby created the office of the Attorney to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may annually appoint, fix the
compensation of or enter into a written request for a rate of compensation
of the Zoning Board of Adjustment Attorney, who shall be an attorney other
than the Township Attorney.
§ 140-40. Expenses, experts and staff.
The Township Committee shall make provision in its budget and appropriate
funds for the expenses of the Board of Adjustment. The Zoning Board of
Adjustment may also employ or contract for and fix the compensation of
such experts and other staff and services as it may deem necessary. The
Board shall not authorize expenditures which exceed, exclusive of gifts or
grants, the amount appropriated by the Township Committee for its use.
§ 140-41. Rules and regulations.
The board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to
carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter.
§ 140-42. Powers of Zoning Board of Adjustment.
The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to:
§ 140-35 WALL CODE § 140-42
139:296
A. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there
is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by an
administrative officer based on or made in the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter.
(1) Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by an interested
party. Each appeal shall be taken within the 20 days prescribed by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72 by filing a notice of appeal with the officer from
whom the appeal was taken, together with three copies of the
notice with the Secretary of the Board of Adjustment. The notice of
appeal shall specify the grounds for the appeal. The officer from
whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the board
all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken.
(2) An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in
respect of which the decision appealed from was made, unless the
officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of
Adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him
that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases,
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by order of the
Superior Court of New Jersey on notice to the officer from whom
the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
(3) The Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed
from, and make such other requirement, decision or determination
as it deems appropriate, and to that end have all the powers of the
Administrative Officer from whom the appeal was taken.
B. Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
zoning provisions of this chapter, or for decisions upon other special
questions upon which such board is authorized by this chapter to pass.
C. Grant, upon an application or an appeal, relief from regulations
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62 through 40:55D-68, except those
departures enumerated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, and provided that the
proposed development does not require approval by the Planning Board
of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use, in which the Planning
Board has the power to review a request for a variance pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60a, where:
(1) The strict application of such regulation would result in peculiar
and exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue
hardship upon the developer of a property for any of the following
reasons:
(a) By reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of
the specific piece of property; or
§ 140-42 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-42
139:297
(b) By reasons of exceptional topographic conditions or physical
features uniquely affecting the specific piece of property; or
(c) By reason of an extraordinary and exceptional situation
uniquely affecting a specific piece of property or the structures
lawfully existing thereon; or
(2) The purposes of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. would be advanced by a
deviation from the Zoning Ordinance requirements and the benefits
of the deviation would substantially outweigh any detriment.
D. Variances, etc.
(1) Grant, upon an application or an appeal, in particular cases and for
special reasons, by affirmative vote of at least five members, a
variance to allow departures from regulations pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-62 through 40:55D-68 to permit the following:
(a) A use or principal structure in a district restricted against such
use or principal structure;
(b) An expansion of a nonconforming use;
(c) Deviation from a specification or standard pertaining solely to
a conditional use;
(d) An increase in the permitted floor area ratio;
(e) An increase in the permitted density, except as applied to the
required lot area for a lot or lots for detached one or two
dwelling unit buildings which lot or lots are either an isolated
undersized lot or lots resulting from a minor subdivision; or
(f) A height of a principal structure which exceeds by 10 feet or
10% the maximum height permitted in the district for the
principal structure.
(2) No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d and this subsection unless such variance or
other relief can be granted without substantial detriment to the
public good and will not substantially impair the intent and purpose
of the zone plan and this chapter. An application under this section
may be referred to any appropriate person or agency, provided
such reference shall not extend the period of time within which the
Board of Adjustment shall act.
E. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant to the same
extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board
subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37
through 40:55D-59 or conditional use approval pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-67, whenever the proposed development requires approval by
the Board of Adjustment of a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
The developer may elect to submit a separate application requesting
§ 140-42 WALL CODE § 140-42
139:298
§ 140-43. Referral.
Any application to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be referred by the
Zoning Board to any appropriate person or agency, including the Planning
Board, for consideration and report; provided, however, that such reference
shall not extend the time within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment is
required to act.
approval of the variance and a subsequent application for any required
approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The separate
approval of the variance shall be conditioned upon grant of all required
subsequent approvals by the Board of Adjustment. No such subsequent
approval shall be granted unless such approval can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and without substantial
impairment of the intent and purpose of the zone plan and zoning
regulations. The number of votes of the Board members required to
grant any such subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. for the approval in question, and the special
vote pursuant to the aforesaid Subsection d of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 shall
not be required.
F. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to direct issuance of a
permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a building or structure in the
bed of a mapped street or public drainageway, flood control basin or
public area reserved on the official map, or shown on a final map. The
Board of Adjustment shall not exercise the power granted by this
subsection if the proposed development requires approval by the
Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use in
conjunction with which the Planning Board has power to direct the
issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter and to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-60b.
G. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to direct issuance of a
permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-35 for a building or structure not
related to a street. The Board of Adjustment shall not exercise the
power granted by this subsection if the proposed development requires
approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional
use in conjunction with which the Planning Board has power to direct
the issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60c.
H. It is the intent of this chapter to confer upon the Board of Adjustment as
full and complete powers as may lawfully be conferred upon such
board, including, not by way of limitation, the authority, in connection
with any case, action or proceeding before the board, to interpret and
construe the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, or any term, clause,
sentence or word thereof, and the Zoning Map, in accordance with the
general rules of construction, applicable to the legislative enactments.
A. If such reports are not received by the Zoning Board of Adjustment
within 45 days from the date or dates of such references, the Zoning
Board of Adjustment may proceed to act without further delay and
§ 140-42 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-43
139:299
§ 140-44. Zoning Board of Adjustment report on application for
variances.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, at least once a year, review its
decisions on applications and appeals for variances and prepare and adopt
by resolution a report on its findings on Zoning Ordinance and land
development regulation provisions which were the subject of variance
requests and its recommendations for zoning and land development
regulations amendment or revision, if any. The Zoning Board shall send
copies of the report and resolution to the Township Committee and the
Planning Board.
without reference to such reports should they be received after the
expiration of such forty-five-day period.
B. When such a report is received from the Planning Board within 45 days,
the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall take no action inconsistent
therewith except by the affirmative vote of a majority of the fully
authorized membership of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 140-43 WALL CODE § 140-44
139:300
ARTICLE VI
Provisions Applicable to Both Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment
§ 140-45. Meetings.
§ 140-46. Minutes.
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the municipal agency
and of the persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the municipal
agency, the findings, if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes
shall thereafter be made available for public inspection during normal
business hours at the office of the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment
Secretary. Any interested party shall have the right to compel production
of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceedings concerning the
subject matter of such minutes. Such interested party may be charged a
reasonable fee for reproduction of the minutes in an amount sufficient to
cover the cost of such reproduction of the minutes for his use.
§ 140-47. Hearings.
A. Every municipal agency shall by its rules fix the time and place for
holding its regular meetings for business authorized to be conducted by
such agency. Regular meetings of the municipal agency shall be
scheduled not less than once a month and shall be held as scheduled
unless canceled for lack of applications for development to process.
B. The municipal agency may provide for special meetings, at the call of
the Chairman, or on the request of any two of its members, which shall
be held on notice to its members and the public in accordance with
municipal regulations and N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
C. All action shall be taken by a majority vote of members of the municipal
agency present at the meeting except as otherwise required by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-32, 40:55D-34, 40:55D-62, 40:55D-63 and 40:55D-17e,
40:55D-26a and b and 40:55D-70d. Failure of a motion to receive the
number of votes required to approve an application for development
shall be deemed an action denying the application.
D. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
E. An executive session for the purpose of discussing and studying any
matters to come before the agency shall not be deemed a regular or
special meeting within the meaning of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
A. Required hearings: The Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall hold a hearing on each application for development.
§ 140-45 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-47
139:301
B. Rules for conducting hearings: The Planning Board and Board of
Adjustment shall make rules governing the conduct of hearings before
such bodies which rules shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of
the MLUL or this chapter.
C. Filing of documents: Any maps, plans and documentation for which
approval is sought shall be on file with the Land Use Department and
available for public inspection at least 10 business days before the date
of the hearing. In order to permit adequate time for professional review,
any revised maps, plans and documentation shall be filed with the Land
Use Department at least 15 business days before the date of the
hearing; provided, however, that this requirement may be waived by the
applicable board or by the Land Use Officer if the revisions are
insubstantial in nature. The applicant may produce other records,
documents or testimony at the hearing to substantiate, clarify or
supplement the previously filed maps and documents. [Amended
7-13-2005 by Ord. No. 20-2005; 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 29-2006]
D. Oaths: The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties,
and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of
1953 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
E. Testimony: The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer and the right of cross examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
F. Evidence: Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
G. Verbatim recording: The municipal agency shall provide for the
verbatim recording of the proceedings by either a stenographer or by
mechanical or electronic means. The municipal agency shall furnish a
transcript or duplicate recording in lieu thereof, on request to any
interested party at his expense.
H. Transcript charge: The municipal agency in furnishing a transcript of
the proceeding to an interested party at his expense shall charge the
fees as provided in § 175-3. Said transcript shall be certified in writing
by the transcriber to be accurate.
I. Voting eligibility: A member or alternate member of a municipal agency
who was absent for one or more of the meetings at which a hearing was
held shall be eligible to vote on the matter upon which the hearing was
conducted, notwithstanding his or her absence from one or more of the
§ 140-47 WALL CODE § 140-47
139:302
§ 140-48. Notice requirements for hearings.
Whenever public notice of a hearing is required on an application for
development, the applicant shall give notice thereof at least 10 days prior
to the date of the hearing in accordance with the following:
meetings; provided, however, that such board member or alternate
member has available to him or her the transcript or recordings of all of
the hearings from which he or she was absent, and certifies in writing
to the municipal agency that he or she has read such transcript or
listened to such recording.
A. Public notice of a hearing on an application for development shall be
given for all of the following:
(1) Appeal or variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.
(2) Directive for issuance of a building permit pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-34 or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
(3) Conditional uses pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
(4) Preliminary major subdivision plats.
(5) Preliminary major site plans.
(6) Interpretations.
(7) Final major subdivision plats. [Added 1-27-1999 by Ord. No.
4-1999]
B. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of
the Township.
C. Manner of giving notice.
(1) Notice of a hearing requiring public notice shall be given to the
owners of all real property as shown on the current tax duplicate or
duplicates located within 200 in all directions of the property which
is the subject of such hearing, provided that this requirement shall
be deemed satisfied by notice to the:
(a) Condominium association, in the case of any unit owner whose
unit has a unit above or below it; or
(b) Horizontal property regime, in the case of any co-owner whose
apartment has an apartment above or below it.
(2) Notice shall be given by:
(a) Serving a copy thereof on the owner as shown on the current
tax duplicate or his agent in charge of the property; or
(b) Mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property owner
at his address as shown on the said current tax duplicate.
§ 140-47 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-48
139:303
(3) Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any
partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon
its president, a vice president, secretary or other person authorized
by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation. Notice to a condominium association, horizontal
property regime, community trust or homeowners' association,
because of its ownership of common elements or areas located
within 200 feet of the property which is the subject of the hearing,
may be made in the same manner as to a corporation without
further notice to unit owners, co-owners, or homeowners on
account of such common elements or areas.
D. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the clerk of such
municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the notice required to
be given to the owners of lands in such adjoining municipality which are
located within 200 feet of the subject premises.
E. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on all applications for development of
property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown on
the Official County Map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining other
county land or situated within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
F. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Transportation of a
hearing on any application for development of property adjacent to a
state highway.
G. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the State
Planning Commission of any hearing on an application for development
of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling units. Such notice
shall include a copy of any maps or documents required to be on file
with the Land Use Officer.
H. Notice to public utilities.
(1) Notice of hearings on applications for approval of a major
subdivision or a site plan not defined as a minor site plan requiring
public notice pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12 shall be given in the
case of a public utility, cable television company or local utility
which possesses a right-of-way or easement within the Township
and which has registered with the Township in accordance with
Subsection H(2) below, by:
(a) Serving a copy of the notice on the person whose name
appears on the registration form on behalf of the public utility,
cable television company or local utility; or
§ 140-48 WALL CODE § 140-48
139:304
(b) Mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the person whose
name appears on the registration form at the address shown on
that form.
(2) Every public utility, cable television company and local utility
interested in receiving notice pursuant to Subsection H(1) above
and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12h may register with the Township if the
public utility, cable television company or local utility has a right-ofway
or easement. The registration shall remain in effect until
revoked by the public utility, cable television company, or local
utility or by its successor in interest.
(3) The Administrative Officer shall adopt a registration form and shall
maintain a record of all public utilities, cable television companies,
and local utilities which have registered with the Township
pursuant to Subsection H(2) above. The registration form shall
include the name of the public utility, cable television company or
local utility and the name, address and position of the person to
whom notice shall be forwarded, as required pursuant to
Subsection H(1) above and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12h. The information
contained therein shall be made available to any applicant, as
provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c.
(4) A registration fee of $10 shall be paid by any public utility, cable
television company or local utility which registers to receive notice
pursuant to Subsection H(2) above.
I. All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given at least
10 days prior to the date fixed for hearing and the applicant shall file an
affidavit of proof of service with the board holding the hearing on the
application for development.
J. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
deemed complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
K. Form of notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of
this chapter shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the
nature of the matters to be considered and identification of the property
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to
lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the Tax
Assessor's office and the location and times at which any maps and
documents for which approval is sought are available as required by
law.
L. The Planning Board shall have the power to waive notice and public
hearing requirements set forth in this chapter when acting upon
subdivision applications if the Planning Board or Subdivision
Committee of the Planning Board finds that the application for
development conforms to the definition of a "minor subdivision" as such
term is defined hereunder.
§ 140-48 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-48
139:305
§ 140-49. Decisions.
Each decision on any application for development shall be reduced to
writing and shall include findings of facts and conclusions based thereon.
M. Notice pursuant to Subsections D, E, F, G and H of this section shall not
be deemed to be required, unless public notice pursuant to Subsection
A of this section is required.
N. List of property owners furnished: Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12c, the Land Use Officer shall within seven days after receipt
of a request therefor, make and certify a list from the current tax
duplicate of names and addresses of owners to whom the applicant is
required to give notice pursuant to Subsections A to H of this section. In
addition, the Land Use Officer shall include on the list the names,
addresses and positions of those persons who, not less than seven days
prior to the date on which the applicant requested the list, have
registered pursuant to Subsection H of this section. The applicant shall
be entitled to rely upon the information contained in such list, and
failure to give notice to any owner or to any public utility, cable
television company, or local utility not on the list shall not invalidate any
hearing or proceeding.
O. Applications by Township. Notice shall be given by the Township of a
hearing on an application for development in which the Township is the
applicant by publication and by personal service or certified mail, as set
forth in this section, to the owners of all real property as shown on the
current tax duplicate or duplicates located within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing. [Added
7-12-2006 by Ord. No. 22-2006]
A. Reduction to writing shall be accomplished through:
(1) A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the applicable time
period for taking action on the application for development; or
(2) A resolution adopted at a meeting held not later than 45 days after
the date of the meeting at which action to grant or deny approval
was taken memorializing said action.
B. Where the agency fails to adopt a resolution, any interested party may
apply to Superior Court in a summary manner for an order compelling
the agency to reduce its findings and conclusions to writing within a
stated time and the cost of the application, including attorney's fees,
shall be assessed against the municipality.
C. The following members shall be eligible to vote on the resolution:
(1) Where the action taken resulted from the failure of a motion to
approve an application those members voting against the motion
for approval shall be the members eligible to vote on the resolution.
§ 140-48 WALL CODE § 140-49
139:306
§ 140-50. Conditional approvals.
(2) In all other circumstances, only the members who voted for the
action taken shall be eligible to vote on the resolution.
D. The following shall apply to adoption of the resolution:
(1) The vote on a resolution shall be deemed to be a memorialization of
the action of the agency and not to be an action of the agency.
(2) The vote of a majority of those eligible members who are present at
the meeting at which the resolution is presented for adoption shall
be sufficient to adopt the resolution.
(3) The date of the adoption of the resolution shall constitute the date
of the decision for purposes of the mailings, filings, and
publications required.
E. Copies of the decision shall be distributed by the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment Secretary as follows:
(1) A copy shall be mailed within 10 days of the date of decision to the
applicant, or, if represented, then to his attorney, without separate
charge.
(2) A copy shall be filed in the office of the Land Use Officer and be
made available for public inspection during reasonable hours.
F. A copy shall be made available to any interested party for a reasonable
fee in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of such copy.
G. A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official
newspaper(s) of the Township.
(1) Such publication shall be arranged and proof of publication shall be
obtained by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment Secretary.
Nothing herein shall be construed as preventing the applicant from
arranging such publication if he so desires. The period of time in
which an appeal of the decision may be made shall run from the
first publication of the notice whether arranged by the Township or
the applicant.
(2) Such notice shall be published within 30 days of the date of
decision, or 20 days of the date of mailing of a copy of the decision
by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment Secretary, whichever
is later, or within such other appropriate period as may be
determined by the municipal agency at the time of decision.
(3) Failure to publish as herein required shall render any approvals
null and void.
A. In the event that a developer submits an application for development
proposing a development that is barred or prevented, directly or
§ 140-49 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-50
139:307
indirectly, by legal action instituted by any state agency, political
subdivision or other party to protect the public health and welfare or by
a directive or order issued by any state agency, political subdivision or
court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public health and welfare,
the municipal agency shall process such application for development
in accordance with the provisions of the MLUL and this chapter, and,
if such application for development complies with the provisions of
this chapter, the municipal agency shall approve such application
conditioned on removal of such legal barrier to development.
B. In the event that development proposed by an application for
development requires an approval of a governmental agency other than
the municipal agency, the municipal agency shall, in appropriate
instances, condition its approval upon the subsequent approval of such
governmental agency, provided that the municipal agency shall make a
decision on any application for development within the time period
provided in this chapter and the MLUL or within an extension of such
period as has been agreed to by the applicant unless the municipal
agency is prevented or relieved from so acting by the operation of law.
C. Whenever review or approval of an application by the County Planning
Board is required by the MLUL, the municipal agency shall condition
any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on
the application by the County Planning Board or approval by the County
Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the required time
period.
D. The municipal agency may impose such other conditions as it deems
appropriate.
E. In all cases the municipal agency shall include a condition of approval
setting forth the time within which all conditions of approval must be
satisfied by the applicant. Failure of the applicant to meet all conditions
of approval within the time specified or within such extensions thereof
as the municipal agency may, from time to time, grant upon the request
of the applicant shall render any approvals null and void.
F. Tolling of running of period of approval. In the event that, during the
period of approval heretofore or hereafter granted to an application for
development, the developer is barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, from proceeding with the development otherwise permitted
under such approval by a legal action instituted by any state agency,
political subdivision or other party to protect the public health and
welfare or by a directive or order issued by any state agency, political
subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public
health or welfare and the developer is otherwise ready, willing and able
to proceed with said development, the running of the period of approval
shall be suspended for the period of time said legal action is pending or
such directive or order is in effect.
§ 140-50 WALL CODE § 140-51
139:308
§ 140-51. Payment of taxes required.
Every application for development submitted to the Planning Board or to
the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no
taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the
property which is the subject of such application; and if it is shown that
taxes or assessments are delinquent on said property, any approvals or
other relief granted by either board shall be conditioned upon the payment
of such taxes and/or assessments.
§ 140-52. Referral of certain matters to Environmental Advisory
Committee.19
The Land Use Office shall forward an informational copy of all major
subdivision, major site plan and use variance applications to the
Environmental Advisory Committee. The Environmental Advisory
Committee may provide a report and recommendations to the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment concerning any such application. A report
or recommendation of the Environmental Advisory Committee shall not be
binding upon the board, but shall be advisory in nature. The failure of
the Environmental Advisory Committee to receive an informational copy
of an application or of the approving board to receive a report from the
Environmental Advisory Committee shall not preclude the board from
hearing an application nor shall it invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 6, Art. III, Environmental Advisory Committee.
§ 140-51 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-52
139:309

ARTICLE VII
Land Use Department
§ 140-53. Department continued; Land Use Officer as head of
Department.
There is hereby continued a Land Use Department and the position of
Land Use Officer. The Land Use Officer shall be the Administrative Officer
referred to in the MLUL and shall report to the Director of Engineering and
Planning. The Land Use Officer shall exercise all of the powers and duties
of the Administrative Officer referred to therein and of the Zoning Officer
referred to in all Township ordinances and shall have all further powers and
duties as provided hereinafter.
§ 140-54. Term of Land Use Officer.
The Land Use Officer shall be appointed by the Township Committee and
shall serve at the pleasure of the Township Committee.
§ 140-55. Functions and duties of Land Use Officer.
A. All requests, inquiries and applications pertaining to land use and
development including but not limited to development permits,
variances, conditional uses, site plans, subdivisions and general
information, shall be referred to the Land Use Officer, prior to action
being taken by any other Township official, employee or board.
B. The Land Use Officer shall ascertain the applicant's intention, then
either issue a development permit and refer the applicant to the
Construction Official with a copy of the development permit or if
appropriate, refuse to issue a permit and provide the applicant with a
copy of the denial and/or the appropriate application forms and
instructions for appeal or application to the appropriate board.
C. The Land Use Officer shall receive for filing all applications, supporting
documents and required fees and if the application is complete and
correct as to form, issue a certificate of completeness, and deposit the
fee in an account entitled "Land Use Office Account." If the application
is incomplete, the applicant shall be notified in writing to that effect.
D. When notice to property owners is required, the Land Use Officer shall
provide a list to be served with notice by the applicant in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, together with any fee required therefor.
E. The Land Use Officer shall retain one copy of the application and
supporting documents, transmit one copy each to the Township
Engineer, Township Planner, Construction Official, Fire Subcode
Official and Police Traffic Bureau, as appropriate, and the balance of
the application forms and documents to the Secretary of the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment as appropriate.
§ 140-53 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-55
139:311
F. The Land Use Officer shall perform any other function or duty
incidental to the foregoing; provided, however, that all action taken by
the Land Use Officer shall be in compliance with the provisions of the
MLUL, and all pertinent ordinances of the Township.
G. When it is ascertained that a violation of any ordinance pertaining to
land use exists, the Land Use Officer or his designee shall serve a
violation notice in writing upon the perpetrator allowing a reasonable
time in which to abate the violation and shall provide one copy thereof
to the Code Enforcement Officer, who shall promptly file a complaint in
the Municipal Court if the violation has not been abated within the
specified time.
H. Upon final action, all files of the Board of Adjustment and Planning
Board shall be stored in the Land Use Office so as to be readily available
for reference by the Land Use Officer in connection with issuance of
development or zoning permits.
I. One copy of each resolution adopted by the Board of Adjustment and
Planning Board shall be furnished to the Land Use Officer upon the
adoption thereof.
J. One copy of all approved site plans and subdivision plans shall be
provided to the Land Use Officer promptly following the approval
thereof.
K. One copy of each violation notice served by any Township official shall
be provided to the Land Use Officer upon the issuance thereof as well
as one copy of the disposition thereof.
L. One copy of each real property transfer shall be provided to the Land
Use Officer by the Tax Assessor upon receipt thereof.
M. The Construction Official shall provide to the Land Use Officer one copy
of every building permit upon the issuance thereof.
N. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Construction Official
until endorsed by the Land Use Officer certifying that the completed
construction, building or development complies with the requirements
of this chapter, and any applicable approvals of a municipal agency.
O. It shall be the duty of the Land Use Officer or his designee to keep a
record of all applications, all actions of the municipal agencies, all
complaints, all violations noted and a record of any action taken
thereon and all development permits issued, together with a notation of
all special conditions involved. He shall file and safely keep all copies of
all plans submitted, and the same shall form a part of the records of his
office and shall be available for the use of the Township Committee and
other officials of the Township.
§ 140-55 WALL CODE § 140-55
139:312
ARTICLE VIII
Fees
§ 140-56. Fees for permits and development applications. [Amended
6-13-2001 by Ord. No. 13-2001]
The payment of the following fees shall be required for the issuance of
the permits specified in Subsections A through P, and the payment of the
application fees shall be required for various categories of applications for
development specified therein. The application and permit fees shall be
paid by the applicant in the form of cash, money order, certified check
or bank check at the time of the submission of the application to the
Land Use Office. Applications requiring a combination of approvals such
as subdivision, site plan and/or variance shall pay an application fee equal
to the sum of the fee for each such approval required. The application
fees specified herein are charged to cover the general administrative costs
incurred by the Township in connection with such applications or permits.
Escrow funds required to be deposited for professional services are in
addition to the required application fees and are governed by § 140-59
hereof.
A. Bulk variances: $300 for the first variance plus $50 per additional
variance per lot; appeals and interpretations (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a, b
and c): $300.
B. Use variances. The fees for use variances (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70D) are:
$300 per use variance request for single- and two-family uses; $600 per
request for multifamily uses and $600 per request for nonresidential
uses.
C. Conditional use variances. The fees for conditional use variances
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67) are $300 per conditional use request.
D. Subdivision applications. The fees for subdivision applications are:
(1) Minor subdivision applications and sketch plat classification
applications: $300 per application;
(2) Preliminary and major subdivision applications: $350 plus $45 per
lot;
(3) Final major subdivision applications: $300 plus $40 per lot; and
(4) No fee is required for subdivisions of public property.
E. Site plan applications. The site plan application fees are:
(1) Residential uses $600 plus $25 per dwelling unit;
(2) Nonresidential uses: $35 per 1,000 square foot of area proposed to
be developed, except that no fee shall be less than $450 nor more
than $850.
§ 140-56 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-56
139:313
§ 140-57. Exemption for tax-exempt organizations and certain
individuals. [Amended 3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 7-2013]
F. Certified list. The fee for a certified list is $10.
G. Special meetings. Special meeting for either board requested by an
applicant: $3,500. [Amended 2-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2-2003]
H. Tree removal permit. Tree removal permit application: $250 except that
applications submitted as part of a major subdivision or site plan shall
not require a fee.
I. Fire Prevention Bureau review. By separate check addressed to the Wall
Township Fire Prevention Bureau for all major subdivisions and site
plans: $100.
J. Zone changes. Zone change requests: $250 for each request.
K. Tax Map revisions. A fee of $50 plus $5 per lot or unit shall be submitted
for all minor subdivisions, major subdivisions, residential unit site
plans, and condominium or cooperative residential or commercial
development to cover the cost of revising the Township Tax Map. This
fee shall be paid prior to the signing of any final map.
L. Requests for reapproval or extension of time: $250 per request.
M. Subdivision certificate of approval. Certificate as to the approval of
subdivision of land: $50 per lot.
N. Certificate of preexisting use: $50 per use.
O. Transfer permit: $50.
P. Zoning or development permits.
(1) Permit fees.
(a) Residential, new home townhouse building, apartment
building: $100;
(b) Residential property additions: $30;
(c) Nonresidential related to approving authority resolution: $350;
(d) Nonresidential other: $40; and
(e) Administrative revision or minor site plan: $750. [Amended
8-8-2012 by Ord. No. 10-2012]
A. All charitable, philanthropic, fraternal and religious nonprofit
organizations, holding a tax exempt status under the Federal Internal
Revenue Code of 1954 [26 U.S.C.§ 501(c) or (d)], who are lessees of
property owned by the Township of Wall, shall be exempt from the
payment of fees or deposits as required by the Planning Board and
§ 140-56 WALL CODE § 140-57
139:314
Board of Adjustment for any application pertaining to such leased
property.
B. Fee exemption for disabled person or parent or sibling of disabled
person.
(1) No person shall be charged a zoning permit fee for any
construction, reconstruction, alteration or improvement designed
and undertaken solely to promote accessibility by the disabled to
an existing public or private structure or any facilities contained
therein.
(2) A disabled person, or parent, sibling or adult child of a disabled
person, shall not be required to pay any Township zoning permit fee
or charge in order to secure a zoning permit for any construction,
reconstruction, alteration or improvement which promotes
accessibility to a disabled person's own living unit.
(3) For the purposes of this chapter, "disabled person" means a person
who has the total and permanent inability to engage in any
substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable
physical or mental impairment, including blindness. The definition
of "disabled person" shall include but not be limited to, any resident
of this state who is disabled pursuant to the federal Social Security
Act (42 U.S.C. § 416) or federal Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 (45
U.S.C. § 231 et seq.) or is rated as having a sixty-percent or higher
disability pursuant to any federal law administered by the United
States Veterans Act. For purposes of this chapter, "blindness"
means central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye with
the use of a corrective lens. An eye which is accompanied by a
limitation in the field of vision such that the widest diameter of the
visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20º shall be
considered as having a central visual acuity of 20/200 or less. Proof
of disability acceptable to the Township shall be required for a fee
exemption.
C. Fee exemption for senior citizen.
(1) The Township shall exempt the first $250 in zoning permit fees
unless approvals are required from the Township Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment. Exemptions shall only be granted in
connection with a residential property. The total sum waived
hereunder shall not exceed $250 for any given property in any
twelve-month period.
(2) All exemptions as described herein shall be in conformance with
the following:
(a) A person applying for a fee exemption shall be 62 years old or
older at the time of the application. A valid driver's license,
valid passport, or birth or baptismal certificate shall be
provided as proof of age.
§ 140-57 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-57
139:315
§ 140-58. Exemption for Township-owned property.
The Township of Wall and its departments and commissions shall be exempt
from the payment of fees as required by the Planning Board and the Board
of Adjustment as to all properties owned by the Township of Wall and used
for municipal purposes.
(b) All exemption requests as noted herein shall be made at the
time of a zoning permit application.
(c) An exemption applicant must be 62 years or older, a current
resident of the Township for at least one year and be at least a
fifty-percent owner/occupant of the property for which an
exemption is requested. All claims of ownership for the
purpose of exemption qualification shall match the deed on file
in the Township Tax Assessor's office. The property must also
be the primary residence of the applicant seeking an
exemption as evidenced by the address on a valid driver's
license, current utility bill or current bank statement. The word
"current" as used above shall mean within three months of the
exemption request.
(d) All applications for a fee exemption shall be made by the
individual owner(s) of the residential property, and no
corporations, partnerships, estates or other forms of
ownership shall be eligible for an exemption herein.
(e) No exemption shall be issued unless all real property taxes of
the applicant are current and all other outstanding amounts
due to the Township, including but not limited to fines, fees,
and utility bills, are paid in full.
(f) Should any property owner receive an exemption hereunder
and convey the subject property to any other party, regardless
of age, within one year of the exemption, the conveyer shall
reimburse the Township the full amount of the exemption prior
to the release of a Fire Prevention Bureau smoke detector/
carbon monoxide certificate. Such reimbursement shall not be
required when the sale or transfer of the property is the result
of the death of the qualifying property owner.
(g) Nothing herein shall create any other exemption whatsoever in
relation to a Township Planning Board or Board of Adjustment
application. Any exemption as noted herein shall not include an
exemption for any other monetary amount, including but not
limited to any rate, fee, fine, bond, penalty enforcement
amount, or surety bond guaranteeing faithful performance/
payment as may be required and/or due the Township or any
other law.
§ 140-57 WALL CODE § 140-59
139:316
§ 140-59. Escrow funds for professional services, review of
applications and preparation of documents and inspections.
A. General.
(1) In addition to the submission of application filing fees (which are
charged to cover general Township administrative costs), as set
forth hereinbefore development applications which meet the
criteria established herein shall be accompanied by a deposit of
escrow funds in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(2) Said escrow funds shall be utilized to cover the cost to the
Township of professional services rendered to the Township for
review of applications for development, review and preparation of
documents, and inspections of developments under construction,
and review by outside consultants when an application is of a
nature beyond the scope of the expertise of the professionals
normally utilized by the Township. Professional fees and salaries
incurred in connection with the review of an application, plans,
consultation, site inspections, written reports, resolution
preparation, meeting attendance, general preparation, research,
testimony, and other work performed by the Township Planner,
Township or Board Attorneys, Township Engineer, the consulting
planner, and any other professional consulting services such as a
professional traffic consultant, that may be required due to the
nature of the application shall be paid from the escrow funds.
Escrow funds deposited with the Township as provided for in this
section shall not be utilized to pay inspection costs required during
the construction process.
B. Escrow amounts. The applicant shall, at the time of filing an
application, deposit with the Township in the form of a certified or bank
check, cash or money order, the amount prescribed herein. The deposit
shall be placed into an escrow account pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.1. [Amended 6-13-2001 by Ord. No. 23-2001;
2-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2-2003]
(1) Bulk variances: No deposit required.
(2) Appeals and interpretations: $750 per appeal or interpretation.
(3) Use variance:
(a) Single and two family: $250.
(b) Multifamily: $2,500 plus $75 per unit.
(c) Nonresidential: $2,500.
(4) Conditional use: $1,000.
(5) Subdivision minor/sketch plat: $3,500; preliminary: $4,000 plus
$100 per lot; final: $2,500 plus $75 per lot.
§ 140-59 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-59
139:317
(6) Site plan:
(a) Residential: $100 per 1,000 square foot of area to be developed
(minimum $2,500; maximum $10,000).
(b) Nonresidential: $100 per square foot of the area to be
developed (minimum $5,000; maximum $10,000).
(7) Waiver request: $500.
(8) Informal hearing (minor subdivision): $250 per meeting.
(9) Informal hering (other): $500 per meeting.
(10) Informal review of conceptual plans: $250.
(11) Requests for administrative approval of changes: $250.
(12) Requests for extensions of time to commence development or file
subdivision maps: $500.
(13) Any application involving more than one of the above categories
shall require a deposit of cumulative amounts.
C. Procedural requirements.
(1) All required initial escrow deposits shall be made at the time of a
filing of an application. No meeting or hearing with the applicant
shall be held by a board until all escrow funds and required fees
have been deposited in accordance with this section. All deposits of
escrow funds shall be made to the Township Land Use Officer.
(2) Additional escrow funds may be required of the applicant when the
escrow has been depleted to 25% of the original escrow amount.
The Land Use Officer shall notify the Chief Financial Officer when
the escrow funds have been depleted in the aforementioned
amount. The Chief Financial Officer shall provide the applicant
with a notice of insufficient escrow or deposit balance. In order for
work to continue on the development or the application, the
applicant shall, within a twenty-one-day period from date of
notification period post a deposit to the account in an amount to be
agreed upon by the Township and the applicant. In the interim, any
required health and safety inspections shall be made and charged
back against the replenishment of funds.
(3) Deposits received from any developer pursuant to this section shall
be deposited in a banking institution or savings and loan
association in this state insured by an agency of the federal
government, or in any other fund or depository approved for such
deposits by the state, in an account bearing interest at the
minimum rate currently paid by the institution or depository on
time or saving deposits. The Township shall notify the applicant in
writing of the name and address of the institution or depository in
§ 140-59 WALL CODE § 140-59
139:318
which the deposit is made and the amount of the deposit. The
Township shall not be required to refund an amount of interest paid
on a deposit which does not exceed $100 for the year. If the amount
of interest exceeds $100, that entire amount shall belong to the
developer and shall be refunded to him by the Township annually
or at the time the deposit is repaid or applied to the purposes
for which it was deposited, as the case may be; except that the
Township may retain for administrative expenses a sum equivalent
to not more than 33 1/3% of that entire amount, which shall be in
lieu of all other administrative and custodial expenses pertaining to
the escrow account.
(4) The Chief Financial Office of the Township shall make all of the
payments to professionals for services rendered to the Township
for review of applications for development, review and preparation
of documents, inspection of improvements or other purposes under
the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq. Such fees or charges shall be based upon a schedule
established by resolution or resolutions as adopted by the Township
Committee for professional services.
(5) Escrow account deposits shall be placed in an interest-bearing
account and the same shall be administered in accordance with the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1.
(6) All disbursements to consulting professionals, Township consulting
professionals and Township employed professionals for services
involved in processing an application which requires escrow
account deposits shall be charged against the escrow account.
(7) The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare and send to the applicant
a statement which shall include an accounting of funds listing all
deposits, interest earnings, disbursements, and the cumulative
balance of the escrow account. This information shall be provided
on a quarterly basis, if monthly charges are $1,000 or less, or on a
monthly basis, if monthly charges exceed $1,000.
(8) Each payment charged to the deposit for review of the application,
review and preparation of documents and inspection of
improvements shall be pursuant to a voucher from the professional.
Said voucher shall identify the personnel performing the service,
the date, the services performed, the hours spent to one-quarterhour
increments, the hourly rate and the expenses incurred. All
professionals shall submit vouchers to the Chief Financial Officer of
the Township on a monthly basis in accordance with schedules and
procedure established by the Chief Financial Officer of the
Township. If the services are provided by a Township employee, the
employee shall prepare and submit to the Chief Financial Officer a
statement containing the same information as required on the
voucher, on a monthly basis. The professional shall send an
informational copy of all vouchers or statements submitted to the
§ 140-59 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-59
139:319
Chief Financial Officer of the Township simultaneously to the
applicant.
(9) The application review and inspection charges shall be limited only
to professional charges for review of applications, review and
preparation of documents and inspections of developments under
construction and review by outside consultants when an
application is of a nature beyond the scope of the expertise of the
professionals normally utilized by the Township.
(10) The only costs that shall be added to any such charges shall be
actual out-of-pocket expenses of any such professional or
consultants including normal and typical expenses incurred in
processing applications and inspecting improvements. The
Township shall not bill the applicant, or charge an escrow account
or deposit, for any Township clerical or administrative functions,
overhead expenses, meeting room charges, or any other costs and
expenses, except as provided for in this section, nor shall a
Township professional add any such charges to his bill.
(11) A professional shall not review items which are subject to approval
by any state agency and not under municipal jurisdiction except to
the extent that consultation with a state agency is necessary due to
the effect of state approval of the subdivision or site plan.
(12) All professional charges for review of an application for
development, review and preparation of documents, or inspection
of improvements shall be reasonable and necessary, given the
status and progress of the application or construction. Review fees
shall be charged only in connection with an application for
development presently pending before the approving authority or
upon review of compliance with conditions of approval, or review of
requests for modifications or amendment made by the applicant.
(13) If the Township retains a different professional or consultant in the
place of the professional originally responsible for development
application review or inspection of improvements, the Township
shall be responsible for all time and expenses of the new
professional to become familiar with the application or project and
shall not bill the applicant or charge the deposit or the escrow
account for any such services.
(14) If the salary, staff support and overhead for a Township
professional are provided by the municipality, the charge shall not
exceed 200% of the sum of the product resulting from multiplying
the hourly base salary of the professional by the number of hours
spent by the respective professional upon review of the application
for development or inspection of the developer's improvements, as
the case may be. For other professionals the charge shall be at the
same rate as all other work of the same nature by the professional
§ 140-59 WALL CODE § 140-59
139:320
for the municipality when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise
imposed on applicants or developers.
D. Inspection fees.
(1) Inspection fees shall be charged only for actual work shown on a
subdivision or site plan required by the Township. Professionals
inspecting improvements under construction shall charge only for
inspections that are reasonably necessary to check the progress
and quality of the work and such inspections shall be reasonably
based on the approved development plans and documents.
(2) The developer shall be required to deposit funds into an escrow
account for the inspection fees pursuant to § 140-60.
(3) The amount of monies to be deposited with the Township shall be as
set forth in § 140-60 of this chapter.
E. Refund of monies in escrow account. The following close out and refund
procedure shall apply to all deposits and escrow accounts established
under the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq., and shall commence after the Township has granted final
approval and signed the subdivision plat or site plan, in the case of
application review escrows and deposits, or after the improvements
have been finally approved, in the case of improvement inspection
escrows and deposits and the Township has further determined that
there is no longer any need to retain any escrow account:
(1) The applicant shall send written notice by certified mail to the
Chief Financial Officer and to the relevant Township professional,
that the application or the improvements are completed.
(2) After receipt of such notice, the professional shall render a final bill
to the Chief Financial Officer within 30 days and shall send a copy
simultaneously to the applicant.
(3) The Chief Financial Officer shall render a written final accounting
to the applicant on the uses to which the escrow account deposit
was put within 45 days after the receipt of the final bill.
(4) Any balances remaining in the deposit or escrow account, including
interest in accordance with the requirements of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.1 shall be refunded to the developer along with the final
accounting.
(5) In the event that an applicant requests a refund of any balances
remaining in a deposit or escrow account and it is necessary for the
Township to provide additional professional services or inspection
services relating to that development application, it will be
necessary for developer to post a new deposit or escrow amount
pursuant to this section as if it were a new development
application.
§ 140-59 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-59
139:321
§ 140-60. Inspection fees.
F. Dispute of charges.
(1) An applicant shall notify in writing the Township Committee with
copies to the Chief Financial Officer, the approving authority and
the professional whenever the applicant disputes the charges made
by a professional for services rendered to the Township in
reviewing applications for development, review and preparation of
documents, inspection of improvements, or other charges made
pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.).
(2) The Township Committee or its designee shall, within a twenty-oneday
period attempt to remediate any disputed charges. In the event
that the matter is not resolved to the satisfaction of the applicant,
the applicant may appeal, in writing, to the County Construction
Board of Appeals established under Section 9 of P.L. 1975, c. 217
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127).
(3) An applicant filing an appeal shall simultaneously send a copy to
the Township, the approving agency, and any professional whose
charge is the subject of the appeal.
(4) Any appeal shall be filed within 45 days from receipt of the
informational copy of the professional's voucher, except that if the
professional has not supplied the applicant with the informational
copy of the voucher, then the applicant shall file his appeal within
60 days from receipt of the municipal statement of activity against
the deposit or escrow account.
A. The developer shall reimburse the Township for all reasonable
inspection fees paid to the Township Engineer for the inspection of
improvements, provided that the Township shall require of the
developer a deposit for the inspection fees in an amount not to exceed,
except for extraordinary circumstances, the greater of $500 or 5% of
the cost of improvements. For those developments for which the
reasonably anticipated fees are less than $10,000, fees may, at the
option of the developer, be paid in two installments. The initial amount
deposited by a developer shall be 50% of the reasonably anticipated
fees. When the balance on deposit drops to 10% of the reasonably
anticipated fees because the amount deposited by the developer has
been reduced by the amount paid to the Township Engineer for
inspection, the developer shall deposit the remaining 50% of the
anticipated inspection fees. For those developments for which the
reasonably anticipated fees are $10,000 or greater, fees may, at the
option of the developer, be paid in four installments. The initial amount
deposited by a developer shall be 25% of the reasonably anticipated
fees. When the balance on deposit drops to 10% of the reasonably
anticipated fees because the amount deposited by the developer has
been reduced by the amount paid to the Township Engineer for
§ 140-59 WALL CODE § 140-60
139:322
inspection, the developer shall make additional deposits of 25% of the
reasonably anticipated fees. The Township Engineer shall not perform
any inspection if sufficient funds to pay for those inspections are not on
deposit.
B. When notified of an account deficiency, the developer shall, within five
business days, reimburse the Township and deposit funds sufficient to
cover future reasonably anticipated inspection expenses. Failure to
accomplish reimbursement and a future deposit against expenses shall
cause the cessation of inspection by the Township Engineer and of the
issuance of permits and certificates by the Land Use Office.
§ 140-60 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-60
139:323

ARTICLE IX
Planning Coordinator
§ 140-61. Establishment.
There is hereby created and established in the Township Land Use Office
the position of Planning Coordinator who shall serve as Secretary to the
Planning Board and Board of Adjustment and who shall perform the
functions and duties indicated herein.
§ 140-62. Term.
The Planning Coordinator shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure
of the Township Committee.
§ 140-63. Compensation.
Compensation for the position of Planning Coordinator shall be as fixed by
ordinance.
§ 140-64. Functions and duties.
The Planning Coordinator shall:
A. Act as administrative and recording secretary to the Planning Board
and Board of Adjustment under the direct supervision of the Director of
Engineering and Planning.
B. Serve as liaison between the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment,
Township Administrator and general public.
C. Attend all of the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment meetings,
prepare, transcribe and distribute board minutes, formulate meeting
agendas based on the submission of applications for development,
maintain and process applicant's files, coordinate and pursue timely
receipt of professional review reports and proper distribution thereof,
and other related administrative duties.
D. Respond to day-to-day inquires from developers and the public relating
to planning and zoning matters.
E. Consult with board Chairman and professional staff as needed.
F. Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Township
Administrator and the Director of Engineering and Planning.
§ 140-61 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-64
139:325

Part 3
Procedures
ARTICLE X
General Requirements
§ 140-65. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish the procedures for regulating
development through permits, inspections, and subdivision, site plan,
conditional use, or variance approvals. The procedures are intended to
provide for the orderly and expeditious processing of such applications.
§ 140-66. Approvals required.
In all zones and for proposed uses, subdivision, site development or
construction other than an exempt development site plan and/or subdivision
approval shall be required prior to:
A. The subdivision or resubdivision of any land.
B. Issuance of a development permit or building permit.
C. Commencement of any regulated use or activity, which includes:
(1) The erection, construction, alteration, repair, remodeling,
conversion, removal or destruction of any building or structures.
(2) The use or occupancy of any building, structure or land.
(3) Any activity which entails the construction of any improvements or
the altercation of the natural condition of any land.
(4) The change of use of any building, structure or land.
D. Construction permit.
(1) No construction permit shall be issued unless the applicant shall
have first secured a development permit.
(2) No building or structure shall be erected, added to, or structurally
altered until a permit therefor has been issued by the Construction
Official. All applications for such permits shall be in accordance
with the requirements of the New Jersey State Uniform
Construction Code (N.J.S.A. 5:23-2.14).
E. No building, structure or land shall be occupied or used until such time
as a certificate of occupancy is issued by the Construction Official and
the Land Use Officer.
F. Whenever there occurs a change of occupancy, tenancy, use, ownership
or operation of a nonresidential building, structure or land, a transfer
permit shall be obtained to insure compliance with all applicable codes
§ 140-65 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-66
139:327
and ordinances of the Township. Responsibility for the application shall
rest with the property owner for changes of occupancy, tenancy,
operation or use and with the purchaser for changes of ownership.
G. Where required, a soil erosion and sediment control plan certification
shall be obtained from the Freehold Soil Conservation District prior to
subdivision or the erection of any structure or the alteration of the
existing grade on any lot. No such certification shall be valid until a
development permit shall have first been issued for the subdivision,
building, structure or use.
H. No person shall erect, alter, modify or expand any sign without a
development permit except that no permit shall be required for exempt
signs or for complying modifications of the graphic content of signs.
I. Except as provided in this section, no application for a building permit
shall be approved unless there is included with the plan for such
building, improvement or use a plot plan showing the required space
reserved for off-street parking, unloading and service purposes. An
occupancy permit shall not be issued unless the required off-street
parking, unloading and service facilities have been provided.
§ 140-66 WALL CODE § 140-66
139:328
ARTICLE XI
Development Permits
§ 140-67. Development permit required prior to certain actions.
A. Development permits shall hereafter be secured from the Zoning
Officer prior to:
(1) Application for and/or issuance of any building permit, except for
minor work or ordinary repairs as defined in the Uniform
Construction Code.20
(2) The erection, construction, alteration, repair, remodeling, or
conversion of any building or structure.
(3) Application for and/or issuance of any permit for a new, expanded
or relocated sign.
(4) Application for and/or issuance of any permit for erection of a fence
in conjunction with any nonfarm use.
(5) Any use or change in use of any building, structure or land.
(6) Any alteration exceeding 5,000 square feet in the natural condition
of any undeveloped parcel of land including but not limited to the
alteration of drainage patterns, removal of soil, regrading, and
removal of trees and ground cover; provided, however, that such
alterations located on and necessary to the operation of a farm as
defined in this chapter shall not require a development permit.
(7) Any use of any portion of any parcel of land for any activity
regulated by this chapter.
(8) The construction of any site improvement either above or below
ground.
(9) The issuance of any certificate of occupancy where no building
permit was previously required.
(10) The excavation, removal, or addition of soil or fill to or from any site
exceeding 10 cubic yards.
B. An application for a development permit shall be in writing by the
owner or his authorized agent on a form prepared by the Land Use
Officer and shall include the following:
(1) A statement of the use or intended use or uses of the building,
structure or land.
(2) An elevation drawn to scale of the building or structure to be
erected including signs to be placed thereon and their content and
manner of construction.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 90, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 140-67 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-67
139:329
(3) A plan drawn to scale showing all proposed and/or existing
buildings, signs, parking areas, setbacks, and yard distances in
exact relation to street and lot lines.
(4) The percentage of existing and proposed lot coverage.
(5) The percentage of existing and proposed impervious lot coverage.
(6) The location of any wetlands, wetlands transition areas, easements,
floodplains or slopes of 10% or greater.
C. The Land Use Officer shall take action on a complete application for a
development permit within 45 days of its submission.
D. Prior to issuance of a development permit, the applicant shall have,
where applicable, secured other required permits including, but not
limited to:
(1) Access permit from the New Jersey Department of Transportation
and/or Monmouth County Engineering Department.
(2) Drainage permits from the NJDOT.
(3) Stream encroachment permit from the NJDEP.
(4) Coastal Area Facilities Review Act (CAFRA) permit from the NJDEP.
(5) Wetlands (tidal or freshwater) permit from the NJDEP.
(6) Riparian construction permit from the NJDEP.
(7) Waterfront development permit from the NJDEP.
(8) Required permits from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and/or
U.S. Coast Guard.
(9) Sewerage and/or industrial waste treatment permit from the
NJDEP.
(10) Land disturbance permit from the Freehold Soil Conservation
District.
(11) Floodplain encroachment permit.
(12) The Wall Township Water-Sewer Utility connection permit.
(13) Approval for connection from the Township of Neptune Sewerage
Authority, South Monmouth Regional Sewerage Authority, Ocean
County Utilities Authority and/or Manasquan River Regional
Sewerage Authority, as may be applicable.
(14) On-site sewerage (septic systems) permit from the Health Officer of
Wall Township, if applicable. [Amended 10-24-2018 by Ord. No.
14-2018]
§ 140-67 WALL CODE § 140-67
139:330
§ 140-68. Sign approvals.
§ 140-69. Certificates as to approval of subdivision of land.
(15) Tree removal permit from the Township.
E. Prior to the issuance of a development permit, the applicant shall have
secured all approvals required by this chapter and shall have met any
and all conditions of any municipal agency approval.
A. Application shall be made to the Land Use Officer for the issuance of a
development permit by any person wishing to erect, alter, modify, or
expand any sign, except exempt signs.
B. If the Land Use Officer (Zoning Officer) determines that a sign requires
the issuance of a development permit, is not part of an application for
site plan, subdivision, conditional use, or variance approval, is
permitted as an accessory structure within the zone and meets the
applicable sign schedule requirements, the officer shall issue a
development permit. The applicant may then apply for a sign
construction permit and any other permits that may be required.
C. If the Land Use Officer determines that the proposed sign is part of
subdivision, site plan, or conditional use application or that it does not
comply with applicable regulations, sign schedule requirements or
other sign regulations, the officer shall instruct the applicant that
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment approval of an application for
development is required and the Officer shall further advise the
applicant which board has jurisdiction in accordance with the following
schedule:
Sign Type Board Jurisdiction
Signs indicated on plats which are part of a
development application before the
Planning Board
Planning Board
Signs indicated on plats which are part of a
development application before the Board
of Adjustment
Board of Adjustment
Signs not permitted Board of Adjustment
D. Modification of graphic content. The graphic content of a sign may be
modified without obtaining a development permit, provided that the
proposed graphic content complies with all applicable provisions of this
section.
A. Any person interested in any land which forms part of a subdivision, or
which formed part of such a subdivision three years preceding the
effective date of the MLUL, may apply in writing to the Land Use Officer
for issuance of a certificate certifying whether or not such subdivision
has been approved by the Planning Board. Such application shall
§ 140-67 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-69
139:331
§ 140-70. Certificate as to existing uses at time of passage of
chapter.
Any person interested in any land or structure may apply in writing for the
issuance of a certificate certifying that the use or structure legally existed
before the adoption of this chapter or any amendment and certifying the
extent and nature of such use. The applicant shall have the burden of proof.
Application pursuant hereto shall be made to the Land Use Officer within
one year of the adoption of the chapter or the amendment or at any time
to the Board of Adjustment and shall be accompanied by the established
fee. A denial by the Land Use Officer shall be appealable to the Board of
Adjustment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72 et seq.
contain a diagram showing the location and dimension of the land to be
covered by the certificate, the name and the owner thereof, and the Tax
Map lot and block numbers of the property.
B. The Land Use Officer shall make and issue such certificate within 15
days after the receipt of such written application and the fees therefor.
Said officer shall keep a duplicate copy of each certificate,
consecutively numbered, including a statement of the fee charged, in a
binder as a permanent record of his office.
C. Each such certificate shall be designated as "Certificate as to Approval
of Subdivision of Land" and shall certify:
(1) Whether there exists in the Township a duly established Planning
Board and whether there is an ordinance controlling subdivision of
land and adopted under the authority of the MLUL.
(2) Whether the subdivision, as it relates to the land shown in said
application, has been approved by the Planning Board, and, if so,
the date of such approval and any extensions and terms thereof,
showing the subdivision of which the lands are a part is a validly
existing subdivision.
(3) Whether such subdivision, if the same has not been approved, is
statutorily exempt from the requirement of approval as provided by
the MLUL.
D. Any person who shall acquire for a valuable consideration an interest in
the lands covered by such certificates of approval of a subdivision in
reliance upon the information therein contained shall hold such interest
free of any right, remedy or action which could be prosecuted or
maintained by the Township pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-55.
E. If the Land Use Officer fails to issue the same within 15 days after
receipt of an application and the fee therefor, any person acquiring an
interest in the lands described in such application shall hold such
interest free of any right, remedy or action which could be prosecuted
or maintained by the Township pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-55.
§ 140-69 WALL CODE § 140-71
139:332
§ 140-71. Endorsement of certificate of occupancy for new
buildings, structures or uses.
A. No certificate of occupancy for a new building shall be endorsed unless
the property owner has completed the following: [Amended
9-12-2001 by Ord. No. 34-2001; 10-10-2001 by Ord. No. 40-2001]
(1) The property owner must submit two copies of a sealed preliminary
plot plan to the Land Use Office prior to the issuance of any zoning
permit together with a fee of $125. Any additional reviews
requested by the Township Engineer or the Zoning Officer shall
require an additional fee of $75. The preliminary plot plan shall
show:
(a) Property lines and dimensions;
(b) Building dimensions and proposed set back dimensions;
(c) Existing elevations of the lot and street conditions, spot
elevations and contours;
(d) Proposed grades to include proposed contours and sufficient
spot elevations at the building corner, driveway and yard areas
to clearly show impact of new grading;
(e) Finished floor grades of house and garage or building to be
constructed and description of house or building style (ranch,
bi-level, 2 story) and critical grade that applies:
(f) A description of the building to be constructed, basement,
crawl space or slab construction;
(g) Where applicable, sufficient information to show any impact on
adjoining properties, if any;
(h) Certification by a New Jersey licensed professional engineer or
a New Jersey licensed land surveyor of the seasonal high-water
table elevation at the location of the proposed building.
(2) Prior to a sheathing inspection, the property owner shall submit a
sealed foundation as-built plan to the Land Use Office. Said plan
must show the set backs and elevations as to said as-built
foundation and specifically showing the top of block elevation and
any other critical floor elevation.
(3) At least five days before the date on which a certificate of
occupancy is required, the property owner shall submit two copies
of a sealed as-built survey together with fee of $150 to the Land
Use Office. Any additional reviews requested by the Township
Engineer or the Land Use Office shall require an additional fee of
$100. The as-built plan must show an overall plan as well as depict
the same data in a tabulation format on the plan. No inspection will
§ 140-71 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-71
139:333
be scheduled until the as-built survey has been supplied by the
property owner. The as-built plan shall show:
(a) Property lines and dimensions;
(b) Existing elevations of the lot and street conditions, as well as
contours and critical spot elevations;
(c) Finished floor grades of house and garage and description of
house style and critical grade that applies;
(d) All building setbacks;
(e) A description of the building constructed, basement, crawl
space or slab construction;
(f) Where applicable, sufficient information to show any impact on
adjoining properties, if any;
(g) A certificate from the preparer that the same is in substantial
conformance with the plan previously submitted for initial
review for a zoning permit. If alterations have been made, they
should be explained by notes or attachments with explanations
of how the changes are different from the original plan, and
explain why they have no significant impact upon the approved
grading plan or adjoining properties.
B. In the case of development which has received site plan approval, no
certificate of occupancy shall be endorsed until two copies of a sealed
as-built plan prepared by a licensed engineer, architect or land surveyor
have been submitted and approved by the Land Use Officer and the
Township Engineer. The as-built plan shall contain and certify the
locations and elevations of all site improvements including but not
limited to buildings, structures, utilities, curbing, sidewalks, pavement,
striping, advertising and safety signage, grading and landscaping.
C. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for any structure,
building use or development for which site plan approval has been
obtained or for which development permits have been issued but for
which not all improvements required by the approval or permit have
been completed, provided that the Land Use Officers determines that
the items to be completed are minor and incidental in nature and
provided that the items have not been completed due to weather or
other unforeseen circumstances.
D. No permanent certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all required
improvements have been installed in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued to
permit occupancy for a period not to exceed one year. If at the end of
that period the required improvements have not been completed, the
occupancy permit becomes null and void and the owner may be subject
to the penalties herein defined by this chapter.
§ 140-71 WALL CODE § 140-71
139:334
E. In the case of a development which required and obtained site plan
approval, no temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued until
the following is submitted to the Land Use Officer.
(1) The property owner shall supply a written, signed and sealed
estimate prepared by a licensed professional engineer itemizing
and totaling the cost to complete all site improvements.
(2) A performance guarantee in the amount of 120% of the estimate,
no less than 10% of which shall be in the form of cash and the
remainder in the form of a letter of credit or surety bond subject to
approval by the Township Attorney.
(3) A signed and notarized escrow agreement on a form prepared by
the Land Use Officer.
F. Prior to the change of occupancy, ownership or tenancy of any
residential unit or dwelling, a certificate of occupancy shall be obtained
by the property owner for a change of tenancy or occupancy and by the
future property owner for a change of ownership. Application for the
certificate shall be made on a form prepared by the Land Use Officer
and shall include the appropriate fee and, for changes in ownership, the
application shall include a survey not more than five years old.
G. Scope of certificate of occupancy. The certificate of occupancy shall
contain sufficient information as to the extent and kind of use or uses,
such that any future investigation of the premises would disclose the
extent to which a use was altered. It shall also indicate whether such
use is a permitted or nonconforming use and the extent to which the
use does not conform to the provisions of this chapter.
H. Improvements required. No permanent certificate of occupancy shall
be issued until all required improvements have been installed in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. A temporary certificate
of occupancy may be issued to permit occupancy for a period not to
exceed one year. If at the end of that period the required improvements
have not been completed, the occupancy permit becomes null and void
and the owner may be subject to the penalties herein defined by this
chapter.
I. Special obligations of condominium and cluster subdivision
homeowners. For individual properties which have an interest in lands
held in common by a homeowners' or condominium association or
similar entity, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a change in
ownership until a deed of conveyance including language
acknowledging the individual property owner's obligation for
ownership and maintenance of these common lands and/or
improvements to be held in common and for membership in the
particular association is submitted and approved by the Township of
Wall.
§ 140-71 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-72
139:335
§ 140-72. Transfer permits.
A. A transfer permit shall hereinafter be secured from the Land Use
Officer prior to the transfer of ownership or a tenancy of any
nonresidential building or unit therein, prior to the change of
ownership of any residential apartment complex or multifamily use or
mobile home park, and prior to the transfer of the operation of any
existing business, residential apartment complex, multifamily
residential use or mobile home park. The issuance of a transfer permit
is intended to inform the property owner, tenant or operator of any land
use or health requirements applicable to the property, any restrictions
placed on the use of the property and any conditional approvals granted
by a municipal agency.
B. Application for a transfer permit shall be made in writing on a form
provided by the land Use Officer and accompanied by the fee
established in this chapter.
§ 140-72 WALL CODE § 140-72
139:336
ARTICLE XII
Applications for Development
§ 140-73. Jurisdiction and time limits.
§ 140-74. Filing of applications.
A. Time for decision. After the date an appeal is taken from the decision of
a municipal officer or the submission of a complete application for
development to the Land Use Officer, the approving authority shall
render its decision within the maximum number of days as specified
below or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. Where more than one type of application is involved, the
longer time period shall apply.
Type of Application
Time Period
(days)
Site plans
Minor 45
Preliminary approval (10 acres or less, 10 units
or less)
45
Preliminary approval (more than 10 acres or 10
units)
95
Final approval 45
Subdivisions
Minor 45
Preliminary approval (10 lots or less) 45
Preliminary approval (more than 10 lots) 95
Final approval 45
Conditional use authorization 95
Variance 120
Appeal from the decision of a municipal officer 120
Direction for issuance of a building permit 120
B. Whenever an application for approval of a subdivision plat, site plan, or
conditional use includes a request for relief pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-60, the Planning Board shall grant or deny approval of the
application within 120 days after submission by a developer of a
complete application to the Land Use Officer or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant. In the event that the
developer elects to submit separate consecutive applications, the
aforesaid provision shall apply to the application for approval of the
variance or direction for issuance of a permit. The period for granting
or denying any subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in
this chapter.
§ 140-73 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-74
139:337
A. Complete applications.
(1) Content. An application for development shall include all of the
items and information required in the applicable application and
checklists adopted herein and listed in 140 Attachment 4:1 et seq.21
A copy of the required checklist(s) shall be completed by the
applicant and submitted with the application. Failure of an
applicant to submit a completed checklist as part of an application
package shall result in the application being deemed incomplete,
and no review shall be undertaken by any employee of the
Township until such time as a completed checklist is submitted by
the applicant. [Amended 2-9-2011 by Ord. No. 1-2011]
(2) Checklist attachments22 provided herein shall be used to determine
the completeness of development applications and shall be
provided to all prospective applicants upon request. The approving
authority may grant waivers from the submission of any submittal
requirements upon the request of the applicant and the provision of
proofs to the authority pursuant to the ordinance with the
exception of the submittal of an environmental impact statement
when required. [Amended 2-9-2011 by Ord. No. 1-201123]
(3) A subdivision and site plan application shall be complete for
purposes of commencing the applicable time period for action
when so certified by the Land Use Officer or designee. In the event
that the Land Use Officer or designee does not certify the
application to be complete within 45 days of the date of its
submission, the application shall be deemed complete upon the
expiration of the forty-five-day period for purposes of commencing
the applicable time period unless the application lacks information
indicated on the checklist of items specified in this chapter, the
checklist has been provided in writing to the applicant, and the
Planning Board or its authorized committee or designee has
notified the applicant, in writing, of the deficiencies in the
application within 45 days of submission of the application. The
applicant may request that one or more of the submission
requirements be waived, in which event the board or its authorized
committee shall grant or deny the request within 45 days of the
date of its submission. Nothing herein shall be construed as
diminishing the applicant's obligation to prove in the application
process that the applicant is entitled to approval of the application.
The Planning Board may subsequently require correction of any
information found to be in error and submission of additional
information not specified in the ordinance or any revisions in the
accompanying documents, as are reasonably necessary to make an
informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary to
21.Editor’s Note: Said checklists are included at the end of this chapter.
22.Editor’s Note: Said checklists are included at the end of this chapter.
23.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection
A(2) as Subsection A(3).
§ 140-74 WALL CODE § 140-74
139:338
§ 140-75. Preapplication informal review of concept plan.
approval of the application for development have been met. The
application shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of any such
additional information or any revisions in the accompanying
documents required by the Planning Board.
B. An applicant may appeal the Land Use Officer's decision concerning
completeness of an application to the board which has jurisdiction to
hear the application. The board shall have 45 days after receipt of a
written request to schedule a public hearing at which time the board
will determine if the application is complete. The board may affirm,
modify, or reverse the decision of the Land Use Officer.
C. Assignment of applications.
(1) The applicant shall have the option of filing an application for
development with the Land Use Officer or his designee to
determine which approvals are required, or of filing an application
and proceeding before the board which the applicant believes to be
appropriate. The Land Use Officer or his designee's determination
shall be presumed to be correct. The following applications may be
filed, and certain applications may involve a combination of actions:
(a) Minor subdivision.
(b) Major subdivision.
(c) Appeal.
(d) Major site plan.
(e) Conditional use.
(f) Variance.
(g) Interpretation
(2) The board shall deny without prejudice a misfiled application, and
the applicant may apply to the correct approving authority.
A. Purpose of concept plan.
(1) At the request of the applicant, the Planning Board or the
Subdivision or Site Plan Committees shall grant an informal review
of a concept plan for a development for which the applicant intends
to prepare and submit an application for development.
(2) The purpose of the concept plan is to provide Planning Board or
Subdivision and Site Plan Committees input in the formative stages
of subdivision and site plan design.
§ 140-74 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-75
139:339
§ 140-76. Post-application technical review.
At the written request of the applicant or his representative and after an
application has been deemed complete, the Land Use Officer shall schedule
a technical review meeting regarding such application. The meeting shall
involve the applicant, any representatives he wishes to attend, the Land Use
Officer, The Township Engineer and the Township Planner and shall be held
to discuss any technical concerns of the Township's representatives prior to
the presentation of the application to the approving authority.
§ 140-77. Development requiring variances.
(3) Application for informal review shall be made on a form provided
by the Land Use Officer and shall provide all information required
therein.
B. Applicants seeking concept plan informal review shall submit the items
stipulated in this chapter 24 days before the concept plan meeting.
These items provide the developer and Planning Board or Subdivision
and Site Plan Committees with an opportunity to discuss the
development proposal in its formative stages.
C. The applicant will be charged the fee established for concept plan
review. The amount of any fees for such informal review shall be a
credit towards fees for review of the application for development.
D. The applicant shall not be bound by any concept plan for which review
is requested, nor shall the Planning Board or Subdivision and Site Plan
Committees be bound by any such review.
A. In cases where a proposed development requires Board of Adjustment
action on an application for the grant of a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70c or d or for the direction of issuance of a building permit
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 or where a party
requests Board of Adjustment action on an appeal pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70a or on an interpretation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b, the
applicant shall submit to the Land Use Officer 15 copies of the items
required by this chapter, together with an executed application form,
the prescribed fee, and evidence that no taxes or assessments are
outstanding against the property.
B. Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this section, notice of the
hearing on the application for development shall include reference to
the request for a variance, or direction for issuance of a permit.
C. The application shall be declared complete or incomplete within a fortyfive-
day period from the date of its submission.
D. The Board of Adjustment shall render a decision not later than 120 days
after the date an appeal is taken from the decision of an administrative
office or the submission of a complete application for development to
the Board of Adjustment. Failure of the board to render a decision
§ 140-75 WALL CODE § 140-77
139:340
§ 140-78. Minor subdivision procedure.
within a one-hundred-twenty-day period or within such further time
as may be consented to by the applicant shall constitute a decision
favorable to the applicant.
E. Any variance permitting use or structure in a district in which such use
or structure is not permitted shall expire by limitations three years after
the date of the decision granting the variance, unless the construction
of the structure or the use has been commenced within that period of
time. The running of the aforesaid period of limitation shall be
suspended from the date of filing of an appeal from the decision to a
court of competent jurisdiction until the termination of such appeal.
Whether there answers part of a subdivision or site plan approval, the
period of limitations shall coincide with the period of effectiveness of
the approval period.
A. Any applicant requesting approval of a proposed minor subdivision as
defined in this chapter shall submit to the Land Use Officer 15 copies of
the items required in by this chapter, together with an executed
application form, the prescribed fee, and evidence that no taxes or
assessments are outstanding against the property.
B. The application shall be declared complete or incomplete within a fortyfive-
day period from the date of its submission.
C. If the subdivision is unanimously approved with at least three members
of the Subdivision Committee present and voting, no further action
shall be required of the Planning Board as a whole. If the vote is not
unanimous, or if such Committee has not been established, the minor
subdivision shall be referred to the Planning Board. If a variance within
the jurisdiction of the Planning Board is requested, the subdivision shall
not be referred to the Committee but instead to the Planning Board as a
whole.
D. The action of the Subdivision Committee or the Planning Board under
this article must be taken within 45 days, or 120 days if a variance is
required of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c or d or within such further time as is
agreed to by the applicant and the board. Failure of the Planning Board
or Committee to act within the period prescribed shall constitute minor
subdivision approval and a certificate of the Land Use Officer as to the
failure of the Planning Board or Committee to act shall be issued on
request of the applicant.
E. Except as provided in Subsection G below, approval of a minor
subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date on which the resolution
of approval is adopted unless within such period a plat in conformity
with such approval and the provisions of the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq., or a deed clearly describing the approved minor
subdivision is filed by the developer with the county recording officer,
the Township Engineer and the Township Tax Assessor as specified by
§ 140-77 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-78
139:341
§ 140-79. Minor site plan procedure. [Amended 8-8-2012 by Ord.
No. 10-2012]
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. Any such plat or deed accepted for such
filing shall have been signed by the Chairperson and Secretary of the
Planning Board, and the Planning Board Engineer.
F. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval was
granted shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date on
which the resolution of minor subdivision approval is adopted, provided
that the approved minor subdivision shall have been duly recorded as
provided in this section.
G. The Planning Board may extend the one-hundred-ninety-day period for
filing a minor subdivision plat or deed pursuant to Subsection E above if
the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the approving
board that the developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly,
from filing because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals
from other governmental or quasi-governmental entities and that the
developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the required
approvals. The length of the extension shall be equal to the period of
delay caused by the wait for the required approvals, as determined by
the board. The developer may apply for an extension either before or
after what would otherwise be the expiration date.
H. The board shall grant an extension of minor subdivision approval for a
period determined by the board but not exceeding one year from what
would otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer proves to the
reasonable satisfaction of the board that the developer was barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental entities and that the developer applied promptly for and
diligently pursued the required approvals. A developer shall apply for
the extension before what would otherwise be the expiration date of
minor subdivision approval or the 91st day after the developer receives
the last legally required approval from other governmental entities,
whichever occurs later.
A. An applicant requesting a jurisdictional determination for a proposed
minor site plan as defined in this chapter shall submit an application to
the Land Use Officer pursuant to § 140-75, Preapplication informal
review of concept plan, pursuant to this chapter. For an application to
be reviewed, the plans and documents submitted shall provide
sufficient information for an adequate review by the Planning Board of
the extent, size, character and scope of the proposed development.
Upon submission of adequate documentation, the application shall be
scheduled for a jurisdictional review at the next available Planning
Board informal hearing.
§ 140-78 WALL CODE § 140-79
139:342
§ 140-80. Major subdivision and major site plan procedure.
B. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Planning Board may request
additional information for further consideration, recommend
jurisdictional application review by the Land Use Officer, or recommend
formal site plan review by the full Planning Board.
C. If jurisdiction is granted to the Land Use Officer, a complete
development application and all applicable fees shall be submitted to
the Land Use Officer pursuant to this chapter. The application shall be
declared complete or incomplete within a forty-five-day period from the
date of submission pursuant to this chapter. If determined to be
complete, a review pursuant to this chapter shall commence and may
result in a minor site plan approval and the issuance of a development
permit. If approval and a permit cannot be issued, a list of the reasons
shall be provided to the applicant for his consideration.
D. Specific consideration by the Land Use Officer shall include but not be
limited to the following:
(1) Compliance with the land use and zoning regulations of the
Township.
(2) The provision of adequate parking spaces in compliance with this
chapter as well as all state and federal requirements for
handicapped accessibility.
(3) Appropriate landscaping and buffering as required by this chapter.
(4) Proof of compliance with all applicable Township, state and federal
regulations and requirements.
(5) All alternations or modifications of and to the existing drainage
systems involving the construction of new facilities, buildings, or
structures, including, but not limited to, grading modifications, soil
removal or fill, and the direction or quantity of surface water flow
shall be approved by the Township Engineer.
(6) The work involved shall not negate any condition of a previously
approved site plan except as set forth above.
(7) The proposed addition or alteration does not violate any zoning
ordinance or land use ordinance requirements.
(8) All other approvals and permits required by law or regulation shall
be obtained and copies submitted to the Land Use Officer.
A. Preliminary approval.
(1) The applicant seeking preliminary major subdivision or preliminary
major site plan approval shall submit to the Land Use Officer 18
copies of the materials stipulated in this chapter.
§ 140-79 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-80
139:343
(2) The application shall be declared complete within a forty-five-day
period from the date of its submission according to the provisions
of this chapter.
(3) The Subdivision and Site Plan Committees, if established, shall
review the application and shall comment and make
recommendations to the Board.
(4) A complete application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, or for a
site plan of 10 acres of land or less or 10 dwelling units or less,
shall be acted upon within 45 days of the date of such submission,
or 120 days if a variance is required, or within such further time as
may be consented to by the developer. A subdivision of more than
10 lots, or a site plan that involves more than 10 acres of land or
more than 10 dwelling units, shall be acted upon within 95 days of
the date of such submissions, or 120 days if a variance is required,
or within such further time as may be consented to by the
developer. Otherwise, the board shall be deemed to have granted
preliminary subdivision or site plan approval.
(5) Effect of preliminary approval of major subdivisions and major site
plans.
(a) Preliminary approval of a major subdivision and site plan shall,
except as provided in Subsection A(5)(b) of this section, confer
upon the applicant the following rights for a three year period
from the date on which the resolution of preliminary approval
is adopted:
[1] That the general terms and conditions on which
preliminary approval was granted shall not be changed,
including, but not limited to, use requirements; layout and
design standards for streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot
sizes; yard dimensions and off-tract improvements; and in
the case of a site plan, any requirements peculiar to site
plan approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-41, except that
nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the Township
from modifying by ordinance such general terms and
conditions of preliminary approval as relate to public
health and safety;
[2] That the applicant may submit for final approval on or
before the expiration date of preliminary approval the
whole or a section or sections of the preliminary
subdivision plat or site plan, as the case may be; and
[3] That the applicant may apply for and the Planning Board
may grant extensions on such preliminary approval for
additional periods of at least one year but not to exceed a
total extension of two years, provided that if the design
and improvement standards have been revised by
ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
§ 140-80 WALL CODE § 140-80
139:344
(b) In the case of a subdivision of or site plan for an area of 50
acres or more, the board may rant the rights referred to in
Subsection A(5)(a)[1], [2] and [3] above for such period of time,
longer than three years, as shall be determined by the board to
be reasonable taking into consideration the number of dwelling
units and nonresidential floor area permissible under
preliminary approval, economic conditions, and the
comprehensiveness of the development. The applicant may
apply for thereafter and the board may thereafter grant an
extension to preliminary approval for such additional period of
time as shall be determined by the board to be reasonable
taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary
approval, the potential number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area of the section or sections awaiting
final approval, economic conditions, and the
comprehensiveness of the development, provided that if the
design and improvement standards have been revised, such
revised standards may govern.
(c) Whenever the board grants an extension of preliminary
approval pursuant to Subsection A(5)(a)[3] or A(5)(b) of this
section and preliminary approval has expired before the date
on which the extension is granted, the extension shall begin on
what would otherwise be the expiration date. The developer
may apply for the extension either before or after what would
otherwise be the expiration date.
(d) The board shall grant an extension of preliminary approval for
a period determined by the board but not exceeding one year
from what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the
developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the board
that the developer was barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, from proceeding with the development because of
delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental entities and that the developer applied promptly
for and diligently pursued the required approvals. A developer
shall apply for the extension before what would otherwise be
the expiration date of the preliminary approval or the 91st day
after the developer receives the last legally required approval
from other governmental entities, whichever occurs later. An
extension granted pursuant to this subsection shall not
preclude the board from granting an extension pursuant to
Subsection A(5)(a)[3] or A(5)(b) of this section.
(e) Where a developer plans to install the site improvements prior
to final approval, the developer shall submit the engineering
plans and specifications for the improvements and the required
fees and insurance certificate to the Township Engineer, who
shall act upon them within 35 days. In the event of a denial, the
§ 140-80 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-80
139:345
specific reasons must be enumerated in letter to the applicant.
If revised plans are submitted in response to the denial letter,
they shall be approved or denied within 20 days with the
same requirements as previously imposed for a denial. After
the plans are approved, the developer may install the site
improvements prior to final approval. Prior to such installation,
the developer shall either post a performance guarantee
pursuant to this chapter or shall be required to furnish a
restoration guarantee for 120% of the maximum cost of
restoring the site in the event that the improvements are not
complete within two years from the commencement of the
work on any section in the development or prior to the
expiration of preliminary approval, which ever occurs first. The
guarantee shall either be a surety bond, a letter of credit, or
cash.
B. Final approval.
(1) An applicant requesting final approval of a proposed major
subdivision or site plan shall submit to the Land Use Officer of the
Planning Board, or other designee, 18 copies of the materials
specified in this chapter. Unless the preliminary plat was approved
without changes, the final plat shall have incorporated all changes
or modifications required by the Planning Board. The final plat or
map shall also be accompanied by a statement from the Township
Engineer that the Township is in receipt of as-built plans showing
all streets and utilities in exact location and elevation and
identifying those portions already installed and those to be
installed, and that the developer has complied with one or both of
the following:
(a) Installed all improvements in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter; or
(b) A performance guarantee has been posted with the Township
pursuant to Article XV.
(2) The application for final subdivision or site plan approval shall be
declared complete within a forty-five-day period from the date of its
submission according to the provisions of this chapter.
(3) Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application to the Land Use Officer, or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed
shall constitute final approval.
(4) Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the
date of signing of the plat by the Chairman and Secretary of the
Planning Board unless within such period the plat shall have been
duly filed by the developer with the county recording officer. The
board may, for good cause shown, extend the period for recording
§ 140-80 WALL CODE § 140-80
139:346
for an additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date of
signing of the plat. The Planning Board may extend the ninety-fiveday
or one-hundred-ninety-day period if the developer proves to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Planning Board that the developer
was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from filing because
of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental or quasi-governmental entities and that the
developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the required
approvals. The length of the extension shall be equal to the period
of delay caused by the wait for the required approvals, as
determined by the board. The developer may apply for an extension
either before or after the original expiration date.
(5) No subdivision plat or deed shall be filed unless it has been duly
approved by the board as indicated by the signature of the
Chairman and Secretary of the board. The signatures of the
Chairman and Secretary of the board shall not be affixed until the
developer has posted the guarantees required pursuant to this
chapter.
(6) Developers agreement. Prior to the signing and recording of final
major subdivision plats and as a condition of final site plan approval
in the case of a site plan, the developer shall enter into an
agreement with the governing body. This agreement shall be of a
form that is acceptable to the Township Attorney and one in which
the developer agrees to abide by the terms and conditions of the
board approval, construct the required improvements in
accordance with the approved plans, agree to maintain the
constructed improvements including but not limited to, payment of
streetlighting charges, snow removal, maintenance of storm
drainage, sewer and water facilities. The developer also shall agree
that in the event the improvements are not maintained, the
Township can utilize the cash portions of the performance
guarantees to immediately attend to such items.
(7) Submission of part of subdivision for final approval.
(a) In the case of large subdivisions, where economic conditions,
special circumstances or other applicable reasons exist,
whereby it is unfeasible, impractical, or would create undue
hardship upon a subdivider to comply with the requirements of
the preceding § 140-39, the Planning Board shall accept and
approve applications for final approval which otherwise meet
the requirements of § 140-80B(1) to (6) for part or parts of a
subdivision, provided that all of the following conditions are
also met:
[1] The number of lots on the approved preliminary plat shall
be more than 30.
§ 140-80 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-80
139:347
[2] The number of lots on any final plat submitted under this
subsection shall not be less than 10 on the first section
submitted for final approval and not less than 20 on all
subsequent sections submitted for final approval.
[3] Not more than 50% of the lots on the preliminary plat front
on an existing street.
[4] All of the improvements and utilities required whether
they be on-site, off-site or off-tract, to provide permanent
access and necessary services to the lots shown on the
final map have been completed.
[5] In the event the preliminary plat has been approved
pursuant to zone modification provisions of the applicable
ordinance and improvements to or dedication of lands for
public use have been approved, a portion of the required
improvements and the transfer of ownership to the
Township of the lands shall have been made in the same
proportion as the number of lots on the final map is to the
number of lots on the approved preliminary plat.
[6] The applicant provides temporary or permanent
easements, rights-of-way or other appropriate instruments
to the Township for all access, utility lines, storm drainage
facilities, watercourses or other facilities crossing, or in
any way affecting lands remaining in the applicant's
ownership or other privately owned lands that are
required for the independent functioning of the portion of
the subdivision for which final approval is being sought.
[7] The filing fee to be paid by the applicant for each final map
submitted shall be $500 dollars plus $10 per lot shown on
the final map.
(b) Temporary culs-de-sac shall be completed and maintained by
the subdivider where a cul-de-sac would otherwise be required
on any proposed street that will be temporarily terminated
until such street has been extended, improved and accepted to
either another temporary or permanent cul-de-sac, its
intersection or connection to another improved street
connecting to an existing public street, or a public street. The
excess right-of-way in the temporary cul-de-sac shall revert to
the adjoining lots and until such street shall have been
extended, improved and accepted no building shall be erected
on any lot affected by such excess right-of-way for a temporary
cul-de-sac. The construction of temporary culs-de-sac pursuant
to this subsection shall be in accordance with the specifications
set forth in this chapter.
(8) Effect of final approval of major subdivisions and major site plans.
The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval
§ 140-80 WALL CODE § 140-80
139:348
first granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer
pursuant to this article whether conditionally or otherwise shall not
be changed for a period of two years after the date on which the
resolution of final approval is adopted, provided that in the case of
major subdivision the rights conferred by this section shall expire if
the plat has not been duly recorded within the time period provided
in § 140-80B(4).
(a) If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final
approval and, in the case of a subdivision has duly recorded the
plat, the Planning Board may extend such period of protection
for extensions of one year, but not to exceed three extensions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the
granting of final approval terminates the time period of
preliminary approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49 and
§ 140-80A(5) above, for the section granted final approval.
(b) In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned
development of 50 acres or more, conventional subdivision or
site plan for 150 acres or more, or site plan for development of
a nonresidential floor area of 200,000 square feet or more, the
Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in Subsection
B(8)(a) above for such period of time, longer than two years, as
shall be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable
taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval,
economic conditions, and the comprehensiveness of the
development. The developer may apply for thereafter, the
Planning Board may thereafter grant, an extension of final
approval for such additional period of time as shall be
determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable taking into
consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential
floor area permissible under final approval, the number of
dwelling units and nonresidential floor area remaining to be
developed, economic conditions, and the comprehensiveness
of the development.
(c) Whenever the board grants an extension of final approval
pursuant to Subsection A(8)(A) and (b) of this section and final
approval has expired before the date on which the extension is
granted, the extension shall begin on what would otherwise be
the expiration date. The developer may apply for the extension
either before or after what would otherwise be the expiration
date.
(d) The Planning Board shall grant an extension of final approval
for a period determined by the board but not exceeding one
year from what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the
developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the board
that the developer was barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, from proceeding with the development because of
§ 140-80 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-80
139:349
§ 140-81. Technical subdivisions. [Added 9-9-1998 by Ord. No.
20-1998]
delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental entities and that the developer applied promptly
for and diligently pursued these approvals. A developer shall
apply for the extension before what would otherwise be the
expiration date of the final approval or the 91st day after
the developer receives the last legally required approval from
other governmental entities, whichever occurs later. An
extension granted pursuant to this subsection shall not
preclude the Planning Board from granting an extension
pursuant to Subsection B(8)(a) and (b) section.
A. While subdivisions are not usually required for nonresidential
development, it is recognized that a commercial project to be developed
pursuant to this chapter may be of such a size or type so as to make
sectionalization by subdivision and the use of different forms of
ownership a practical necessity. The Township recognizes that a
technical subdivision for such a project may be required for marketing
or financing purposes.
B. An application for technical subdivision approval may be submitted
with an application for approval of a nonresidential site plan, or
subsequent to the issuance of such an approval.
C. An application for technical subdivision approval may be submitted
with an application for approval of a site plan for a residential
development providing for low- and/or moderate-income housing units
as part of the Township's affordable housing plan, or subsequent to the
issuance of such an approval.
D. Such an application shall be considered as a technical subdivision and
treated as a minor subdivision application without the necessity to
obtain bulk variances that would technically be required, subject to the
following conditions:
(1) The purpose of the application is to create a new lot for the purpose
of financing or transfer of ownership within a development which
is, or has been, the subject of site plan approval.
(2) A technical subdivision may not substantially modify or otherwise
adversely impact on the integrity of a previously approved
development plan.
(3) A technical subdivision must not reduce, limit or modify parking or
access to parking.
(4) If a technical subdivision includes the division of parking or other
common areas or facilities, the subdivision shall be conditioned
upon appropriate easements for parking, access, drainage and/or
utilities where necessary.
§ 140-80 WALL CODE § 140-82
139:350
§ 140-82. No permit prior to filing of subdivision plat.
No development or building permit for a new structure or dwelling shall
be issued for a site which is the subject of a minor or major subdivision
application until such time as the approved minor subdivision or final
subdivision plat is filed with the County Clerk.
§ 140-82 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-82
139:351

ARTICLE XIII
Detention Facilities
§ 140-83. Responsibility for operation and maintenance.24
§ 140-84. Dedication of facilities.
Where required, the stormwater management facilities shall be dedicated
to the Township of Wall as a drainage utility easement or right-of-way.
Detention or retention facility dedication shall be 15 feet from the top
of bank of facilities in cut and the toe of slope of facilities constructed
in fill. Inlet and outlet piping and maintenance access shall be contained
within thirty-foot wide, minimum, drainage utility easements. No relocation,
construction or reconstruction shall take place within the area of the
easement, nor shall any structures be located within such area, nor shall
any action be taken which may alter or impair the effectiveness of present
or future drainage facilities or cause soil erosion without prior approving
authority or Township Committee approval.
A. Responsibility for operation and maintenance of detention facilities,
including periodic removal and disposal of accumulated particulate
material and debris, shall remain with the owner or owners of the
property or a homeowners' association with permanent arrangements
that it shall pass to any successive owner, unless assumed by a
governmental agency. If portions of the land are to be sold, legally
binding arrangements shall be made to pass the basic responsibility to
successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each project
the property owner, governmental agency, or other legally established
entity to be permanently responsible for maintenance, hereinafter in
this section referred to as the responsible person.
B. Prior to granting approval to any project subject to review under this
chapter, the applicant shall enter into an agreement with the
municipality to ensure the continued operation and maintenance of the
detention facility. This agreement shall be in a form satisfactory to the
Township Attorney and may include, but may not necessarily be limited
to, personal guarantees, deed restrictions, covenants, and bonds.
C. An applicant seeking approval for construction of a stormwater
management facility shall provide the funds necessary to permanently
maintain the facility. The amount necessary to permanently maintain
the facility shall be calculated by the Planning Board Engineer based
upon current estimates for maintenance with an annual increase of 4%.
The Planning Board Engineer shall also assume that the investment will
yield a return equal to the ninety-day certificate of deposit interest rate
paid by the First Fidelity Bank or its successor on the date the
calculation is made.
24.Editor's Note: See § 140-11 of this chapter.
§ 140-83 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-84
139:353

ARTICLE XIV
Off-Tract Improvements
§ 140-85. Purpose.
This article is intended to ensure a pro rata share allocation of the costs for
off-tract improvements necessitated by new development.
§ 140-86. Definition and principles.
As a condition of final subdivision or site plan approval, the municipal
agency may require an applicant to pay his/her pro rata share of the cost of
providing reasonable and necessary circulation improvements and drainage
facilities, including land and easements, located off-tract of the property
limits of the subdivision or development but necessitated or required by
the development. "Necessary" improvements are those clearly, directly,
and substantially related to the development in question. The board shall
provide in its resolution of approval the basis of the required improvements.
The improvements cost shall include all design, legal, and other related
expenses. The proportionate or pro rata amount of the cost of such facilities
within a related or common area shall be based on the following criteria.
§ 140-87. Cost allocation.
§ 140-88. Agreement for different allocation method authorized.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent the municipal
agency and the developer from agreeing to use a different method to
allocate cost.
§ 140-89. Applicant's proportionate share of street improvements.
The applicant's proportionate share of street improvements, alignment,
channelization, barriers, new or improved traffic signalization, signs, curbs,
sidewalks, trees, utility improvements uncovered elsewhere, the
A. Full allocation. In cases where off-tract improvements are necessitated
by the proposed development, and where no other property owner(s)
receive(s) a special benefit thereby, or where neither the Township nor
any other government entity has planned or accepted the responsibility
for any portion of the cost of the improvement, the applicant may be
required at his sole expense and as a condition of approval, to provide
and install such improvements.
B. Proportionate allocation. Where it is determined that the properties
outside the development will also be benefited by the off-tract
improvement, or where neither the Township nor any other government
entity has planned or accepted the responsibility for any portion of the
cost of the improvement, the following criteria shall be utilized in
determining the proportionate share of the cost of such improvements
to the developer.
§ 140-85 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-89
139:355
construction or reconstruction of new or existing streets, and other
associated street or traffic improvements shall be as follows:
§ 140-90. Applicant's proportionate share of drainage
improvements.
The applicant's proportionate share of stormwater and drainage
improvements including the installation, relocation and replacement of
storm drains, culverts, catch basins, manholes, riprap, improved drainage
ditches and appurtenances thereto, and relocation or replacement of other
storm drainage facilities or appurtenances associated therewith, shall be
determined as follows:
A. The Township Engineer or Planner shall provide the applicant with the
existing and reasonably anticipated future peak hour flows for the offtract
improvements.
B. The applicant shall furnish a plan for the proposed off-tract
improvement which shall include the estimated peak-hour traffic
generated by the proposed development and the proportion thereof
which is to be accommodated by the proposed off-tract improvement.
The ratio of the peak-hour traffic generated by the proposed
development which is to be accommodated by the off-tract
improvement to the future additional peak-hour anticipated to impact
the proposed off-tract improvement shall form the basis of the
proportionate share.
A. The capacity and the design of the drainage system to accommodate
stormwater runoff shall be based on the standards specified in this
chapter, computed by the developer's engineer and approved by the
Township Engineer.
B. The capacity of the enlarged, extended, or improved system required
for the subdivision and areas outside of the developer's tributary to the
drainage system shall be determined by the developer's engineer
subject to approval of the Township Engineer. The plans for the
improved system shall be prepared by the developer's engineer and the
estimated cost of the enlarged system calculated by the Township
Engineer.
§ 140-89 WALL CODE § 140-90
139:356
ARTICLE XV
Improvement, Performance and Maintenance Guarantees
§ 140-91. Purpose of improvement guarantees.
Improvement guarantees shall be provided to ensure the municipality of the
proper installation and maintenance of on-site and on-tract improvements.
§ 140-92. Performance guarantees.
A. Prior to the approval of a final site plan requiring public improvements
to be owned by or dedicated to the Township, a developer shall be
required to post a performance guarantee in conformance with this
article.
B. Before the recording of final subdivision plats or as a condition of final
site plan approval or as a condition to the issuance of a zoning permit
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65, the board shall require and the
Township shall accept in accordance with the standards set forth
herein, for the purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance of
on-tract improvements, a performance guarantee in favor of the
Township, as follows: [Amended 8-28-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
(1) The developer shall furnish a performance guarantee in favor of the
Township that shall be in an amount of 120% of the cost of
installation, which cost shall be determined by the Township
Engineer for only those improvements required by an approval or
developer's agreement, ordinance or regulation to be dedicated to
a public entity, including streets, curbs, grading, pavement,
gutters, sidewalks, streetlighting, street trees, surveyor's
monuments, as shown on the final plat and required by the Map
Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), water mains, sanitary
sewers, community septic system, drainage structures, public
improvements of open space and any grading necessitated by the
preceding improvements. A performance guarantee shall also be
furnished for privately owned perimeter buffer landscaping as
required by local ordinance or imposed as a condition of approval.
At the developer's option, a separate performance guarantee may
be posted for the privately owned perimeter buffer landscaping.
(2) The Township Engineer shall prepare an itemized cost estimate of
the improvements covered by the performance guarantee, in the
manner specified in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4, which itemized cost
estimate shall be appended to each performance guarantee posted
by the obligor.
(3) The performance guarantee shall consist of a developer's
agreement, the terms of which shall concern the general
development of the tract, plus 10% of the performance guarantee
amount in cash and the remaining 90% by any of the following:
§ 140-91 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-92
139:357
(a) Cash, by means of a bank or treasurer's check.
(b) A performance bond issued by a bonding or surety company
approved by the Township Attorney as to form and content,
which bond shall contain a provision that it shall not expire
until released by the Township Committee.
(c) An irrevocable standby letter of credit must be written in
accordance with the standardized form adopted by regulation
by the Department of Community Affairs pursuant to Section 1
of P.L. 1999, c. 68 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53a) as complying with the
provisions of Section 41 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53) and approved by the Township Attorney or other
security as may be approved by the Township Committee.
C. An irrevocable letter of credit shall only be accepted if it constitutes an
unconditional payment obligation of the issuer running solely to the
Township for an express initial period of time in the amount required; is
issued by a banking or savings institution authorized to do so and doing
business in the State of New Jersey; is for a period of time of at least
one year; and permits the Township to draw upon the letter of credit if
the obligor fails to furnish another letter of credit which complies with
the provisions of this section 30 days or more in advance of the
expiration date of the letter of credit or such longer period in advance
thereof as is stated in the letter of credit. All guarantees posted herein
shall be in addition to and not in substitution for the developer's
primary responsibility to install the improvements and complete the
subdivision in accordance with all rules, regulations, standards,
specifications, and ordinances of the Township.
D. All performance guarantee amounts shall be computed, by the
Township Engineer based on the documented construction costs for
public improvements prevailing in the general area of the Township.
E. The developer may appeal the Township Engineer's estimate to the
Township Committee. The Township Committee shall decide the appeal
within 45 days of the appeal in writing by the Township Clerk. After the
developer posts a guarantee with the Township based on the cost of
installation of improvements as determined by the Township
Committee, he may institute legal action within one year of the posting
in order to preserve the right to a judicial determination as to the
fairness and reasonableness of the amount of the guarantee.
F. All guarantees shall provide for construction of the required bonded
improvements within two years of the date of their posting. This time
period may be extended by the governing body, in the form of a
resolution granting such extension provided the municipal agency has,
if necessary, extended the period of protection pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-52a. As a condition or as part of any such extension, the amount
of any performance guarantee shall be increased or reduced, as the
case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of the
§ 140-92 WALL CODE § 140-92
139:358
installation, which cost shall be determined by the Township Engineer
as aforesaid. [Amended 8-28-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
G. If the required bonded improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guarantee, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the Township for the reasonable cost of
the improvements not completed or corrected and the Township may
either prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof complete
such imporvements. [Amended 8-28-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
H. Request for list of incomplete improvements; filing of monument
certification. [Amended 8-28-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
(1) Upon substantial completion of all required street improvements
(except for the top course) and appurtenant utility improvements,
and the connection of same to the public system, the obligor may
request of the Township Committee, in writing, by certified mail
addressed in care of the Township Clerk that the Township
Engineer prepare, in accordance with the itemized cost estimate
prepared by the Township Engineer and appended to the
performance guarantee pursuant this section, a list of all
uncompleted or unsatisfactorily completed bonded improvements.
If such a request is made, the obligor shall send a copy of the
request to the Township Engineer. The request shall indicate which
bonded improvements have been completed and which bonded
improvements remain uncompleted in the judgment of the obligor.
(2) At the time of the request, the obligor is to file with the Township
Engineer, the surveyor's monument certification; signed and sealed
as-built construction plans; and, if not previously provided, deed(s)
of dedication for roads, detention basin lots, open space areas,
easements or other land areas to be dedicated to the Township all
of which shall be subject to review and approval by the Township
Engineer and Township Attorney.
I. The Township Engineer shall inspect all bonded improvements covered
by the obligor's request and shall file a detailed list and report, in
writing, with the Township Committee, and shall simultaneously send a
copy thereof to the obligor not later than 45 days after the Engineer's
receipt of the obligor's request. [Amended 8-28-2019 by Ord. No.
10-2019]
J. The list prepared by the Township Engineer shall state, in detail, with
respect to each bonded improvement determined to be incomplete or
unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the incompleteness of each
incomplete bonded improvement or the nature and extent of, and
remedy for, the unsatisfactory state of each completed bonded
improvement determined to be unsatisfactory. The report prepared by
the Township Engineer shall identify each bonded improvement
determined to be complete and satisfactory together with a
recommendation as to the amount of reduction to be made in the
§ 140-92 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-92
139:359
§ 140-93. Posting of maintenance guarantee. [Amended 8-28-2019
by Ord. No. 10-2019]
performance guarantee relating to the completed and satisfactory
bonded improvement, in accordance with the itemized cost estimate
prepared by the Township Engineer and appended to the performance
guarantee. [Amended 8-28-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
K. The Township Committee, by resolution, shall either approve the
bonded improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by
the Township Engineer or reject any or all of these bonded
improvements upon the establishment in the resolution of cause for
rejection, and shall approve and authorize the amount of reduction to
be made in the performance guarantee relating to the bonded
improvements accepted, in accordance with the itemized cost estimate
prepared by the Township Engineer and appended to the performance
guarantee pursuant to this section. This resolution shall be adopted not
later than 45 days after receipt of the list and report prepared by the
Township Engineer. Upon adoption of the resolution by the Township
Committee, the obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to its
performance guarantee, with respect to those approved bonded
improvements, except for that portion adequately sufficient to secure
completion or correction of the improvements not yet approved,
provided that 30% of the amount of the performance guarantee posted
shall be retained to ensure completion and acceptability of all
improvements. [Amended 8-28-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
L. In the event that the obligor has posted cash with the Township as part
of the performance guarantee, then any partial reduction granted in the
performance guarantee pursuant to this section shall be applied to the
cash deposit in the same proportion as the original cash deposit bears
to the full amount of the performance guarantee.
M. If any portion of the required bonded improvements is rejected, the
Township Committee may require the obligor to complete or correct
such bonded improvements and, upon completion or correction, the
same procedure of notification, as set forth above shall be followed.
[Amended 8-28-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
A. Prior to the release of all or any portion of the performance guarantee,
a maintenance guarantee shall be posted with the Township Committee
for a period of two years after final acceptance of the improvement, in
the amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the installation of the
following private site improvements: stormwater management basins,
inflow and water quality structures within the basins, and the outflow
pipes and structures of the stormwater management system, if any,
which cost shall be determined according to the method of calculation
set forth in Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4).
B. In the event that other government agencies or public utilities
automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the improvements
§ 140-92 WALL CODE § 140-93
139:360
§ 140-94. Deposit by developer to cover inspection fees. [Amended
8-28-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
§ 140-95. Approval in stages.
In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of development, the
provisions of this article shall be applied by stages or section.
are covered by a performance or maintenance guarantee to another
governmental agency, no performance or maintenance guarantee, as
the case may be, shall be required for such utilities or improvements.
A. The developer shall reimburse the Township for reasonable inspection
fees paid to the Township Engineer for the foregoing inspection of
improvements which fees shall not exceed the sum of the amounts set
forth herein. The Township shall require the developer to post the
inspection fees in escrow in an amount.
(1) Not to exceed, except for extraordinary circumstances, the greater
of $500 or 5% of the cost of bonded improvements that are subject
to the performance guarantee under § 140-92B;
(2) For those developments for which the reasonably anticipated fees
total less than $10,000, fees may, at the option of the developer, be
paid in two installments. The initial amount deposited in escrow by
a developer shall be 50% of the inspection fees. When the balance
on deposit drops to 10% of the inspection fees because the amount
deposited by the developer has been reduced by the amount paid to
the Township Engineer for inspection, the developer shall deposit
the remaining 50% of the inspection fees.
(3) For those developments for which the inspection fees total $10,000
or greater, fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in four
installments. The initial amount deposited in escrow by a developer
shall be 25% of the inspection fees. When the balance on deposit
drops to 10% of the inspection fees because the amount deposited
by the developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the
Township Engineer for inspection, the developer shall make
additional deposits of 25% of the inspection fees.
B. If the Township determines that the amount in escrow for the payment
of inspection fees is insufficient to cover the cost of additional required
inspections, the Township may require the developer to deposit
additional funds in escrow, provided that the Township delivers to the
developer a written inspection escrow deposit request, signed by the
Township Engineer, which informs the developer of the need for
additional inspections, details the items or undertakings that require
inspection, estimates the time required for those inspections, and
estimates the cost of performing those inspections.
§ 140-93 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-96
139:361
§ 140-96. Approval of sureties and lending institutions.
All guarantees, sureties, and lending institutions are subject to the approval
of the Township Attorney and the governing body.
§ 140-96.1. Temporary certificate of occupancy bond guarantee.
[Added 8-28-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
§ 140-96.2. Safety and stabilization guarantee. [Added 8-28-2019 by
Ord. No. 10-2019]
A. In the event that the developer shall seek a temporary certificate of
occupancy for a development, unit, lot, building, or phase of
development, as a condition of the issuance thereof, the developer shall
furnish a separate guarantee, referred to herein as a "temporary
certificate of occupancy guarantee," in favor of the Township in an
amount equal to 120% of the cost of installation of only those
improvements or items which remain to be completed or installed
under the terms of the temporary certificate of occupancy and which
are required to be installed or completed as a condition precedent to
the issuance of the permanent certificate of occupancy for the
development, unit, lot, building or phase of development and which are
not covered by an existing performance guarantee.
B. Upon posting of a temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee, all
sums remaining under a performance guarantee, required pursuant to
§ 140-92, which relate to the development, unit, lot, building, or phase
of development for which the temporary certificate of occupancy is
sought, shall be released. At no time may a Township hold more than
one guarantee or bond of any type with respect to the same line item.
C. The scope and amount of the temporary certificate of occupancy
guarantee shall be determined by the Township Engineer.
D. The temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee shall be released by
the Township Engineer or Zoning Officer upon the issuance of a
permanent certificate of occupancy with regard to the development,
unit, lot, building, or phase as to which the temporary certificate of
occupancy relates.
A. In addition to a performance guarantee required pursuant to § 140-92,
a developer shall furnish to the Township a guarantee, referred to
herein as a "safety and stabilization guarantee," either as a separate
guarantee or a line item of the performance guarantee, in favor of the
Township, to be available to the Township solely for the purpose of
returning property that has been disturbed to a safe and stable
condition or otherwise implementing measures to protect the public
from access to an unsafe or unstable condition, only in the
circumstance that:
§ 140-96 WALL CODE § 140-96.2
139:362
(1) Site disturbance has commenced and, thereafter, all work on the
development has ceased for a period of at least 60 consecutive days
following such commencement for reasons other than force
majeure; and
(2) Work has not recommenced within 30 days following the provision
of written notice by the Township to the developer of the
Township's intent to claim payment under the guarantee.
B. The amount for the safety and stabilization guarantee shall be
calculated to equal the following:
(1) For a development with bonded improvements in an amount not
exceeding $100,000, shall be $5,000.
(2) For a development with bonded improvements exceeding
$100,000, shall be calculated as a percentage of the bonded
improvement costs of the development or phase of development as
follows:
(a) $5,000 for the first $100,000 of bonded improvement costs,
plus 2.5% of bonded improvement costs in excess of $100,000
up to $1,000,000, plus 1% of bonded improvement costs in
excess of $1,000,000.
C. The Township shall not provide notice of its intent to claim payment
under a safety and stabilization guarantee until a period of at least 60
days has elapsed during which all work on the development has ceased
for reasons other than force majeure. The Township shall provide
written notice to a developer by certified mail or other form of delivery
providing evidence of receipt.
D. The Township shall release a separate safety and stabilization
guarantee to a developer upon the developer's furnishing of a
performance guarantee which includes a line item for safety and
stabilization in the amount required under this section.
E. The Township shall release a safety and stabilization guarantee upon
the municipal engineer's determination that the development of the
project site has reached a point that the improvements installed are
adequate to avoid any potential threat to public safety.
§ 140-96.2 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-96.2
139:363

ARTICLE XVI
Inspections
§ 140-97. Preconstruction conference.
Prior to the commencement of any construction, the developer shall arrange
for a preconstruction conference between the developer, contractor and
Township Engineer and Land Use Officer.
§ 140-98. Inspection of site improvements during installation.
All site improvements shall be inspected during the time of their installation
under the supervision of the Township Engineer. Prior to the start of
construction of any improvements, the applicant shall deposit by cash or
certified check with the Township Clerk the applicable inspection fee.
§ 140-99. Permission of Engineer required to perform work.
In no case shall any work required by the terms of site plan approval or
the provisions of this chapter, including the installation of underground
facilities or any paving work, be conducted without permission from the
Township Engineer.
§ 140-100. Deadline for notification of Engineer.
The Township Engineer's office shall be notified 14 days in advance of
the commencement of initial construction and five working days prior to
commencement of each of the following phases of construction so that the
Engineer or a qualified representative may be present to inspect the work:
A. Road subgrade.
B. Establishment of tree clearing limits.
C. Curb and gutter forms.
D. Curbs and gutters.
E. Road paving.
F. Sidewalk forms.
G. Sidewalks.
H. Drainage pipes and other drainage construction.
I. Street name signs.
J. Monuments.
K. Sanitary sewers.
L. Detention and/or retention basins.
§ 140-97 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-100
139:365
§ 140-101. Improvements installed without approval or inspection.
Any improvements installed contrary to the plan or plat approved for the
project or without notice for inspection shall constitute just cause for:
§ 140-102. Liability of Township due to defects or negligence;
responsibility of owner.
Inspection by the Township of the installation of improvements and utilities
shall not operate to subject the Township to liability for claims, suits or
liability of any kind that may at any time arise because of defects or
negligence during construction or at any time thereafter; it being
recognized that the responsibility to maintain safe conditions at all times
during construction and to provide proper utilities and improvements is
upon the owner and his contractor, if any.
§ 140-103. Supervision of work; emergency contacts.
§ 140-104. Failure of developer to conform.
Upon receipt of notification that the developer has failed to conform to the
requirements of this article, the Township Engineer shall perform no further
engineering services regarding the developer's project until such time as he
is notified that the development is in compliance with this article.
M. Topsoil, seeding, planting, shade trees.
A. The issuance of a stop-work order by the Township Engineer pending
the resolution of any dispute.
B. Removal of the uninspected improvements.
C. The payment by the developer of any costs for material testing.
D. The restoration by the developer of any improvements disturbed during
any material testing.
A. No contractor, builder, developer or subcontractor shall engage any
personnel in any of the work on constructing any improvements unless
they are continually supervised by a competent, English speaking
supervisor acceptable to the Township Engineer.
B. No less than five days prior to commencing construction of any
improvements or tree removal on the site, the developer or his agent
shall provide the Township Engineer with the names, addresses, phone
number and emergency phone numbers of the subdivider and/or a
representative empowered to act for the developer and/or each
contractor and their supervisor in charge of the construction, setting
forth the aspects of construction for which each is responsible.
§ 140-100 WALL CODE § 140-104
139:366
ARTICLE XVII
(Reserved)25
§ 140-105. (Reserved)
25.Editor's Note: Former Art. XVII, Checklists, consisting of § 140-105, Use of Checklists to
determine completeness of applications, addded 2-13-2002 by Ord. No. 3-2002, was
repealed 2-9-2011 by Ord. No. 1-2011. See now § 140-74, Filing of applications, and the
checklists at the end of this chapter.
§ 140-105 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-105
139:367

Part 4
Zoning
ARTICLE XVIII
General Provisions
§ 140-106. Minimum regulations.
The regulations set forth in this Part 4 for each district shall be minimum
regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class of structure or land
within the district, as hereinafter provided. Deviation from the standards of
this Part 4 will only be permitted upon the grant of a variance.
§ 140-107. Purpose.
The purpose of these provisions is to provide direction regarding the
application of development requirements and restrictions within the
Township's zone districts.
§ 140-108. Aboveground essential services facilities; conditional
use approval.
The provisions of this Part 4 shall not apply to customary underground
essential services as defined herein, except that all facilities such as
pumping stations, repeater stations and electric substations, which require
a building above ground or any other aboveground appurtenance of any
type more than 30 feet high, shall require approval as a conditional use
subject to the provisions of this Part 4.
§ 140-109. Condominiums allowed in any zone.
The term condominium describes an ownership arrangement, not a land use
subject to these regulations; therefore, condominiums may be established
in any zone under the restrictions applicable to the development that it
comprises. The existence of condominium ownership shall not negate
minimum lot area, dimension or other requirements intended to provide
adequate light, air, and privacy.
§ 140-110. Conformity to district regulations required.
No building or structures shall hereafter be erected and no existing building
or structure shall be moved, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any
land or building or portion of a building or structure to be used, designed,
or arranged to be used for any purpose unless in conformity with all of the
regulations herein specified for the district in which is it located.
§ 140-111. Principal building frontage on public street.
Every principal building shall be built upon a lot with frontage upon a
public street improved to meet the municipal requirements of this chapter
or for which such improvement has been guaranteed by the posting of a
§ 140-106 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-111
139:369
performance guarantee unless relief has been granted under the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
§ 140-112. One principal building per lot; exceptions.
Except for multifamily and nonresidential uses, no more than one principal
building and its accessory buildings shall hereafter be erected on any one
lot.
§ 140-113. Compliance with minimum yard and lot requirements.
No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be
reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth
herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this chapter shall
meet the minimum requirements established by this chapter.
§ 140-113.1. Lots.
A. Insofar as is practical, lots should be evenly and regularly shaped. Side
lot lines shall be at right angles to straight streets and radial to curved
streets, and rear lot lines shall be parallel to the front lot line or street
line.
B. Through lots with frontage on two streets shall be permitted only under
the following conditions:
(1) Where the length of the lot between both streets is such that future
division of the lot into two lots is impermissible under current
zoning;
(2) Access shall be to the street with the lower traffic function, or the
street on which the dwelling would best fit into the existing
neighborhood character and fabric; and
(3) The portion of the lot abutting the other street shall be clearly
labeled on the plat and in any deed that street access is prohibited.
C. The rear yard of through lots, or reverse frontage lots, shall be buffered
from the street in the following manner:
(1) Reverse frontage buffers shall be required where residential units
and/or lots back onto any street.
(2) The buffer shall be situated adjacent to the property line.
(3) Any landscaped buffer shall be not less than 20 feet in width. For
lots backing up on arterial streets or highways, the landscape
buffer shall not be less than 30 feet.
(4) The buffer area shall be used for no purpose other than
landscaping, underground utilities or for any required sidewalk.
§ 140-111 WALL CODE § 140-114
139:370
§ 140-114. Yards and open space requirements.
No yard or other open space provided around any building for the purpose
of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered as
providing a yard or open space for any other buildings, and no yard or other
open space on one lot shall be considered as providing a yard or open space
for a building on any other lot.
§ 140-115. Responsibility for maintenance of buildings and land.26
It shall be the responsibility of every property owner, tenant, developer and
applicant to maintain in a safe and orderly condition, all buildings and land
in the municipality which they own, use, occupy or for which they have
maintenance responsibility in accordance with the following regulations.
Maintenance of all land uses within the municipality shall include, but is not
limited to, the following:
A. Potholes and other pavement failures within paved parking areas shall
be repaired on a regular basis. If such potholes or pavement failures are
hazardous to vehicles, they shall be appropriately barricaded and
marked to warn motorists.
B. Unpaved or gravel parking and pedestrian areas shall be maintained
and regularly regraded in a manner which will keep the area free of
holes and other severe grade changes which would be hazardous to
vehicular and pedestrian usage.
C. Paint striping, traffic control signs and markings, and all other signs
and graphics shall be maintained in a condition whereby they can be
clearly seen and are legible.
D. Curbing, other pavement edging and sidewalks shall be maintained free
of cracks and holes which would present a hazard to pedestrians.
E. All refuse stored outdoors shall be kept within containers having lids, in
a manner that the refuse is not visible to pedestrians or persons in
vehicles on or off the site. Such containers shall be located so as to
prevent interference with vehicular or pedestrian circulation.27
F. All areas of the site shall be kept free of debris and other materials. All
users of shopping carts or similar items shall provide for the regular
pickup of such shopping carts or similar items from parking areas and
other portions of the site at least once every hour during their business
hours. All shopping carts or similar items shall either be stored indoors
or in a location adjacent to the building specifically set aside for such
storage during nonbusiness hours.
G. Building finishes shall be maintained reasonably free of peeling or
cracked paint, rust or other unsightly conditions.
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 171, Property Maintenance.
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 191, Solid Waste.
§ 140-114 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-115
139:371
§ 140-116. Protection of natural features.
§ 140-117. Topsoil, sand and gravel.
No topsoil shall be removed from any premises in any zone. No subsoil, sand
or gravel shall be removed from any premises in any zone except that:
§ 140-118. Storage or parking of certain vehicles.
H. All plantings and ground cover shall be adequately watered and cut. All
dead plant materials shall be removed or replaced. All lawn or other
nonpaved areas shall be kept trimmed and free from weeds and other
noxious growth.
I. All outdoor lighting shall be maintained in a working condition.
A. Existing natural features such as streams, lakes, ponds and the natural
configuration of the ground shall be retained where possible. If it can be
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Planning Board when reviewing
applications for subdivisions, site plan or conditional uses, or to the
satisfaction of the Board of Adjustment in all other cases, that such
feature will substantially interfere with a permitted use of a property,
such features may be altered only to the extent absolutely necessary to
render premises suitable for such permitted use.
B. Elevation alterations.
(1) No alteration of any existing elevation of land or an approved
grading plan shall be permitted without the written approval of the
Township Engineer.
(2) The existing elevation of any land in the Township shall not be
altered more than two feet by means of soil removal, fill, or
grading, except as part of an approved development application.
Should the Township Engineer determine a proposed modification
to an approved grading plan to be substantial, such approval shall
be withheld and the applicant or developer shall be required to
apply to the approving agency for approval or an amended grading
plan.
A. The Land Use Officer may issue a permit for the removal of subsoil from
excavations for building foundations or other structures, provided that
the total amount to be removed from the lot does not exceed 500 cubic
yards.
B. The appropriate hearing agency for any development application may
grant a temporary bulk variance for the removal of soil, sand or gravel
other than as set forth in Subsection A above. Such removal shall also
be regulated by Chapter 188, Soil Removal.
A. No truck, tractor trailer, truck or trailer body of any kind, mobile home,
house trailer, camper trailer or any similar vehicles shall be stored or
§ 140-115 WALL CODE § 140-118
139:372
parked on any premises or upon any street in any zone except while
actually loading or unloading or making pickups and deliveries, and
except as otherwise provided herein. This prohibition shall not apply to
lawfully registered pickup trucks or vans which do not exceed 19 feet
in overall length.28
B. No truck, tractor trailer, truck or trailer body of any kind, mobile home,
house trailer, camper trailer or any similar vehicle and no metal or
other container shall be used for storage purposes on any premises in
any zone. This prohibition shall apply to such vehicles, bodies or
containers whether or not the same are capable of movement.
C. In business and industrial zones only, trucks, tractor trailers and buses
which are used as motor vehicles to transport goods or materials in
connection with the business conducted on the premises may be parked
thereon, provided that all such vehicles are property registered, kept in
good repair and arranged in an orderly fashion upon the premises.
D. Unregistered vehicles may be stored on the premises of a trucking
terminal or other use which requires the storage of heavy equipment,
provided that the use is permitted and provided further that the
vehicles or equipment are in good repair and arranged in an orderly
fashion upon the premises.29
E. No sales of goods or merchandise from any truck, tractor trailer, motor
vehicle of any kind, truck or trailer body of any kind, mobile home,
house trailer, camper trailer or any similar vehicle shall be permitted in
any zone. This prohibition shall apply whether or not the same is
capable of movement. This subsection shall not apply to an ice cream
vendor who has obtained a permit or license from the Township.30
F. No truck, tractor trailer, truck or trailer body of any kind, mobile home,
house trailer, camper trailer, pickup camper or any other vehicle or
facility shall be used for habitation in any zone, except for mobile homes
in a licensed mobile home park and except for a temporary mobile home
on a single-family residential lot on which the existing principal
dwelling has been destroyed to a point where it is uninhabitable by fire
or other disaster not controllable by the occupant of the dwelling. Such
a temporary mobile home shall be permitted only for the purposes of a
temporary residence while the damaged dwelling is being repaired or
rebuilt to a habitable condition and shall in no case be permitted for a
period of longer than six months.31
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Vehicles and Traffic.
29.Editor's Note: See Ch. 171, Property Maintenance, Art. I, Removal of Brush, Junk and
Debris.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 167, Peddling and Soliciting, Art. I, Sale of Merchandise on
Highways.
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks.
§ 140-118 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-118
139:373
§ 140-119. Access to business or industrial zones through
residential zones.
No driveway or easement providing access to or egress from a business or
industrial use shall extend through or into any residential zone.
§ 140-120. Exterior finish of commercial buildings.
§ 140-121. Housing facade diversity.
§ 140-122. Removal of trees. [Amended 5-10-2006 by Ord. No.
12-2006]
G. No truck, tractor trailer, truck or trailer body of any kind, mobile home,
house trailer, camper motorized home or any similar vehicle, and no
boat shall be stored on any street in any zone.
A. In all commercial and industrial zones buildings shall be so designed
that all sides of the building shall be of similar design and shall be
constructed with similar materials.
B. In all commercial and industrial zones, all buildings shall be so
designed that the roof design and roofline shall be similar on all sides.
A. Except as hereinafter provided not more than one building permit shall
hereafter be issued for any dwelling to be erected in a housing
development consisting of two or more houses if it is substantially alike
in exterior design and appearance with any neighboring dwelling
situated on the, same or opposite side of the street, within 200 feet in
zones requiring lot areas of 40,000 square feet or more, or within 150
feet in zones requiring lot areas of less than 40,000 square feet. The
distances herein specified shall be the shortest distance between the
street lines of the respective properties.
B. Houses within such specified distances of each other shall be
considered substantially alike in exterior design and appearance if they
have any one of the following characteristics:
(1) The same basic dimension and floor plans are used without
substantial differentiation of one or more exterior elevations.
(2) The same basic dimensions and floor plans are used without
substantial change in the orientation of the houses on the lots.
(3) The height and design of the roofs are without substantial change
in design and appearance.
(4) The size, type and location of doors and windows in the front
elevation are without substantial differentiation.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person not explicitly exempted by this
section to remove or injure any live tree, the trunk of which exceeds
§ 140-118 WALL CODE § 140-122
139:374
three inches in diameter measured at a point two feet above the
ground, or any specimen tree as defined in this chapter, in any zone,
without first obtaining a permit to do so from a municipal agency or
designee thereof, as part of an application for development. A tree
removal permit application unrelated to a development application
shall be presented to the Planning Board.
B. The following shall be exempt from the requirements of this section:
(1) Any homeowner who wishes to remove trees from the lot on which
he resides; or on which he intends to construct a dwelling in which
he will reside and for which he has valid zoning and building
permits. This exemption shall not apply to trees in a public right-ofway
or to trees on a residential property that is the subject of a
pending minor or major subdivision application.
(2) Any tree or shrub growing on property actually being used as a
nursery, garden center, tree farm or orchard.
(3) Any tree removal in compliance with the Farmland Assessment Law
(N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq.) for agricultural use. The agricultural use
must be for a minimum of three years.
(4) Trees directed to be removed by municipal, county, or state
authority pursuant to law.
(5) Any dead, diseased or damaged tree or any tree that endangers life
or property as determined by the designated municipal official.
(6) Any public utility company may prune trees to obtain normal line
clearance for overhead utility wires, provided such pruning does
not endanger or adversely affect the appearance of said trees.
C. No zoning or building permit shall be issued until a written plan of tree
removal has been approved by the approving agency or designee
thereof. The applicant shall submit such a plan as part of any
subdivision or site plan application. The plan shall show all proposed
tree removal in relation to the survey stakes marking each lot, use and
structure requiring such removals. In addition the plan shall contain the
following information:
(1) Tax Map, lot and block number.
(2) Area of tract.
(3) Owner's name and address.
(4) Map of locations and surrounding properties showing wooded
areas, steep slopes, floodplains, any wetlands and wetland buffer
areas, coastal wetland areas, and all other environmentally
sensitive areas as defined in this chapter.
§ 140-122 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-122
139:375
(5) The location of all shrub and tree lines, the location, species and
diameter breast height of all single standing trees, all trees eight
inches in diameter two feet above existing grade, and specimen
trees as defined in this chapter, with the clearing limits for all trees
to be removed clearly defined.
(6) The method of delineating tree clearing limits on site. Acceptable
delineation methods include painting bright white or orange
markings visible from a distance of 25 feet at a minimum height of
eight feet above grade on all trees at the outside limit of the tree
clearing limits; the use of bright white or orange plastic tape
extending from tree to tree at a minimum height of eight feet above
grade at the outside limit of the tree-clearing limits; the similar
marking of single standing trees three inches in diameter two feet
above existing grade; or other method acceptable to the approving
authority. Specimen and other trees to be saved and/or relocated
shall be designated using red tape or paint markings eight feet
above grade visible from a distance of 25 feet.
(7) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, roads,
driveways, parking lots, staging areas, recreation areas, gardens
and septic systems.
(8) Grading plan.
(9) Demonstration of compliance with § 140-260C. The plans may also
indicate existing trees which may be salvaged from the clearing
areas and relocated. These trees shall be identified by species, size,
area and method for relocation.
(10) Provision for removal of excess stumps and branches from the
property. No burying of this material is permitted.32
(11) Measures to be taken to insure the survival of the trees during and
after construction, suggested trimming and maintenance prior to
construction.
(12) Where a project is to be developed in phases, the plan shall denote
the phase limits in relation to all proposed tree removal.
D. In determining whether or not a permit should be granted, the agency
or its designee shall consider:
(1) The condition of the trees or shrubs with respect to disease, insect
attack, danger of falling, proximity to existing or proposed
structures and interferences with utility services.
(2) The necessity of removing the trees or shrubs in order to construct
the proposed improvements to allow reasonable economic use of
the property.
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 188, Soil Removal, § 188-12C.
§ 140-122 WALL CODE § 140-122
139:376
(3) The effect of the removal on erosion, soil moisture retention and
flow of surface waters.
(4) The number and density of trees in the area and the effect of tree
removal on property values of the neighborhood and on other
existing vegetation.
(5) If their presence would cause hardship, or endanger persons or
property, or substantially interfere with a permitted use of a
property.
(6) The necessity to clear areas to be occupied by buildings, driveways,
or recreation areas and within a distance of 15 feet around the
perimeter of such buildings depending on the tree species and
conditions to be reasonably determined by the Planning Board.
(7) If the removal of trees is to be performed in a selective manner
consistent with the public interest, thinning of a heavily wooded
area where some trees are removed and others remain may be
permitted.
(8) Whether the applicant has complied with § 140-260C regarding
reforestation. [Added 5-10-2006 by Ord. No. 12-2006]
E. No paving of any impervious nature shall be placed within the dripline
of a tree. No material, machinery or temporary soil deposits shall be
placed within six feet of any existing tree trunk or stem. Any regrading
shall require, where necessary, that all trees remaining shall be welled
in.
F. Trees may be removed in driveways and within 10 feet of each side of
the driveway. Alignment of driveways shall be planned to save as many
trees and shrubs as practical.
G. If no area other than a wooded area or area with trees and shrubs can
be found to accommodate the building foundation, sewerage system,
disposal field or well, meeting the approval of the appropriate inspector,
necessary tree removal shall be permitted.
H. Where more than three inches of fill is required around trees, the trees
must be protected by an air well six feet in diameter or as needed
around the trunk to prevent the intrusion of soil. Tile pipe must radiate
like spokes from the well to provide oxygen to the roots. The top of the
well must extend six inches above the graded level.
I. Tree barriers shall be erected with fencing or roping prior to the use of
heavy equipment on the property, and removed only after the threat of
damage from heavy equipment is gone.
J. All tree removal permit applications shall be forwarded to the
Environmental Advisory Committee for review and comment.
Comments regarding a particular permit application shall be forwarded
to the Land Use Officer, the municipal agency and the applicant.
§ 140-122 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-122
139:377
§ 140-123. Posting of numbers on buildings.33
Every principal building shall have its street address clearly posted in
an area which is visible from the road on which it fronts. Numerals for
residential buildings shall be no less than two inches high and one inch
wide. Numerals for nonresidential buildings shall be no less than six inches
high and two inches wide and shall not contribute toward the permitted
square footage for advertising signage.
K. An application for approval of a tree removal plan shall be accompanied
by a filing fee in the amount set forth in this chapter.
33.Editor's Note: See Ch. 79, Buildings, Numbering of.
§ 140-122 WALL CODE § 140-123
139:378
ARTICLE XIX
Nonconforming Uses, Lots, Buildings and Structures
§ 140-124. Continuance of nonconforming use of land or building.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter the lawful use of the land
or a building existing at the date of the adoption of this chapter may be
continued although such use or building does not conform to the regulations
specified by this chapter for the zone in which such land or building is
located; provided, however, that no nonconforming lot shall be further
reduced in size and no nonconforming use may be expanded. The following
regulations shall apply to nonconforming uses and structures.
§ 140-125. District changes.
Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer
an area from one district to another district of a different classification,
the provisions of this chapter shall also apply to any nonconforming uses
existing therein or created thereby.
§ 140-126. Abandonment of nonconforming use.
§ 140-127. Restoration of nonconforming buildings or structures.
A. A nonconforming use shall be deemed to be abandoned where there is
an intention to abandon as well as an external act (or omission to act) by
which such intention is carried into effect.
B. It shall be prima facie evidence that a nonconforming use has been
abandoned when there occurs a cessation of such use on the part of a
tenant or owner for a continuous period of at least 12 consecutive
months.
C. When a nonconforming use has been abandoned, such use shall not
thereafter be reinstated and any structure shall not thereafter be
reoccupied, except in conformance with this chapter.
A. If any nonconforming structure shall be more than partially destroyed,
then the structure may not be rebuilt, restored or repaired, except in
conformity with this chapter.
B. Destruction to the extent that rebuilding, repair or restoration requires
removal or demolition of any remaining portions of the damaged part of
the structure such that the only major components of the original
structure utilized in such building, repair or restoration are the
foundation or exterior walls shall be prima facie evidence that the
structure has been more than partially destroyed.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring of
any portion of a structure which has been declared unsafe by the
Construction Official.
§ 140-124 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-128
139:379
§ 140-128. Certification of preexisting nonconforming uses, lots,
buildings and structures.
Upon application, a certificate, certifying the legality of a preexisting
nonconforming use, lot, building or structure, may be issued by the Land
Use Officer or Board of Adjustment, pursuant to this chapter.
§ 140-129. Alterations and additions.
§ 140-130. Prior approved construction.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans, construction or
designated use of a building for which a building permit has been hereto
before issued and the construction of which shall have been diligently
prosecuted within three months of the date of such permit, and the ground
story framework of which, including the second tier of beams, shall have
been completed within six months of the date of the permit, and which
entire building shall be completed according to such plans as filed within
one year from the date of the adoption of this chapter.
§ 140-131. Nonconforming lots.
Where two or more lots, created by the filing of a map pursuant to the Map
Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.) prior to establishment of the Planning
Board, have any contiguous lines and are in single ownership and one or
more of the lots is nonconforming in any aspect, the lots involved shall be
considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this chapter, and
A. Alterations, as applied to a nonconforming building or structure, shall
only include a change or rearrangement in the structural supports or a
change in exterior appearance.
B. No nonconforming building or lot shall be enlarged, extended or
increased, unless such enlargement will not increase the degree of
nonconformance.
C. A nonconforming building, or an existing building on a nonconforming
lot may be altered, repaired, enlarged or extended, provided that the
use is permitted and provided that the enlargement or extension does
not project any farther than the existing building beyond a required
setback line or create any new setback or lot coverage violations.
D. Accessory buildings or structures may not be constructed on
nonconforming lots and/or on lots which contain a nonconforming
principal building or structure unless:
(1) At the time and since the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance making
such lot nonconforming the owner of the lot did not own any
adjoining property.
(2) The new accessory structure or building conforms to all
requirements of this chapter.
§ 140-128 WALL CODE § 140-131
139:380
no portion of said parcel shall be conveyed or divided except through the
filing of an approved subdivision in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 140-131 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-131
139:381

ARTICLE XX
Zoning Map and Districts
§ 140-132. Zoning Map.
The locations and boundaries of the districts of the Township are hereby
established as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township of Wall, New
Jersey, which is attached hereto and is hereby made a part of this chapter,
together with all notations, references and designations shown thereon.34
§ 140-133. Enumeration of districts. [Amended 8-12-1998 by Ord.
No. 19-1998; 1-27-1999 by Ord. No. 4-1999]
The Township of Wall is hereby divided into zone districts as follows:
R-5 Single-Family Residential
R-7.5 Single-Family Residential
R-10 Single-Family Residential
R-15 Single-Family Residential
R-20 Single-Family Residential
R-25 Single-Family Residential
R-30 Single-Family Residential
R-40 Single-Family Residential
R-60 Single-Family Residential
RR Rural Residential
RR-5 Rural Residential Five-Acre (minimum lot size five acres)
RR-6 Rural Residential (minimum lot size six acres)
HD-8 Multifamily Residential
HD-12 Multifamily Residential
MH Manufactured Housing
MHP Mobile Home Park
ML-25 Moderate/Low Income — 25
ML-3 Mount Laurel — 3
ML-6 Moderate/Low Income — Multifamily 6
ML-7 Moderate/Low Income — Multifamily 7
ML-8B Senior Citizen and Townhouse (eight DU/Acre)
MLC-3 Multifamily (three DU/acre)
MLC-7 Multifamily (seven DU/acre)
MLC-8 Multifamily (eight DU/acre)
MLC-8A Mount Laurel Compliance — Multifamily
34.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Land Use Office.
§ 140-132 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-133
139:383
ML-8A Multifamily (eight DU/acre)
ML-12 Moderate Low Income Multifamily (12 DU/acre)
ML-12A Mount Laurel Contribution
MLCC Mount Laurel Congregate Care (14 DU/acre)
MLC-RAC Mount Laurel Compliance Residential Adult Community
MLC-RAC-2 Mount Laurel Compliance Residential Adult Community — 2
MLC-3.4 Mount Laurel Compliance
NB Neighborhood Business
HB-20 Highway Business
HB-40 Highway Business
HB-80 Highway Business
HB-120 Highway Business
HB-200 Highway Business
CR-10 Commercial Recreation
CR-40 Commercial Recreation
OR-2 Office Research
OR-5 Office Research
OR-10 Office Research
OP-2 Office Park
OP-10 Office Park
GI-2 General Industrial
GI-5 General Industrial
GI-10 General Industrial
AI Airport Industrial
POS Public Open Space
OB-20 Office Business
OB-40 Office Business
OB-120 Office Business
§ 140-134. Development in the OP-10, OR-10 and GI-10 Zone
District
A. Development in the OP-10, OR-10 and GI-10 Zone District shall occur on
properties of no less than 10 acres. Where development is proposed in
the form of an office park, office/light industrial park or general
industrial park, no more than 40% of the lots may be developed, and
subdivided to a minimum of two acres.
§ 140-133 WALL CODE § 140-134
139:384
§ 140-134.1. Development in the NB Zone District. [Added
11-24-2009 by Ord. No. 30-2009]
Properties that are used entirely and only for residential purposes and
are located in the NB Neighborhood Business Zone shall be permitted to
use and develop the property pursuant to the requirements of the R-7.5
Single-Family Residential Zone until such time as the property is converted
wholly or in part to any nonresidential use or purpose. At such time, all site
development shall be consistent with the requirements of this chapter and
the prevailing NB Zone District requirements. Subdivisions of residentially
used properties in the NB Zone District are prohibited until such time as the
properties are made to conform to this chapter and the requirements of the
NB Zone District.
§ 140-135. Maintenance of Official Zoning Map and Schedules.
Authenticated copies of the Official Zoning Map shall be maintained in
the office of the Township Clerk and Land Use Officer and shall be made
available for public reference. Copies of all or a part of the Official Zoning
Map may be reproduced for public distribution. However, the original copy
of the Official Zoning Map and Schedules maintained in the office of the
Township Clerk shall be the final authority as to the current status of zoning
districts in the Township of Wall.35
§ 140-136. Interpretation of boundaries.
In constructing the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
B. Bulk requirements for the two-acre lots shall be consistent with the
OR-2, OP-2 and GI-2 Zones. Bulk requirements for lots five acres or
more shall be consistent with the ORI-5 and GI-5 Zones.
C. The design of the park shall provide common access to an arterial or
collector road by an internal road system with at least 80% of the lots
proposed fronting on the internal roads.
D. Development of the parks may be approved in phases of one or more
lots providing that applications for a phased development shall contain
an overall concept plan for the entire tract, presenting, at a minimum:
(1) The boundaries of the entire tract, proposed lot and road layout;
(2) Existing and proposed tree lines; and
(3) Significant environmental characteristics, such as but not limited
to steep slopes, wetlands, waterways and water courses, ponds and
lakes.
35.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Zone Requirements and the Schedule of Permitted and
Conditional Uses are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 140-134 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-136
139:385
§ 140-137. Mount Laurel districts.
The restrictions and standards applicable to development in the ML (Mount
Laurel) districts are the subject of court-approved settlements and the Fair
Share Housing Plan of the Township and are set forth in Article XLII.
A. Zone district boundaries are intended to follow center lines, lot or
property lines, or other natural lines such as the center line of
watercourses, ditches or lagoons, unless such district or zone
boundaries are fixed by dimension on the Zoning Map or by description,
measured from right-of-way.
B. Boundaries indicated as following the center lines of streets, highways
or alleys or streams, rivers or other bodies of water shall be construed
to follow such center lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall
be construed as following such lot lines.
D. Boundaries indicated as following railroad rights-of-way shall be
construed to be midway between the right-of-way lines.
E. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated
in Subsections A through C above shall be so construed. Distances not
specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by
the use of the scale appearing thereon.
F. Where a zone boundary fixed by dimensions approximately follows and
is not more than 20 feet distant from a lot line, such lot line shall be
construed to be the zone boundary.
§ 140-136 WALL CODE § 140-137
139:386
ARTICLE XXI
General Use Restrictions
§ 140-138. Schedule of Permitted and Conditional Uses. [Amended
2-9-2000 by Ord. No. 2-2000]
The use of land within the Township of Wall shall be subject to the following
standards and limitations. Permitted and conditional uses are specifically
designated on the Schedule of Permitted and Conditional Uses36 and
identified, where appropriate, by the USOMB's North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS I997). All land uses shall conform with the
performance standards set forth herein.
§ 140-139. Permitted uses.
A. The uses listed on the Schedule of Permitted and Conditional Uses shall
be permitted in the zones designated. Said schedule is annexed hereto
and made a part hereof.37
(1) Expedited review of NAICS code revisions. The Township
recognizes that there may be additional uses identified by NAICS
codes not contained in the Schedule of Permitted and Conditional
Uses, Nonresidential Zone Districts, the inclusion of which in
certain zones would be consistent with the intent and provisions of
the Master Plan and this chapter.
(2) An applicant may request the inclusion of an additional NAICS code
as a permitted or conditional use in any nonresidential zone district
and shall receive an expedited review and decision on such
request.
(3) The Land Use Officer shall prepare a one-page application form for
consideration of the addition of an NAICS code to the Schedule of
Permitted and Conditional Uses. An applicant may also submit such
additional information concerning the nature of the applicant's use
as the applicant may wish the Township to consider. There shall be
no fee for the making of such an application.
(4) The Land Use Officer, within seven days of receipt of such an
application, shall forward the application to the Township
Committee, together with a report and recommendation
concerning the application.
(5) The Township Committee shall review and act upon the application
at its first regular executive meeting alter receipt of the report and
recommendation from the Land Use Officer.
36.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Permitted and Conditional Uses is included at the end of
this chapter.
37.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Permitted and Conditional Uses is included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 140-138 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-139
139:387
§ 140-139.1. Solar farms. [Added 8-8-2012 by Ord. No. 11-2012]
B. Municipal buildings, facilities and services essential to the operation of
the Township, subject to general review and recommendation by the
Planning Board, are permitted in all zones.
A. Definitions:
COLLECTOR SURFACE — Any part of a solar collector that absorbs
solar energy for use in the collector's energy transformation process.
Collector surface does not include frames, support and mounting
hardware.
PRESERVED OPEN SPACE and PRESERVED FARMLAND — Land on
which a development easement was conveyed to, or retained by, the
State Agricultural Development Committee, a board, or a qualifying
tax-exempt nonprofit organization pursuant to the provisions of § 24
of N.J.S.A. 4:1C-31, § 5 of N.J.S.A. 4:1C-31.1, § 1 of N.J.S.A. 4:1C-38,
§ 1 of N.J.S.A. 4:1C-43.1, §§ 37 through 40 of N.J.S.A. 13.8C-37 through
13:8C-40, or any other state law enacted for farmland preservation
purposes.
RENEWABLE ENERGY FACILITY — A facility that engages in the
production of electric energy from solar technologies, photovoltaic
technologies, or other solar-based technology.
SOLAR COLLECTOR — A device, structure or part of a device or
structure in which a substantial purpose is used to transform solar
energy into thermal, mechanical, chemical or electrical energy.
SOLAR ENERGY — Direct radiant energy received from the sun.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — One or more solar panels and all
associated equipment involved in the conversion of solar radiation to
electrical energy which functions as the only principal use on the land
on which such system is situated, said land constituting 10 or more
acres in size.
SOLAR PANEL — A structure containing one or more receptive cells
or collector devices, the purpose of which is to use solar radiation to
create usable electrical energy.
B. Solar energy systems.
(1) Solar energy systems shall be a permitted use in the AI, GI-10, GI-5,
OP-10, OR-10 and OR-5 zones of the Township, and shall constitute
the principal use of the lot on which it is located. For all such
systems site plan approval is required. Any proposed installation
which is not in one of the zones listed herein shall be considered a
prohibited use.
(2) A person who owns a preserved farmland may construct, install and
operate solar energy systems on an area less than the ten-acre
§ 140-139 WALL CODE § 140-139.1
139:388
minimum for such a use on the preserved portions of the farm or
on any portion excluded from preservation.
(3) A site plan application for a solar energy system shall address, and
not be limited to, buffering, care and maintenance of all property
associated with the installation, security, visual impacts, drainage,
traffic to and from the site. Installations shall be subject to the
following requirements:
(a) The location of ground-mounted arrays and freestanding
collectors shall be set back a distance of 50 feet from all
property lines.
(b) Ground-mounted arrays shall not exceed 20 feet in height
when oriented at maximum tilt.
(c) A twenty-five-foot-wide, densely planted perimeter landscaped
buffer that includes a combination of evergreen trees and
shrubs with a six-foot-tall black vinyl-coated chain link fence
located inside the landscape permineter. Plantings shall not be
a lesser height than that of the solar array at time of plantings.
(d) No more than 80% of the total lot area shall be utilized for a
solar energy system installation.
(4) To the extent reasonably possible, solar energy panels, regardless
of how they are mounted, shall be oriented and/or screened year
round so that glare is directed away from adjoining properties and
streets.
(5) To the extent reasonably possible, solar energy systems shall be
designed using such features as colors, materials, textures,
screening and landscaping so as to blend into their settings and
avoid visual blight. The solar energy systems shall remain painted
or finished in the color or finish that was originally applied by the
manufacturer. The exterior surface of any visible components shall
be a nonreflective, neutral color like white, grey or another
nonobtrusive color. Finishes shall be matter or nonreflective.
(6) Solar energy systems shall not be used for the display of
advertising.
(7) All solar energy system collector installations must be performed
by a qualified solar installer, and prior to operation the electrical
connections must be inspected by the Construction Office or other
appropriate electrical inspection agency as determined by the
Township. In addition, any interconnection to the public utility grid
must be inspected by the appropriate public utility.
(8) When solar storage batteries are included as part of the solar
energy collector system, they must be placed in a secure container
or enclosure meeting the requirements of the New Jersey State
§ 140-139.1 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-139.1
139:389
Building Code when in use and when no longer used shall be
disposed of in accordance with the laws and regulations of the
State of New Jersey and other applicable laws and regulations.
(9) Clearing of natural vegetation for the installation of a solar energy
system shall be limited to that which is necessary for the
construction, operation and maintenance of the system and as
otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations and
ordinances.
(10) Any trees to be removed to accommodate the installation of a solar
energy system shall be accompanied by a plan demonstrating the
need to remove the trees. Any applicant shall locate a solar energy
system so that tree removal is not required, to the extent practical.
(11) Any ancillary buildings and any outside storage associated with a
solar energy system must, to the extent reasonably possible, use
materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will
blend the facility into the natural setting and existing environment
(i.e., in an agricultural setting accessory buildings could be
designed to look like barns). Appropriate landscaping and
architecture shall be provided to screen accessory structures from
roads and adjacent residences.
(12) Decommissioning of system.
(a) Any solar energy system that has generated no electricity for a
period of 12 months shall be deemed to be abandoned and
shall be decommissioned within six months. A
decommissioning plan shall be submitted to the approving
authority as part of the site plan application process. The
decommissioning plan shall include, but not be limited to the
following:
[1] A time schedule and methods for the removal of the entire
solar panel array and all associated facilities and
equipment connected thereto from the premises;
[2] Cleaning and restoration of the property to its preinstalled
condition, including grading and vegetative restabilization
to eliminate any negative impacts to surrounding
properties; and
[3] Posting of a performance bond prior to the start of the
decommissioning work, in an amount to be determined by
the Township Engineer, to insure the completion of this
work in accordance with this and other relevant
ordinances and codes.
(b) If said decommissioning has not been completed within the
requisite six-month period, then the Township's Zoning Officer
shall provide written notice by certified mail to the landowner
§ 140-139.1 WALL CODE § 140-139.1
139:390
§ 140-140. Prohibited uses.
requiring that decommissioning be completed within 30
calendar days of the receipt of said notice.
(c) If the decommissioning has not been completed within 30
calendar days of the receipt of said notice, the Township may
either undertake the decommissioning and charge the
landowner and/or facility owner and operator for all of the
costs and expenses thereof, including reasonable attorney's
fees, or take appropriate legal action to compel the
decommissioning. All costs incurred by the Township shall be
billed to the landowner and if not paid within 60 calendar days
of billing, shall become a lien against the property.
A. Any use not specifically permitted in § 140-139 is prohibited except as
noted in § 140-141. The following uses or activities are hereby
prohibited anywhere within the Township:
(1) Manufacture of acetylene or ammonia.
(2) Manufacture or bulk storage of pyroxylin, plastics, explosives,
fireworks or matches.
(3) Manufacture of acids.
(4) Manufacture of heavy chemicals.
(5) Refining of petroleum or the storage of petroleum products having
a flash point of under 150º F., in excess of 200,000 gallons.
(6) The manufacture, batching or mixing of asphalt, asphalt products
or bituminous concrete.
(7) Refining or manufacture of animal black, bone black, or lamp black.
(8) Refining, manufacture or mixing of fertilizer or potash.
(9) Incinerators, garbage or refuse disposal dumps or landfill, except
public sanitary landfills owned by the Township.
(10) Manufacture of disinfectants, insecticides or other poisons or toxic
gases.
(11) Manufacture of dye.
(12) Rendering or refining of grease, fat or tallow.
(13) Manufacture of glue, size or gelatins, where the process includes
the refining and recovery of products from fish, animal refuse or
offal.
(14) Stockyards or the slaughtering or processing of animals, fish or
poultry or parts thereof.
§ 140-139.1 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-140
139:391
(15) Storage, cleaning, curing or tanning of rawhides or skins or the
pulling of wool.
(16) Coke ovens or manufacture of derivatives of coke.
(17) Manufacture or production of metals or alloys in ingot form.
(18) Crematoriums.
(19) Manufacture of rubber or rubber products.
(20) Manufacture of plastic or cork or their constituents.
(21) Manufacture of paints, oils and varnishes.
(22) Manufacture of soaps or detergents.
(23) Manufacture or repair of boilers, tank or pipe.
(24) Firearm target ranges, skeet or trap ranges or any place where
firearms, bow and arrow, cross bow, air driven weapon, sling shot
or similar weapon is discharged for practice or competitive
purposes.
(25) Discharge of firearms, bow and arrow, cross bow, air driven
weapon, sling shot or similar weapon in all of that area of the
Township lying to the east and south of the center lines of the roads
set forth in the following description: Beginning at a point the
intersection of the center line of School House Road and the
boundary line between the Township of Wall and the Township of
Neptune, thence southwesterly along School House Road to the
easterly right-of-way line of the Garden State Parkway, thence
southeasterly along the easterly right-of-way tine of the Garden
State Parkway to Belmar Boulevard; thence southeasterly along
Belmar Boulevard to Woodfield Avenue; thence, along Woodfield
Avenue to Allenwood Road; thence in a northeasterly direction
along Allenwood Road to Belmar Boulevard; thence southeasterly
along Glendola Road to Hurley Pond Road; thence southeasterly
along Hurley Pond Road to New Bedford Road; thence
southeasterly along New Bedford Road to Route No. 35; thence
southerly along Route No. 35 to Route No. 34; thence
northwesterly along Route No. 34 to Panther Trail; thence
southwesterly along Panther Trail to Ramshorne Drive; thence
northerly along Ramshorne Drive to River Bluffs Lane; thence
southwesterly along River Bluffs Lane to Birch Place; thence
northwesterly along Birch Place to Lorraine Court; thence
southwesterly along the center line of Lorraine Court and the
extension thereof to the Wall Township boundary in the Manasquan
River.
(26) Rooming or boarding houses.
§ 140-140 WALL CODE § 140-140
139:392
(27)Keeping or raising of horses or other similar animals or farming as
defined in this chapter on lots comprised of less than five acres.
(28) Trailer courts, camps or parks.
(29) Any use of land or building or any activity which will adversely
affect or impair the lawful use or peaceful enjoyment of any other
land or buildings.
(30)Raising of swine or fowl.
(31) Dog kennels.
(32) Landing of aircraft or landing areas for aircraft, in any zone except
in the AI Airport Industrial zone.
(33) Junkyards.
(34) Manufacture, growth, cultivation, or conduct of any farming
activities related to marijuana and the sale of marijuana and/or the
paraphernalia that facilitates the use of such marijuana. [Added
2-28-2018 by Ord. No. 2-2018]
§ 140-140 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-140
139:393

ARTICLE XXII
Conditional and Accessory Uses
§ 140-141. Conditional use approval; standards.
§ 140-142. Heavy construction other than building constructioncontractors
(NAICS 234); lumber and wood products, except
furniture (NAICS 321); stone, clay, glass and concrete products
(NAICS 327); coating, engraving and allied products (NAICS
332813); warehousing (excluding NAICS 49311), mini warehouses
and self-storage (NAICS 53113); and motor freight terminals
(NAICS 48849).
Heavy construction other than building construction-contractors (NAICS
234); lumber and wood products, except furniture (NAICS 321); stone, clay,
glass and concrete products (NAICS 327); coating, engraving and allied
products (NAICS 332813); warehousing (excluding NAICS 49311), mini
warehouses and self-storage (NAICS 53113); and motor freight terminals
(NAICS 48849) may be permitted in specified zones only upon receipt of a
conditional use permit. A conditional use permit shall be granted, provided
that the following standards are met:
A. The uses listed on the Schedule of Permitted and Conditional Uses as
conditional uses shall be permitted in the zones designated upon a
favorable review by the Planning Board.38
B. The following shall apply to the approval of a conditional use:
(1) The use for which an application is being made shall be specifically
listed as a conditional use within the zone where the property is
located.
(2) The development shall conform with the criteria specified under
this article.
C. Site plan approval shall be required unless otherwise specified in this
chapter.
(1) The conditional use shall comply with the design standards,
improvement standards, and document submittal requirements of
this chapter unless a requirement is waived by the approving
authority.
(2) The conditional use shall adhere to the additional standards
specified for the particular use unless a variance is granted
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
D. The criteria and additional standards applicable to the various
conditional uses shall be as follows.
38.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Permitted and Conditional Uses is included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 140-141 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-142
139:395
§ 140-143. Mini warehousing and self-storage (NAICS 53113).
Mini warehousing and self-storage (NAICS 4225) uses may be permitted in
specified zones only upon receipt of a conditional use permit. A conditional
use permit shall be granted, provided that all of the following conditions are
met:
A. Any structures to be used for the aforementioned purposes shall not be
erected nearer than 100 feet to any street line or any parcel of land and
shall not be erected nearer than 50 feet to any side line, nor 75 feet to
any rear yard line and at least 100 feet from the property line of any
residential zone abutting the premises. The word "structure" herein
shall include accessory buildings and parking areas. Adequate off-street
parking with respect to the premises shall be provided and be limited to
the rear and side yards in accordance with this chapter.
B. The loading and delivery area shall be located at the rear of the
structure and shall be screened primarily with evergreen trees so as to
provide visible obstruction as to neighboring properties. In the event
any of the aforesaid trees do not live, they shall be replaced so as to
maintain the adequate screening.
C. If the parking is illuminated it shall be adjusted so that no glare or beam
is directed towards any adjoining property, public street or dwelling
windows.
D. Site plan approval shall be required and any development shall be
subject to the following supplemental zoning regulations:
(1) Minimum lot area shall be three acres.
(2) Minimum lot frontage shall be 250 feet.
(3) Maximum lot coverage shall be 40%.
(4) All outdoor storage areas shall be screened from view from any
public road by a landscaped buffer with a minimum width of 20
feet.
(5) All outdoor storage areas shall be screened from adjacent
properties by a landscaped buffer with a minimum width of 30 feet.
(6) All outdoor storage areas shall be arranged in a safe and neat
manner, shall be fenced in with a minimum six-foot high fence and
shall be paved in accordance with this chapter.
A. The minimum rental storage area shall be 40,000 square feet.
B. Such facilities shall maintain an operational manager's or resident
manager's office/dwelling which shall be accessory to the principal use
herein. Occupancy of the dwelling shall be limited to the facility
manager and his immediate family.
§ 140-142 WALL CODE § 140-143
139:396
C. Such facilities shall provide for the storage of customer's goods and
wares only. No business activity other than the rental of storage space
shall be conducted on the premises by either the owner of the facility,
the resident manager or a tenant of storage space.
D. No storage of any kind shall be conducted out of doors.
E. The site containing such a use shall have direct access to a
nonresidential collector or arterial street.
F. Site plan approval shall be required and any development shall also be
subject to the following supplemental zoning regulations:
(1) The minimum site area shall be four acres and the maximum site
area shall be 12 acres.
(2) The maximum building area inclusive of a manager's office and/or
dwelling for any one building on the site shall be 12,000 square
feet.
(3) The maximum building length inclusive of a manager's office and/or
dwelling shall be 300 feet.
(4) The minimum front yard setback abutting a public street shall be
75 feet. The minimum setback adjacent to any residentially zoned
or developed property shall be 50 feet. All other setbacks shall be a
minimum of 25 feet.
(5) The facades of all structures visible from public streets and
residentially zoned or developed property shall be constructed of
materials which are wood, brick, masonry, or other material
finished to be compatible with the uses in the area in which the
facility is located. Facades facing residentially zoned or developed
property shall not contain access doors to the storage units.
(6) No single structure shall exceed one story, 18 feet in height
including all roof equipment attached thereto. Structures with roof
equipment shall provide roof screening to prevent its visibility from
all sides of the building. The height of a resident manager's office
dwelling, whether or not it is attached to another structure, shall
be permitted to a maximum of 35 feet, 2 1/2 stories.
(7) All outdoor lighting shall be shielded to direct light and glare only
onto the premises and shall be of sufficient intensity to discourage
vandalism and theft. It shall be directed, shaded and focused away
from all adjoining property.
(8) A minimum of four standard parking spaces shall be located in the
immediate vicinity of the administrative office for the use of
prospective clients. Parking areas adjacent to or in close proximity
to the storage facilities shall be provided. Two additional standard
parking spaces shall be provided for a resident manager's dwelling.
§ 140-143 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-143
139:397
§ 140-144. Wireless communications towers and antennas.
[Amended 11-10-1999 by Ord. No. 36-1999]
Fire lanes shall be designated and marked in accordance with the
Fire Prevention Official.
(9) Outdoor mini warehouse or self-storage identification advertising
displays shall be in accordance with this chapter and shall not in
any way exceed the maximum size, height, character and spacing
allowed in the zone in which it is to be located.
(10) Drive aisles with access on both sides to storage facilities shall
provide a minimum of 30 feet of width where traffic flow is both
ways. Where only one way traffic flow is permitted, the width may
be reduced to a minimum of 22 feet.
(11) Drive aisles with access on one side to storage facilities shall
provide a minimum of 25 feet of width where traffic flow is both
ways. Where only one way traffic flow is permitted, the width may
be reduced to a minimum of 20 feet.
(12) A minimum of fifteen-foot continuous planted buffer in accordance
with this chapter shall be provided along all property lines adjacent
to other nonresidentially zoned sites. If an adjacent site is
residentially zoned or developed, the minimum planted buffer shall
be 50 feet.
(13) A minimum fifty-foot continuous planted buffer in accordance with
this chapter shall be provided along all nonaccessible street
frontages. Where a frontage provides access to the facility, the
same buffer shall be required except for the area necessary for an
ingress/egress drive, required parking, signage as permitted by
this chapter and required sight triangles.
A. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines for the
siting of wireless communications towers and antennas. The goals
of this section are to:
(a) Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of towers and antennas.
(b) Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas.
(c) Minimize the total number of towers throughout the Township.
(d) Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower
sites as a primary option rather than construction of additional
single-use towers.
§ 140-143 WALL CODE § 140-144
139:398
(e) Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal.
(f) Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a
way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and
antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening
and innovative camouflaging techniques.
(g) Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications
services to provide such services to the community quickly,
effectively and efficiently.
(h) Consider the public health and safety of communication
towers.
(i) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower
failure through engineering and careful siting of tower
structures.
(2) In furtherance of these goals, the Township of Wall has given due
consideration to the Township of Wall's Master Plan, Zoning Map,
existing land uses and environmentally sensitive areas in approving
sites for the location of towers and antennas.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings set forth below. These definitions are supplemental to
§ 140-17.
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Man-made trees, water towers,
bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting
structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or
towers.
ANTENNA — Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on
a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate
or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications
signals or other communication signals.
BACKHAUL NETWORK — The lines that connect a provider's towers/
cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or
long distance providers, or the public switched telephone network.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance
measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on
the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna.
PREEXISTING TOWERS and PREEXISTING ANTENNAS — Any tower
or antenna for which a building permit or special use permit has been
properly issued prior to the effective date of this section, including
§ 140-144 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-144
139:399
permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so
long as such approval is current and not expired.
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for
the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio
and similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice
towers, guyed towers or monopole towers. The term includes radio
and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier
towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures and the
like. The term includes the structure and any support thereto.
C. Applicability.
(1) New towers and antennas. All new towers or antennas in the
Township of Wall shall be subject to these regulations, except as
provided in Subsections C(2) through (4), inclusive.
(2) Amateur radio station operators/receive-only antennas. This
section shall not govern any tower or the installation of any
antenna that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated
by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used
exclusively for receive-only antennas.
(3) Preexisting towers or antennas. Preexisting towers and preexisting
antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this
section, other than the requirements of Subsections D(4) and (5).
(4) AM array. For purposes of implementing this section, an AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground
system which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be
considered one tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation
distances shall be measured from the outer perimeter of the towers
included in the AM array. Additional tower units may be added
within the perimeter of the AM array by right.
D. General requirements.
(1) Conditional use. Antennas and towers shall be permitted as
conditional uses in the GI Zones and OLI-10 Zone. They shall not be
permitted in any other zone except on properties owned by the
Township, excluding open space properties. A different existing use
or an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the
installation of an antenna or tower on such lot.
(2) Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with district development regulations,
including but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage
requirements and other such requirements, the dimensions of the
entire lot shall control even though the antennas or towers may be
located on leased parcels within such lot.
(3) Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or
tower shall provide to the approving board an inventory of its
§ 140-144 WALL CODE § 140-144
139:400
existing towers, antennas or sites approved for towers or antennas,
that are either within the jurisdiction of the Township or within five
miles of the border thereof, including specific information about
the location, height and design of each tower.
(4) State or federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed
current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any
other agency of the state or federal government with the authority
to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations
are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed
by this section shall bring such towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six
months of the effective date of such standards and regulations,
unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the
controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and
antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or
antenna at the owner's expense.
(5) Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity
of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local
building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are
published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended
from time to time. If, upon inspection, the Township concludes that
a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and
constitutes a danger to persons or property, then, upon notice
being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30
days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards.
Failure to bring such tower into compliance within said 30 days
shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at
the owner's expense.
(6) Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and
separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities
located in the Township irrespective of municipal and county
jurisdictional boundaries.
(7) Not essential services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this section and shall not be regulated or
permitted as essential services, public utilities or private utilities.
(8) Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall
certify that all franchises required by law for the construction and/
or operation of a wireless communication system in the Township
have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises
with the Township Clerk.
(9) Public notice. For purposes of this section, any conditional use
permit or variance application shall require public notice to all
abutting property owners and all property owners of properties
§ 140-144 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-144
139:401
that are located within the corresponding separation distance
listed in Subsection E, Table 1, in addition to any notice otherwise
required by the Municipal Land Use Law.
(10) Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.
(11) Building and support equipment. Buildings and support equipment
associated with antennas or towers shall comply with the
requirements of Subsection F.
(12) Multiple antenna/tower plan. The Township encourages the users
of towers and antennas to submit a single application for approval
of multiple sites. Applications for approval of multiple sites shall be
given priority in the review process.
E. Conditional use permits.
(1) General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of
conditional use permits for towers or antennas by the Planning
Board:
(a) In granting a conditional use approval, the Board may impose
conditions to the extent the Board concludes such conditions
are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed
tower on adjoining properties.
(b) Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant
submits, whether civil, mechanical or electrical, shall be
certified by a licensed professional engineer.
(2) Towers.
(a) Information required. Applicants for a conditional use permit
for a tower shall submit the following information:
[1] A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and
height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning,
adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to
other municipalities), Master Plan classification of the site
and all properties within the applicable separation
distances set forth in Table 1, adjacent roadways,
proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines,
elevation drawings of the proposed tower and any other
structures, topography, parking and other information
deemed by the Township Planner or Planning Board to be
necessary to assess compliance with this article.
[2] A legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
[3] The setback distance between the proposed tower and the
nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned
properties and unplatted residentially zoned properties.
§ 140-144 WALL CODE § 140-144
139:402
[4] The separation distance from other towers described in
the inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to
Subsection D(3) shall be shown on an updated site plan or
map. The applicant shall also identify the type of
construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner/
operator of the existing tower(s).
[5] A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
[6] The method of fencing and finished color and, if
applicable, the method of camouflage and illumination.
[7] A description of compliance with Subsections D(3), (4), (5),
(6), (7), (10), (11) and (12) and E(4)(c)[1] and [2] and all
applicable federal, state or local laws.
[8] A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether
construction of the tower will accommodate collocation of
additional antennas for future users.
[9] An identification of the entities providing the backhaul
network for the tower(s) described in the application and
other cellular sites owned or operated by the applicant in
the municipality.
[10] A description of the suitability of the use of existing
towers, other structures or alternative technology not
requiring the use of towers or structures to provide the
services to be provided through the use of the proposed
new tower.
[11] A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within the Township of Wall based upon existing
physical, engineering, technological or geographical
limitations in the event that the proposed tower is erected.
(3) Factors considered in granting conditional use permits for towers.
The Board shall consider the following factors in determining
whether to issue a conditional use permit:
(a) Height of the proposed tower.
(b) Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries.
(c) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties.
(d) Surrounding topography.
(e) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage.
(f) Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating
visual obtrusiveness.
§ 140-144 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-144
139:403
(g) Proposed ingress and egress.
(h) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or
structures as discussed in Subsection E(4)(a) of this section.
(4) A conditional use permit shall be granted for a wireless
communications tower or antenna, provided that the following
standards and specifications are satisfied:
(a) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or
alternative technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless
the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of
the approving board that no existing tower, structure or
alternative technology that does not require the use of towers
or structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed
antenna. An applicant shall submit information requested by
the board as to the availability of suitable existing towers,
other structures or alternative technology. Evidence submitted
to demonstrate that no existing tower, structure or alternative
technology can accommodate the applicant's proposed
antenna may consist of any of the following:
[1] No existing towers or structures are located within the
geographic area which meet the applicant's engineering
requirements.
[2] Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to
meet the applicant's engineering requirements.
[3] Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient
structural strength to support the applicant's proposed
antenna and related equipment.
[4] The applicant's proposed antenna would cause
electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the
existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the
existing towers or structures would cause interference
with the applicant's proposed antenna.
[5] The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the
owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to
adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are
unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development
are presumed to be unreasonable.
[6] The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting
factors that render existing towers and structures
unsuitable.
[7] The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology
that does not require the use of towers or structures, such
§ 140-144 WALL CODE § 140-144
139:404
as a cable microcell network using multiple low-powered
transmitters/receivers attached to a wireline system, is
unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed
new tower or antenna development shall not be presumed
to render the technology unsuitable.
(b) Setbacks and bulk requirements. The following bulk and
setback requirements shall apply to all towers for which
approval is sought:
[1] The lot on which the tower is proposed to be located shall
meet all of the minimum lot size and other bulk
requirements of the zone in which it is located.
[2] Towers must be set back a distance at least equal to the
height of the tower from any adjoining lot line or the
setback requirements of the zoning district, whichever is
greater.
[3] Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum
zoning district setback requirements.
(c) Separation. The following separation requirements shall apply
to all towers and antennas for which approval is required;
provided, however, that the board may reduce the standard
separation requirements if the goals of this article would be
better served thereby.
[1] Separation from off-site uses/designated areas.
[a] Tower separation shall be measured from the base of
the tower to the lot line of the off-site uses and/or
designated areas as specified in Table 1, except as
otherwise provided in Table 1.
[b] Towers shall be separated from off-site uses or areas
in accordance with the minimum standards
established in Table 1.
§ 140-144 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-144
139:405
Table 1
Off-Site Use/
Designated Area
Separation Distance2
Single family or duplex
residential units1
500 feet or 300% of height
of tower, whichever is
greater
Vacant single family or
duplex residentially
zoned land which is
either platted or has
preliminary subdivision
plan approval which has
not expired
500 feet or 300% of height
of tower, whichever is
greater
Vacant unplatted
residentially zoned
lands3
500 feet or 200% of height
of tower, whichever is
greater
Existing multifamily
residential units greater
than duplex units
500 feet or 200% of height
of tower, whichever is
greater
Right-of-way of State
Highway No. 34
Nonresidentially zoned
lands or nonresidential
uses
200 feet or 200% of height
of tower, whichever is
greater
NOTES:
1Includes modular homes and mobile homes used for
living quarters.
2Separation measured from base of tower to closest
building setback line.
3Includes any unplatted residential use properties
without a valid preliminary subdivision plan or valid
development plan approval and any multifamily
residentially zoned land greater than a duplex.
[2] Separation distances between towers. Separation
distances between towers shall be applicable for and
measured between the proposed tower and preexisting
towers. The separation distances shall be measured by
drawing or following a straight line between the base of
the existing tower and the proposed base, pursuant to a
site plan, of the proposed tower. The separation distances
(listed in linear feet) shall be as shown in Table 2.
§ 140-144 WALL CODE § 140-144
139:406
Table 2
Existing
Towers
Lattice
(feet)
Guyed
(feet)
Monopole
75 Feet in
Height or
Greater
(feet)
Monopole
Less Than
75 Feet in
Height
(feet)
Lattice 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Guyed 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Monopole
less than
75 feet
750 750 750 750
(d) Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing
not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with
an appropriate anticlimbing device.
(e) Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the
landscaping surrounding towers for which a conditional use
approval is required.
[1] Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens the view of the tower
compound from any adjoining property or roadway used
for residences. The standard buffer shall consist of a
landscaped strip at least four feet wide outside the
perimeter of the compound.
[2] In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be
minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or
waived.
[3] Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the
site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In
some cases, such as towers located on large, wooded lots,
natural growth around the property perimeter may be
sufficient buffer.
(f) Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following
requirements:
[1] Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or,
subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted
a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
[2] At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related
structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials,
colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend
them into the natural setting and surrounding buildings.
§ 140-144 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-144
139:407
[3] If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower,
the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical
equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or
closely compatible with, the color of the supporting
structure so as to make the antenna and related
equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
(g) Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted unless
required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is
required, the lighting alternatives and design chosen must
cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views.
F. Buildings or other equipment storage.
(1) Antennas mounted on structures or rooftops. The equipment
cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall comply
with the following:
(a) The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 100
square feet of gross floor area or be more than 10 feet in
height. In addition, for buildings and structures which are less
than 65 feet in height, the related unmanned equipment
structure, if over 100 square feet of gross floor area or 10 feet
in height, shall be located on the ground and shall not be
located on the roof of the structure.
(b) If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building,
the area of the equipment structure and other equipment and
structures shall not occupy more than 10% of the roof area.
(c) Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable zoning and building codes.
(2) Antennas mounted on utility poles or light poles. The equipment
cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall be
located in accordance with the following:
(a) In residential zones, the equipment cabinet or structure may
be located:
[1] Provided the cabinet or structure is no greater than 10 feet
in height or 100 square feet of gross floor area and the
cabinet/structure is located a minimum of 200 feet from all
lot lines. The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an
evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of at least eight
feet and a planted height of at least 48 inches.
(b) In nonresidential zones, the equipment cabinet or structure
shall be no greater than 10 feet in height or 100 square feet in
gross floor area. The structure or cabinet shall be screened by
an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of eight feet and a
planted height of at least 48 inches. All structures or cabinets
§ 140-144 WALL CODE § 140-144
139:408
shall be screened from view of all residential properties which
abut or are directly across the street from the structure or
cabinet by a solid fence eight feet in height or an evergreen
hedge with an ultimate height of eight feet and a planted
height of at least 48 inches.
(3) Antennas located on towers. The related unmanned equipment
structure shall not contain more than 100 square feet of gross floor
area or be more than 10 feet in height and shall be located in
accordance with the minimum yard requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located.
(4) Modification of building site requirements. The requirements of
Subsection F(1) through (3) may be modified by the Planning Board
in the case of uses permitted by conditional use in order to
encourage collocation.
G. Removal of abandoned antennas and towers/bonding.
(1) Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period
of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such
antenna or tower and the owner of the property shall remove the
same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the Township
notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to remove an
abandoned antenna or tower within said 90 days shall be grounds
to remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
(2) Notice of abandonment and the requirement to remove the tower
shall be provided by the Township to both the owner of the tower
and the owner of the property on which the tower is located.
Should the tower not be removed and should the Township
determine that in the interest of the public health, safety or welfare
the tower should be removed, the Township may cause the tower to
be removed, and all costs associated with the removal of the tower,
including actual removal costs, all engineering, legal and Township
personnel costs and the cost of public bidding for the contract for
removal of the tower, shall be certified by the Township Committee
to the Tax Collector. The full cost shall be imposed by the Tax
Collector as a lien upon the property to be collected in the same
manner as taxes.
(3) No building permit shall be issued for the construction of a new
tower in the Township until a bond is posted by the applicant
guaranteeing the cost of demolition and removal of the tower in the
event of its abandonment, said bond to be in a form satisfactory to
the Township Attorney as to form and content and in an amount to
be determined by the Township Engineer representing a
reasonable estimation of the costs of demolition and removal of the
tower.
(4) If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision
shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower.
§ 140-144 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-144
139:409
(5) The owner of every tower located in the Township shall, on or
before December 1 in each year, provide a certification to the
Township Clerk that the tower is operational. Said certification
shall be submitted on a form provided by the Township Clerk.
H. List of administratively approved uses. The following uses may be
administratively approved by the Township Land Use Officer:
(1) Locating antennas on existing structures or towers consistent with
the terms of Subsection H(1)(a) and (b) below.
(a) Antennas on existing structures. Any antenna which is not
attached to a tower may be approved by the Township Land
Use Officer as an accessory use to any commercial, industrial,
professional, institutional or multifamily structure of eight or
more dwelling units, provided:
[1] The antenna does not extend more than 30 feet above the
highest point of the structure;
[2] The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA
regulations; and
[3] The antenna complies with all applicable building codes.
(b) Antennas on existing towers. An antenna which is attached to
an existing tower may be approved by the Land Use Officer
and, to minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the
proliferation and clustering of towers, collocation of antennas
by more than one carrier on existing towers shall take
precedence over the construction of new towers, provided
such collocation is accomplished in a manner consistent with
the following:
[1] A tower which is modified or reconstructed to
accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna
shall be of the same tower type as the existing tower.
(2) Installing a cable microcell network through the use of multiple
low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to existing wireline
systems, such as conventional cable or telephone wires, or similar
technology that does not require the use of towers.
(3) If the tower or antenna is not permitted to be approved
administratively pursuant to this Subsection H, then a conditional
use permit shall be required for the construction of a tower or the
placement of an antenna.
(4) Any administrative approval pursuant to this section shall be
conditioned upon the posting of a performance bond pursuant to
Subsection G(3) hereof.
I. Nonconforming uses/structures.
§ 140-144 WALL CODE § 140-144
139:410
§ 140-145. Retail nurseries (NAICS 44422).
Retail nurseries (NAICS 44422) may be permitted in specified zones only
upon receipt of a conditional use permit. A conditional use permit shall be
granted, provided that the following standards are met:
(1) Preexisting towers. Preexisting towers shall be allowed to be
maintained and continue their usage as they presently exist,
pursuant to state law. Routine maintenance shall be permitted on
such preexisting towers. New construction other than routine
maintenance on a preexisting tower shall comply with the
requirements of this section.
(2) Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming towers or
antennas. Bona fide nonconforming towers or antennas that are
damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt without having to first obtain
a conditional use permit or variance and without having to meet the
separation requirements specified herein; provided, however, that
the type, height and location of the tower on site shall be of the
same type and intensity or of a lesser height and intensity as the
original facility. Building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply
with the then applicable building codes and shall be obtained
within 180 days from the date the facility is damaged or destroyed.
If no permit is obtained or if said permit expires, the tower or
antenna shall be deemed abandoned.
(3) Performance bond required. Any permit for the rebuilding of a
nonconforming tower shall be conditioned upon the posting of a
performance guarantee pursuant to the provisions of Subsection
G(3) hereof.
A. Minimum lot area shall be no less than two acres.
B. No nursery may be located within two miles, measured by driving
distance on public roads between nearest property lines, of any other
nursery.
C. Site plan approval shall be required and any development shall be
subject to the following supplemental zoning regulations.
(1) All outdoor retail sales and/or outdoor display area shall be
designated and dimensioned on the site plan.
(2) All outdoor retail sales and/or display areas shall comply with the
principal building setbacks for the zone in which the site is located.
(3) Outdoor retail sales and/or display areas shall only be permitted as
accessory to a principal retail building.
(4) All outdoor retail sales and/or display areas shall be adequately
illuminated during evening hours.
§ 140-144 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-145
139:411
§ 140-146. Gasoline service stations (NAICS 4471).
Gasoline service stations (NAICS 4471) may be permitted in specified zones
only upon the receipt of a conditional use permit. A conditional use permit
shall be granted, provided that the following standards are met:
(5) All outdoor retail sales and/or display areas shall be counted
towards the permitted building coverage of the site.
(6) Vehicle loading and unloading areas shall be provided distinct from
the required parking facilities.
(7) All outdoor retail sales and/or display areas shall be counted
towards the parking requirements for the use.
A. The location of such facilities shall be limited as follows:
(1) The minimum site area shall be 40,000 square feet.
(2) The minimum street frontage shall be 300 feet.
(3) Distance from public meeting places. No building permit shall be
issued if any part of the lot or plot on which such use will be made is
situated within a distance of 500 feet measured by a straight line
between nearest property lines, of premises on which are located
one or more of the following types of buildings.
(a) Public, private and parochial schools.
(b) Hospitals and nursing homes.
(c) Churches and other places of worship.
(d) Theaters and assembly halls.
(e) Public libraries.
(f) Public museums.
(g) Lands held by any public corporation for the purposes of
erecting thereon any of the institutions listed above or to be
used in connection with such uses.
B. Site plan approval shall be subject to the following supplemental zoning
regulations. The development of such facilities shall be controlled as
follows:
(1) The minimum floor area shall be at least 1,000 square feet.
(2) No pits, racks, lifts or repair work shall be permitted out of doors;
no disabled vehicle shall be permitted to remain on the premises
for more than two weeks, and no more than four disabled vehicles
shall be stored or parked on the premises at one time.
(3) No vending machines shall be permitted out of doors.
§ 140-145 WALL CODE § 140-146
139:412
(4) Gasoline pumps shall be located at least 30 feet from any property
line.
(5) All fuel or similar volatile substances shall be stored underground.
(6) No ingress or egress drives shall be located closer than 50 feet to
any other drive on the same site or any other property. Such ingress
and egress drives shall have a width of at least 20 feet, but not
more than 30 feet.
(7) No paved areas other than an ingress or egress drive may be
located within 10 feet of any property line.
(8) All unpaved areas of the site shall be graded and planted with
grass, shrubs or trees.
(9) No building shall be erected nearer than 50 feet to any street line
nor nearer than 20 feet to any side or rear property line.
(10) The minimum unoccupied open space shall be 30% of the lot area.
(11) The maximum lot coverage shall be 10% of the lot area.
(12) The operation of such facilities shall be limited as follows:
(a) No body or fender repairs shall be permitted on any part of the
premises.
(b) No motor vehicles, trailers or boats for sale or lease shall be
parked, stored or displayed on any pat of the premises.
(c) No vehicle shall be permitted to be standing or parked on the
premises of a motor vehicle service station other than those
used by the employees in the indirect or direct operation of the
establishment.
(d) Accessory goods for sale may be displayed on the pump islands
and the building island only. The outside storage of oil cans
and/or antifreeze and similar products may be displayed on the
respective islands, if provided for in a suitable metal stand or
rack.
C. Gasoline service stations located in the HB-80 or HB-120 Zones which
are operated as a dual use with a fast-food convenience store shall be
subject to the following supplemental conditions which must be
satisfied in order for a conditional use permit to be issued: [Added
6-19-2001 by Ord. No. 26-2001]
(1) The minimum lot area for a combined fast-food convenience store/
gasoline service station shall be 60,000 square feet.
(2) The maximum size of the fast-food convenience store operated in
conjunction with a gasoline service station shall be 2,400 square
feet of gross floor area.
§ 140-146 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-146
139:413
§ 140-147. Motor vehicle dealers, new and used (NAICS 4411), boat
dealers (NAICS 441222), recreational vehicle dealers (NAICS
44121), and motorcycle dealers (NAICS 44121).
Motor vehicle, boat, recreational vehicle and motorcycle dealerships may be
permitted in specified zones only upon receipt of a conditional use permit.
A conditional use permit shall be granted, provided that the following
standards are met:
(3) The gasoline service station shall be limited in size to four multiple
dispensing units and eight fueling points.
(4) The minimum required front yard setback shall be increased to 75
feet in the HB-80 Zone and 100 feet in the HB-120 Zone.
(5) No drive-through facilities shall be permitted for combined
gasoline service station/fast-food convenience store operations.
A. New or used automobiles, or new or used boats, trailers, campers or
other types of drawn or propelled vehicles on display for sale or
awaiting delivery are permitted only where accessory to the sale of new
vehicles through the use of showroom displays and where no less than
50% of the automobiles, boats, trailers, or other vehicles for sale stored
on site are new vehicles. [Amended 6-9-1999 by Ord. No. 13-1999]
B. All display and storage is to be conducted on the same lot as the
principal use and not closer than 25 feet to any street line.
C. In no event shall any premises used as a sales or showroom display
center be located within two miles of any such other sales or showroom
display center, measured by driving distance on public roads between
the nearest property lines. This subsection shall not apply to any sales
or showroom display center for which a certificate of occupancy was
issued prior to January 1, 2001. [Amended 5-9-2001 by Ord. No.
12-2001]
D. Site plan approval shall be required and any development shall be
subject to the following supplemental zoning regulations:
(1) The vehicles shall be stored on paved parking areas constructed in
accordance with the standards established in the chapter.
(2) Parking areas for employees and customers shall be separate and
distinct from vehicle and display areas and shall be so noted on a
site plan.
(3) No vehicle may be stored or displayed on a surface not specifically
noted as such on an approved site plan.
(4) An on-site truck loading area not less than 15 feet by 50 feet shall
be provided and have adequate access to drive aisles and an
ingress/egress outlet.
§ 140-146 WALL CODE § 140-147
139:414
§ 140-148. Hotels, excluding motels, cabins (NAICS 7211), hotel/
convention centers.
Hotels, and similar commercial establishments providing transient lodging
or lodging and meals for the general public may be permitted in specified
districts only upon receipt of a conditional use permit. A conditional use
permit shall be granted, provided that the following standards and
specifications are met:
(5) No vehicles may be unloaded from an off-site location.
A. The site shall have direct access to a primary arterial road as
designated in the Master Plan or, where the site is part of an approved
or proposed planned commercial development, the local road network
shall have direct access to a primary arterial road as designated in the
Master Plan. [Amended 10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 25-2004]
B. The minimum site area shall be five acres.
C. The minimum street frontage shall be 300 feet on any one street.
D. The height of buildings may be increased to 80 feet provided no part of
the structure shall be closer to any property line than a distance equal
to its height at that point.
E. A hotel shall be permitted only when:
(1) It contains 100 or more rooms or suites used, rented out or hired
for sleeping and living purposes by guests; and [Amended
3-8-2006 by Ord. No. 4-2006]
(2) Where only a general kitchen and dining room, banquet room and/
or ancillary facilities, such as a swimming pool and guest service
facilities, are provided within the building but where separate
kitchen facilities are not permitted in each individual room.
(3) When multiple living suites are located within two or more
detached buildings in an extended-stay hotel, the suites may
contain kitchen facilities, subject, however, to the following:
[Added 3-8-2006 by Ord. No. 4-2006]
(a) The facility shall be operated, maintained and advertised as an
extended-stay hotel and shall not be maintained, operated,
used or advertised as an apartment complex or facility.
(b) The facility shall contain a central lobby; a hotel reception desk
that is open and staffed at all times; and a restaurant.
(c) Such additional detached ancillary buildings and structures in
the facility may include, but are not limited to, pools, spas,
guest services, health club amenities, other recreation
facilities and business offices.
§ 140-147 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-148
139:415
§ 140-149. Automotive repair shops, excluding NAICS 81121body
shops (NAICS 8111).
An automotive repair shop may be permitted in specified zones only upon
the receipt of a conditional use permit. A conditional use permit shall be
granted, provided that the following standards are met:
F. A hotel may include accessory retail shops and other personal services
for the convenience of its guests, provided that the total floor area
devoted to such usage does not exceed 500 square feet and external
signage does not give evidence to the existence of such accessory
shops.
G. A hotel may include accessory eating, drinking and entertainment
establishments, provided that they are wholly contained within the
principal building and are accessed through a main entry foyer shared
by the hotel.
H. Site plan approval shall be subject to the following supplemental zoning
regulations:
(1) All buildings permitted by this section shall be set no closer than 75
feet to a front property line, 30 feet to a side property line and 35
feet to a rear property line.
(2) A minimum planted buffer area of 25 feet be provided along all side
and rear property lines except that when the hotel site borders a
residential zone or use, a buffer area of 50 feet shall be provided
along the property line adjacent to the residential zone or use. Such
buffer areas shall be planted of conifers and other plant materials
and shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance so
as to create a visual screen to hotel rooms, pools and exterior
patios and other meeting or public congregation areas.
(3) A fire safety plan for evaluation of hotel guests and employees shall
be included with the site plan for review and approval by the
Hearing Board and Fire Subcode Official.
(4) A security plan shall be included with the site plan for review and
approval by the hearing board and the Police Chief.
(5) Preliminary architectural and floor plans shall be included for
review and approval by the hearing board and shall include all
proposed uses, and sound, light and visual protection details for all
lodging areas. Elevations and architectural details shall show the
type of structure(s), facade design, exterior fabric material
proposed and the design compatibility with area structures. Floor
plans shall reflect the design layout and uses for all proposed
floors.
A. The location of such facilities shall be limited as follows:
§ 140-148 WALL CODE § 140-149
139:416
§ 140-150. Body shops (NAICS 81121) and miscellaneous repair
services (NAICS 811).
Miscellaneous repair services may be permitted in specified zones only
upon receipt of a conditional use permit. A conditional use permit shall be
granted, provided that the following standards are met:
(1) Automotive repair shops shall be located on a lot with an area of
not less than 40,000 square feet with a minimum frontage of 200
feet on one street.
(2) No automotive repair shop shall be located within 500 feet of any
public entrance to a place of worship, school, library, hospital, fire
station, park, playground, charitable institution, or place of public
assemblage. The distance shall be measured in a straight line along
the center line of streets forming the shortest route from a point
opposite the nearest boundary from said public entrance to a point
opposite the nearest boundary of the repair garage lot.
B. Site plan approval shall be subject to the following supplemental zoning
regulations. The development of such facilities shall be controlled as
follows:
(1) A buffer not less than 35 feet in depth shall be established adjacent
to any residential zone or property.
(2) No outdoor oil drainage pits or hydraulic lifts shall be permitted.
(3) All motor vehicles awaiting repair or under repair which are stored
out of doors shall be shall be kept in a designated screened from
public by a solid fence and/or evergreen plantings as required by
the Planning Board.
(4) The maximum lot building coverage shall be 20% of the lot area.
(5) The minimum unoccupied open space shall be 30% of the lot area.
(6) The operation of such facilities shall be limited as follows:
(a) Any repair, lubrication or other similar services to motor
vehicles shall be performed in a fully enclosed building. No
parts or partially dismantled motor vehicle may be stored out
of doors.
(b) No motor vehicle awaiting repair or under repair may be
stored in a required parking area. A designated outdoor
storage area conforming with the outdoor storage
requirements of this chapter shall be established.
(c) Only motor vehicles awaiting repair may be stored on the site.
§ 140-149 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-150
139:417
§ 140-151. Public and private golf courses (NAICS 71391).
Golf courses and country clubs may be permitted in specified zones only
upon the receipt of a conditional use permit. A conditional use permit shall
be granted, provided that the following standards are met:
A. The location of repair services shall be limited to a lot with an area of
not less than 40,000 square feet with a minimum frontage of 200 feet on
one street.
B. Site plan approval shall be subject to the following supplemental zoning
regulations. The development of such facilities shall be controlled as
follows:
(1) A buffer not less than 35 feet in depth shall be established adjacent
to any residential zone or property.
(2) The maximum lot building coverage shall be 20% of the lot area.
(3) The minimum unoccupied open space shall be 30% of the lot area.
(4) All repair work shall be performed in a fully enclosed building. No
parts or partially dismantled equipment may be stored out of doors.
(5) No equipment or materials may be stored out of doors.
A. The site shall have direct access to a road classified as a secondary
arterial or collector road by the Township of Wall Master Plan.
B. The course shall be located on a site of not less than 50 acres.
C. The operation of the golf course shall be restricted to daylight hours
and shall not include what are commonly known as golf driving ranges,
miniature golf course, or pitch and put golf courses.
D. The course shall provide a minimum playing distance of 2,500 yards
from the first tee to the last green.
E. No building shall be erected nearer than 100 feet to any property line.
F. The operation may include, in addition to a clubhouse and other
buildings normally accessory to a golf course operation, a restaurant
under the following additional conditions.
(1) Restaurants may be open to the general public but must be
operated under the same ownership as the golf course.
(2) The design and location of any restaurant constructed in
conjunction with a golf course shall be such that the restaurant will
blend harmoniously with the golf course and the area in which the
golf course is situated.
(3) No restaurant may be opened for operation prior to the completion
of the construction of the golf course.
§ 140-150 WALL CODE § 140-152
139:418
§ 140-152. Nursing and personal care facilities (NAICS 62311).
Nursing and personal care facilities may be permitted in specified zones
only upon the receipt of a conditional use permit. A conditional use permit
shall be granted, provided that the following standards are met:
§ 140-153. Public, private or parochial schools (NAICS 61111).
Public, private or parochial schools, including institutions of higher
learning, may be permitted in specified zones only upon receipt of a
conditional use permit. A conditional use permit shall be granted, provided
that the following standards and specifications are met:
A. The minimum site area shall be three acres and the minimum frontage
shall be 250 feet.
B. The site shall have direct access to a secondary arterial road as
indicated on the Township of Wall Master Plan as amended.
C. No nursing or personal care facilities shall be located nearer than 500
feet to any gasoline filling station measured by a straight line between
nearest property lines.
D. Site plan approval shall be subject to the following supplemental zoning
regulations.:
(1) No vehicular access shall be permitted onto any road not classified
as a collector or arterial road in the Township of Wall Master Plan
as amended.
(2) No building shall be located nearer than 100 feet to any property
line; and further provided that for every foot in height by which a
building exceeds the height limit of the zone in which it is located,
the building shall be set back one additional foot from any adjoining
residential property line.
(3) Nursing homes shall not exceed two stories in height.
(4) Maximum site coverage shall be 20%.
(5) A fifty-foot deep buffer strip shall be provided along the entire
perimeter.
A. The use shall constitute a customary educational facility.
B. The proposed school shall meet the minimum standards of the New
Jersey Department of Education.
C. Convents, social halls and similar uses which are accessory to the
educational use shall be permitted on site or on a property within 200
feet.
§ 140-152 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-153
139:419
§ 140-154. Child day-care services (NAICS 62441).
Child day-care services may be permitted in specified zones only upon
the receipt of a conditional use permit. A conditional use permit shall be
granted, provided that the following standards are met:
D. A school site must have direct access only on existing or proposed
secondary arterial or collector road as indicated on the Township of
Wall Master Plan.
E. Elementary schools shall have a minimum lot area of five acres plus one
acre for each 25 students or fraction thereof.
F. Secondary schools shall have a minimum lot area of 10 acres plus one
acre for each 25 students or fraction thereof.
G. Nursery schools serving more than 25 children shall have a minimum
lot area of three acres plus one acre for each 25 children or fraction
thereof.
H. Nursery schools serving more than five but not more than 25 children
shall have a minimum lot area of one acre.
I. No elementary or secondary school building shall be located nearer
than 100 feet to any property line.
J. No nursery school building shall be located nearer than 25 feet to any
interior lot line or located nearer than 50 feet to any street line.
K. No play area shall be located nearer than 50 feet to any adjoining
residential property.
L. The minimum street frontage shall be 500 feet.
M. No school premises shall be located nearer than 500 feet to any
gasoline filling station measured by a straight line between nearest
property lines.
N. Site plan approval shall be subject to the following supplemental zoning
regulations.
(1) Educational uses shall be screened from adjacent residential zones
or existing residences adjacent to the site in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and/or shall provide fencing along such
property lines as may be deemed adequate by the Planning Board.
(2) Minimum unoccupied open space shall be 35%.
A. Any child-care facility shall be licensed by the New Jersey Division of
Youth and Family Services.
B. Any child-care facility associated with an office or plaza shall be
contained within the principal structure and may not be freestanding.
§ 140-153 WALL CODE § 140-154
139:420
§ 140-155. Special trade contractors; plumbing, heating, airconditioning
and solar system contractors (NAICS 23511). [Added
6-8-2005 by Ord. No. 18-2005; 7-13-2011 by Ord. No. 18-2011;
9-14-2011 by Ord. No. 22-2011; 6-28-2017 by Ord. No. 5-2017;
9-25-2019 by Ord. No. 14-2019]
Special trade contractors; plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and solar
system contractors involving the installation, servicing and selling of
heating and air-conditioning appliances and solar systems may be permitted
in the OP-2, OR-2, or OR-5 Zones as set forth in the Schedule of Permitted
and Conditional Uses39 only upon receipt of a conditional use permit.
C. Site plan approval shall be subject to the following supplemental zoning
regulations:
(1) Any facility shall have at least one exit which shall discharge into
an open area having a minimum dimension of 15 feet and a
minimum area of 50 square feet per child.
(2) All child care facilities shall provide adequate on-site parking
conforming with the following standards:
(a) Parking shall be provided in an amount which shall be the
greater of one space for each 700 square feet of gross floor
area or one space for each employee plus one space for each
10 children.
(b) A dropoff area for two cars shall be provided with a staging
area sufficient to accommodate one waiting car for the greater
of each 700 square feet of gross floor area or each 10 children.
(3) All child-care facilities shall provide an on-site outdoor play area
conforming with the following standards:
(a) Play areas shall occupy an area which shall be the greater of
50% of the gross floor area or 200 square feet per child. A
portion of the play area shall be covered, the minimum area of
which shall be the greater of 40% of the gross floor area or 20
square feet per child.
(b) Play areas shall be enclosed by a fence or having a height of
not less four feet.
(c) Areas containing more than two pieces of play equipment shall
be visually screened from adjoining residential properties.
(d) When adjacent to residential properties, usage of play areas
shall be limited to between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m.
(e) Play areas shall not be located where concentrations of carbon
monoxide equals or exceeds 10 mg/m3.
§ 140-154 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-155
139:421
§ 140-156. Religious organizations (NAICS 81311). [Amended
6-12-2002 by Ord. No. 24-2002]
Churches and other places of worship or assembly for religious purposes
may be permitted in specified zones only upon receipt of a conditional
use permit. A conditional use permit shall be granted, provided that the
following standards and specifications are met:
A. The minimum size of the building in which the use is located shall be
20,000 square feet.
B. A minimum of 30% of the building shall be devoted to office space. In
the case of partial building occupancy, 30% of the space designated for
the use (NAICS 23511) shall be devoted to office space ancillary to that
use.
C. The on-site storage of service vehicles shall be limited to no more than
25% of the parking spaces required by this chapter. The service
vehicles to be stored on site shall be limited to vans of no more than 19
feet in length.
D. The service vehicles stored on the site shall not be visible from any
public street. Landscaping and buffers shall be supplemented to
provide year-round screening of the area in which service vehicles are
to be parked or stored.
E. Compliance with all Wall Township sign regulations pursuant to Article
XXIX, Signs and Billboards, § 140-219 et seq.
A. The site shall have direct access to a street classified as a collector or
secondary arterial road in the Township of Wall Master Plan.
B. The minimum distance from gasoline filing stations shall be 500 feet
measured by a straight line between nearest property lines.
C. The minimum site area shall be five acres and the minimum frontage
shall be 300 feet.
D. Accessory uses and structures.
(1) Accessory activities that occur more frequently than four times per
year shall be expressly authorized only after the ability to provide
adequate parking has been demonstrated to the board's
satisfaction.
(2) Permitted outdoor accessory structures and uses. Activities
associated with the principal and accessory uses of the property
shall primarily and routinely occur indoors. The following outdoor
accessory structures and uses shall be permitted in accordance
with the following standards:
39.Editor’s Note: The Schedule of Permitted and Conditional Uses is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 140-155 WALL CODE § 140-156
139:422
§ 140-157. Home professional office.
Home professional occupation as defined in this chapter may be permitted
in any residential zone only upon receipt of a conditional use permit and
provided that the following standards are met, together with any other
reasonable requirements deemed necessary by the Planning Board and any
other applicable requirements of this chapter:
(a) Storage buildings and garages. All materials stored outdoors
shall be contained in a garage structure. The structure shall
match the architecture and building materials of the principal
building. No storage and garage structure shall exceed 20 feet
in height. The area of such buildings shall be included in the
calculation of the building coverage. The setbacks for such
buildings shall be the same as those for principal buildings.
Accessory buildings shall be buffered from adjacent properties
through vegetative plantings and, where appropriate, with
fencing.
(b) Playgrounds and athletic fields and courts. These accessory
uses shall not be lighted for nighttime use. The setbacks for
such buildings shall be same as those for principal buildings.
Such uses shall be buffered from adjacent properties through
vegetative plantings and, where appropriate, with fencing.
(c) Additional buildings and structures that are incidental and
necessary for the effective operation of the principal use shall
be permitted upon board review and approval.
(d) Permanent amphitheaters or stages shall not be permitted.
(e) Outdoor speakers or sound systems shall not be permitted.
E. Maximum site coverage shall not exceed 30%. [Amended 11-13-2002
by Ord. No. 46-2002]
A. The home professional office shall be carried on entirely within the
principal building and shall under no circumstances utilize an area
exceeding 25% of the total habitable floor area of the principal building,
or 1,500 square feet, whichever is less.
B. No such home professional office shall require any exterior alterations
of the principal building.
C. The office shall be located on a lot of not less than one acre in size and
shall be no closer than 200 feet to an adjoining residential property.
D. There shall be no exterior evidence of said home professional office
whether visual or audible, or detectable by human sense of smell or
sense of feeling except that one small nameplate sign may be displayed
in the front yard, such sign shall not exceed two square feet in area on
any one side; and such sign may be illuminated only by a nonflashing
§ 140-156 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-157
139:423
§ 140-158. Special trade contractors (NAICS 235).
Special trade contractors as defined in this chapter shall be permitted in the
HB-20 and the HB-40 Zones only upon receipt of a conditional use permit
and provided that the following standards are met, together with any other
reasonable requirements deemed necessary by the Planning Board and any
other applicable requirements of this chapter:
§ 140-159. Miscellaneous products of petroleum and coal
lubricating oils and greases (NAICS 324191).
Establishments primarily engaged in blending, compounding and rerefining
of lubricating oils and greases from purchased materials shall be
permitted in GI-10 Zone only upon the receipt of a conditional use permit.
A conditional use permit shall be granted, provided that the following
standards and specifications are met:
incandescent or fluorescent light of sufficient wattage to illuminate only
the fact of the sign.
E. Any off-street parking area necessary to serve the home professional
office shall be located in a side or rear yard and shall be screened from
adjacent properties by a densely planted evergreen hedge at least five
feet in height. No such parking area shall be located closer than five
feet to any property line nor nearer to any public street than the
established building setback line.
F. Since the basic interest of this section is to prevent the
commercialization of residential zones, while still permitting small
home offices, it shall be understood as a condition of approval of a
conditional use permit for a home professional office that a violation of
the requirements of this section shall be grounds for the revocation of
the conditional use permit and that the home professional office must
be abandoned or relocated within a commercial zone within a period
not exceeding six months from the receipt of written notice from the
Planning Board that the conditional use permit has been revoked.
A. All equipment and materials used or stored in relation to the
contractor's operation shall be kept indoors at all times. There shall be
no outdoor display or storage of any equipment or materials.
B. Parking of all vehicles used in the contractor's operation shall be in an
area specially designated for this purpose on a site plan and
demarcated at the site. The area shall be separated and distinct from
any required customer and employee parking on site pursuant to this
chapter and shall not diminish the number of such spaces nor access to
them.
C. No vehicles longer than 19 feet in length or having more than two axles
or taller than 10 feet in height may be stored or parked on site.
A. The location of such facilities shall be limited as follows:
§ 140-157 WALL CODE § 140-159
139:424
(1) The minimum site area shall be 25 acres.
(2) The minimum setback from any side or rear property line shall be
75 feet.
(3) A minimum buffer as defined herein of 150 feet shall provided
where the property line of the site abuts a residential zone or a with
an existing residential use.
(4) A minimum buffer of 50 feet shall be required where the forms the
zone boundary between the site and a residential zone.
(5) No building used for the manufacturing or storage of the
manufactured product shall be located within 250 feet of any
property line adjacent to a residential use or zone or adjacent to a
street which forms the boundary of the site with a residential zone.
B. In the case of natural woodlands, the buffer may be natural vegetation.
In addition, further plantings shall be provided should the Planning
Board deem the same necessary to provide effective buffering.
C. For office buildings, parking and other structures not directly
associated with the manufacture or storage of the manufactured
product, the general setback requirements of the GI-10 Zone shall
apply; provided, however, that the required buffer, as required herein,
is supplied.
D. The following uses shall be permitted only as an accessory to the
principal permitted use, and shall be limited to the manufacture, mixing
or blending of the following industrial organic chemicals:
(1) Fatty acid esters and amines.
(2) Hydraulic fluids, synthetic base.
(3) Metallic salts of acyclic organic chemicals.
(4) Metallic stearates.
(5) Oxalic acid and metallic salts.
(6) Plasticizers, organic, cyclic and acyclic.
(7) Silicones.
(8) Sodium acetate.
(9) Solvents, organic.
(10) Sorbitol.
(11) Stearic acid salts.
§ 140-159 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-160
139:425
§ 140-160. Motion-picture theaters, except drive-ins (NAICS
512131). [Added 2-9-2000 by Ord. No. 2-2000]40
Motion-picture theaters shall be permitted in the HB-200 Zone only upon
the receipt of a conditional use permit. A conditional use permit shall be
granted, provided that the following standards and specifications are met:
§ 140-161. Drinking establishments with live entertainment (NAICS
72241).41 [Added 4-4-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012]
Drinking establishments that provide live entertainment shall be permitted
only upon the receipt of a conditional use permit and provided the following
standards are met, along with any other reasonable requirements deemed
necessary by the Planning Board and any other applicable requirements of
this chapter.
A. The location of such facilities shall be limited as follows:
(1) The minimum site area shall be 15 acres.
(2) The minimum setback from any side or rear property line shall be
75 feet.
(3) A minimum buffer as defined herein of 100 feet shall be provided
where a property line of the site abuts a residential zone or a
property with an existing residential use.
B. The site shall have direct access to a state highway, and no access or
egress shall be provided on any local or county roadway.
A. Such establishments shall provide year-round continuous vegetative
landscape screening to all adjacent properties in the form of evergreen
trees and shrubs that are no less than six feet in height at the time of
planting. All such plantings shall be maintained in a healthy condition
and shall provide continuous screening to adjacent properties.
B. No such establishment shall be located within 250 feet of a residential
zone district or a property used and/or occupied for residential
purposes.
C. A solid-view six-foot-high fence shall be required inside of the planting
perimeter and shall be properly maintained.
D. One freestanding sign no more than 40 square feet shall be permitted
such that its maximum height shall be 10 feet above ground level and
shall have setbacks as follows:
40.Editor's Note: Original Section 14-405.2c(19), Assisted Living Facilities (NAICS 623312),
and the accompanying amendment to the Schedule of Permitted and Conditional Uses,
was repealed 1-27-1999 by Ord. No. 1-2001
41.Editor's Note: Former § 140-161, Age-restricted multifamily housing, added 6-12-2002 by
Ord. No. 20-2002, amended 2-12-2003 by Ord. No. 4-2003, was repealed 8-10-2005 by Ord.
No. 28-2005.
§ 140-160 WALL CODE § 140-161
139:426
§ 140-162. Dwelling for public or private golf course (NAICS 71391)
caretaker/superintendent. [Added 6-12-2002 by Ord. No. 21-2002]
One dwelling for the caretaker of record may be permitted per golf course
as a conditional use, provided that the following standards are met:
§ 140-163. Uses, structures and vegetation in Airport Safety Zone.
[Amended 4-8-2009 by Ord. No. 8-2009]
All uses, structures, objects and vegetation proposed to be located within
the Airport Safety Zones of Allaire Airport (Monmouth Executive Airport)
within the Township of Wall shall comply with all regulations promulgated
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 6:1-80, 6:1-84 and 6:1-85 et seq. and as may be
amended (Air Safety and Zone Act) and N.J.A.C. 16-62 et seq. and as may be
amended (Air Safety and Zoning) as required.
§ 140-164. Accessory use restrictions.
Accessory uses and activities shall be permitted in conjunction with and
subject to the requirements applicable to related principal uses. Accessory
uses are expressly subject to the performance standards42 and shall be
subject to such further restrictions as follows.
(1) Front yard: 10 feet.
(2) Side and rear yards: 20 feet.
A. For safety purposes, the dwelling shall be located within 1,000 feet of a
public roadway and adequate fire and other emergency access to the
dwelling shall be provided. The Planning Board, with input from the
Township Fire Official, shall determine the appropriateness of a
dwelling's location and adequacy of access to same.
B. The dwelling shall be constructed, maintained and occupied as a singlefamily
unit, shall be subject to applicable residential building codes,
and shall not exceed 2,100 square feet in total floor area.
C. No outdoor storage of any kind shall be permitted as accessory to the
dwelling.
D. The dwelling shall be located on the same tax lot as the principal golf
course use and shall not be subsequently subdivided from the golf
course lot or sold, rented or otherwise occupied other than as the
residence for the on-site golf course caretaker.
A. Outdoor storage and display.
(1) Solid waste and recyclable storage.43
42.Editor's Note: See Article XXIII of this chapter.
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 191, Solid Waste.
§ 140-161 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-164
139:427
(a) Solid wastes and recyclables from single- and two-family
homes, if stored outdoors, shall be placed in metal or plastic
receptacles with tight fitting covers. Such receptacles shall not
be stored or placed within any front yard prior to the time at
which materials are permitted to be placed at the curblines for
collection. If stored within a side yard area, they shall be
screened from view of adjoining properties and street areas
with planting or fencing.
(b) Other outdoor storage areas for solid wastes and recyclables
shall be enclosed by a wall constructed of masonry and finished
to match the principal building's finish not less than six feet in
height and shall be located in a rear yard area only.
(2) Nonresidential outdoor storage areas for the loading, storage, or
display of materials, goods, or heavy equipment and vehicles,
including the storage of passenger vehicles awaiting repair or
service.
(a) All such areas shall be delineated on an approved site plan.
(b) All such areas shall be paved in accordance with this chapter.
(c) All such areas shall be separated from off-street parking and
designed to discourage the use of parking areas by truck
traffic.
(d) Any such areas which are illuminated shall have lighting
fixtures designed so that no glare or beam is directed towards
any adjoining property, public street or dwelling windows.
(e) All outdoor storage shall be screened from view from any
public street.
(f) All materials stored out of doors shall be arranged in an orderly
and safe manner.
(g) All such areas shall be subject to the following additional
restrictions:
[1] Loading and delivery areas shall be located at the side or
rear of the structure and shall be visually screened from
neighboring properties and public streets.
[2] Warehouses, trucking terminals, contractors' yards or
other uses involved in outdoor storage or the utilization of
heavy equipment or vehicles such as trucks, vans or
trailers shall confine storage to designated areas. No such
storage shall occur and no area surfaced for such use shall
be located within 100 feet of any street line or within 50
feet of any side property line, or within 75 feet of any rear
property line, and in no case within 100 feet of any
residential zone or property.
§ 140-164 WALL CODE § 140-164
139:428
[3] Uses involved in outdoor storage or display of passenger
vehicles, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, boats or
nursery stock shall confine storage and display to
designated areas. No such storage shall occur and no area
surfaced for such use shall be located within 25 feet of any
street line or side property line, or within 50 feet of any
rear property line, and in no case within 75 feet of any
residential zone or property. Outdoor display areas shall
be separated from public rights-of-way by a low level
screen at least two feet high in the form of a decorative
wall or evergreen plantings.
(3) Nonresidential outdoor displays.
(a) Outdoor displays in nonresidential zones shall only be
permitted where the goods displayed are the merchandise of a
business included within a structure located on the site, unless
in accordance with a permit or other approval issued therefore
by the Township. Uses such as flea markets where two or more
concessionaires, proprietors or businesses display goods for
sale out of doors shall not be permitted in any zoning district
within the Township. Outdoor displays should comply with the
following regulations:
[1] Temporary sales and outdoor display of goods may be
permitted where the goods displayed are the merchandise
of a business included within a structure located on the
site. No business shall hold more than five such sales per
year nor shall any one sale exceed one week in duration.
Such displays or sales shall be in accordance with a permit
issued by the Zoning Officer.
[2] Temporary flea markets and sales operated by nonprofit
groups such as places of worship may be permitted where
the goods displayed are on a site which is already
developed as a principal use of the nonprofit group. No
nonprofit group shall hold more than five such sales per
year nor shall any one sale exceed one week in duration.
Such displays or sales shall be in accordance with a permit
issued by the Zoning Officer.
(b) Coin-operated vending machines shall not be located further
than two feet from a related business structure.
(c) Goods for sale or displayed shall not be located closer than 25
feet to any street right-of-way or 15 feet to any side or rear line,
except in conjunction with temporary sidewalk or other types
of outdoor sales, and shall not block pedestrian access, fire
lanes or parking facilities. Such display or sales shall be in
accordance with a permit issued by the Zoning Officer.
§ 140-164 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-164
139:429
(d) Seasonal sales of Christmas trees may be conducted by
commercial establishments in the primary business of selling
nursery stock or operating a Christmas tree farm. The
temporary sale of Christmas trees by nonprofit organizations
shall be permitted in nonresidential zones and on property
owned by the organization in accordance with a permit issued
by the zoning officer, beginning the day after Thanksgiving
through the month of December. No such permit shall be
issued unless adequate off-street parking and maneuvering
space for vehicles of customers can be provided and unless it
can be demonstrated that the temporary use will not interfere
with other uses on the site. Each such temporary, use shall be
permitted to have one freestanding sign, no larger than 12
square feet in area, no closer to any property line than 10 feet,
and not exceeding six feet in height. All signs and other
materials or equipment used in connection with such
temporary sales shall be removed from the property on which
the sales are being conducted no later than January 2. [Added
8-11-1999 by Ord. No. 23-1999]
(4) The outdoor storage of an unoccupied recreational vehicle, motor
home, travel trailer, camper or small boat shall be permitted on
single-family properties, provided that: [Amended 10-22-2014 by
Ord. No. 21-2014]
(a) Only one such travel trailer or camper, or one small boat shall
be permitted to be stored outdoors at any single-family
residence, provided that a minimum of two off-street passenger
vehicular parking spaces are provided and remain available for
that purpose on the property in addition to the space that is
being utilized for the unoccupied recreational vehicle, motor
home, travel trailer, camper or small boat.
(b) Any such vehicles stored in accordance with this section shall
not be occupied and shall not be provided with utility
connections.
(c) Permanent or temporary overnight occupancy or use of trailer,
travel trailer, motor home, boat or recreational vehicle is not
permitted in any zone.
(d) Such storage shall be in a side or rear yard area except that the
Zoning Officer may allow other on-site storage where it is not
feasible to store in a side or rear yard but only when the two
additional parking spaces are provided as required in
§ 140-164A(4)(a).
(e) No storage shall be permitted on a public road.
§ 140-164 WALL CODE § 140-164
139:430
(f) Stored items shall be kept in good repair, and, if applicable, be
validly registered by the New Jersey Department of Motor
Vehicles.
(g) The storage size of the recreational vehicle, motor home, travel
trailer, camper or small boat shall not exceed the following
limitations:
[1] Small boat: 28 feet in length and eight feet in width.
[2] Recreational vehicle, motor home, travel trailer, or
camper: in the closed position only and no more than 45
feet in length and eight feet in width. The dimensions shall
not include any expandable options such as sliding
sections that can increase the width and/or length of a
motor home when in use.
(5) Construction trailers, upon the approval of the Land Use Officer,
may be parked on premises in any zone after issuance of a building
permit for and during the construction of the principal structure
thereon, but shall be removed prior to the issuance of the
certificate of occupancy for the principal structure in residential
zones and within 30 dates of the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy for the principal structure in all other zones.
(6) Commercial vehicle storage.
(a) No commercial motor vehicle having a rated maximum gross
vehicle weight (GVW) in excess of 10,000 pounds or having
more than two axles, or within excess of 19 feet in length shall
be parked or stored overnight on any occupied property which
is primarily used for residential purposes or on any vacant
property in a residentially zoned area, except for vehicles
engaged in construction, parked or stored on an active
construction site for which a permit has been issued.
(b) Not more than one motor vehicle with commercial motor
vehicle registration, having a rated maximum gross vehicle
weight (GVW) of 10,000 pounds or less shall be parked or
stored overnight on any occupied property which is primarily
used for residential purposes or on any vacant property in a
residentially zoned area, except for vehicles engaged in
construction, parked or stored on an active construction site.
This provision shall not apply to passenger automobiles with
commercial motor vehicle registration.
B. Agricultural accessory businesses. Agricultural accessory businesses
intended to supplement farm income are permitted as accessory to
active agricultural uses subject to the following restrictions:
§ 140-164 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-164
139:431
§ 140-165. Fast-food convenience stores and restaurants.
Fast-food convenience stores (NAICS 44512) and fast-food/carry-out
restaurants (NAICS 7222), where permitted in specified zones, shall be
subject to the following supplemental zoning regulations:
(1) Such businesses shall involve only the sale of products or crafts
grown and made on-site or the provision of services employing
farm tools and implements used on-site.
(2) Employees shall be limited to household members, farm employees
and part-time or seasonal workers.
(3) No farm business shall be conducted on a site of less than five
acres.
(4) The area devoted to use by the business shall be limited to 5,000
square feet of the site and shall be located not less than 400 feet
from any residential property and not less than 150 feet from any
public road.
(5) Any buildings devoted to use by the business shall be no more than
1,000 square feet and shall be otherwise subject to all zoning and
site plan requirements.
(6) Accessory uses to which the public is invited to harvest and
purchase farm products by self-service shall be permitted but
otherwise subject to all zoning and site plan requirements.
C. Miscellaneous repair services.
(1) Repair and service activities shall be considered a customary
accessory to permitted sales uses provided they remain incidental
and subordinate to the sales use.
(2) The repair and service activity shall be wholly located within the
contiguous floor area of the sales use. It shall not utilize more than
25% of the total floor area or more than 1,500 square feet.
(3) It shall not have a separate customer entrance.
(4) There shall be no exterior evidence of the repair and service
activity. The premises shall not differ from those characteristics
expected in the zone in the following regards:
(a) Appearance, such as colors, materials, construction, lighting,
or display of goods;
(b) Risk due to the nature or volume of materials stored; or
(c) Noise, vibration, dust, smoke, odor, glare, or electrical
interference.
§ 140-164 WALL CODE § 140-165
139:432
A. The use shall be conducted within a totally enclosed, permanent
building.
B. There shall be no manufacturing, processing or assembling conducted
on the premises, except that which is incidental and essential to the
food enterprise, such as assembling of sandwiches, provided the
processed or assembled merchandise is sold at retail on the premises.
C. The use shall provide separate public rest room facilities easily
accessible from the interior of the building for male and female
customer use.
D. Ingress and egress shall be provided from a nonresidential arterial or
collector street.
E. Adequate on-site parking for standard and large vehicles shall be
provided, as required by this section. Large vehicle parking spaces shall
be screened from view from any public street.
F. Adequate on-site loading zones according to this section shall be
provided. A loading zone shall not be located within any other drive
aisle or parking space.
G. Adequate on-site refuse and recycling storage facilities according to
this section shall be provided.
H. In no event shall any premises used for fast-food convenience store or
fast-food/carry-out restaurant use be located within 1,500 feet,
measured by driving distance on public roads between nearest property
lines, of any other such convenience store or fast-food/carry-out
restaurant use.
I. The minimum pad site, lot, lease or condominium area of the use shall
be 80,000 square feet and shall meet the bulk requirements of the
HB-80 Zone, except that the height of the principal building shall be no
more than one story and 20 feet; provided, however, that the minimum
area may be reduced to 40,000 square feet, if the approving agency
finds that all other requirements of the chapter pertaining to the use
have been satisfied.
§ 140-165 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-165
139:433

ARTICLE XXIII
Performance Standards
§ 140-166. Evidence of compliance; permits and certificates.
§ 140-167. Conditional permit.
A. As a condition of approval and the continuance of any use or occupancy
of any structure, or the operation of any process or equipment, the
applicant shall supply evidence, satisfactory to the municipal agency, or
to its designated representative, that the proposed use, structure,
process, or equipment will conform fully with all of the performance
standards contained herein.
B. As evidence of compliance, the municipal agency may require
certification of tests by appropriate government agencies or by
recognized testing laboratories, with the costs thereof to be borne by
the applicant.
C. The municipal agency may require that specific types of equipment,
machinery, or devices be installed, or that specific operating
procedures or methods be followed if the government agencies or
testing laboratories examining the proposed operation shall determine
that the use of such specific types of machinery, equipment, devices,
procedures or methods are required in order to assure compliance with
the applicable performance standards.
D. Permits and certificates required by other government agencies shall
be submitted to the municipal agency as proof of compliance with
applicable codes.
E. If appropriate permits, tests and certifications are not or cannot be
provided by the applicant, then the municipal agency or Land Use
Officer (Zoning Officer) may require that instruments and/or other
devices, or professional reports or laboratory analysis be used to
determine compliance with the following performance standards for an
existing or proposed use and the cost thereof shall be borne by the
owner, applicant, or specific use in question.
A. In the event a determination cannot be made at the time of application
that a proposed use, process or piece of equipment will meet the
standards established in this article, the municipal agency may issue or
may recommend issuance of a conditional permit. The conditional
permit would be based on submission of evidence that the proposed
use, process or equipment will meet the standards established herein
after completion or installation and operation.
B. Within 30 days after a conditional permit is granted, a certificate of
occupancy shall be satisfactory evidence shall be applied for and
satisfactory evidence submitted that all standards established by this
article have been met.
§ 140-166 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-168
139:435
§ 140-168. Applicability and enforcement of performance
standards.
§ 140-169. Noise.
A. Applicability.
(1) Prior to construction and operation. Any application for
development or building permit for a use which shall be subject to
performance standards shall be accompanied by submissions,
attachments, certifications as required by this article, and a sworn
statement filed by the owner of the subject property or the operator
of the proposed use that said use will be operated in accordance
with the performance standards set forth herein.
(2) For existing structures. Any existing structure or use which is, after
the effective date of this chapter, allowed to deteriorate or is
modified so as to reduce its compliance with these standards will
be deemed to be in noncompliance and to constitute a violation.
B. Continued compliance. Continued compliance with performance
standards is required and shall be enforced by the Construction Official
or Land Use Officer.
C. Termination of violation. All violations shall be terminated within 30
days of notice or shall be deemed a separate violation for each day
following and subject to fines as set forth herein.
D. Violation inspection. Whenever, in the opinion of the Construction
Official or Land Use Officer, there is a reasonable probability that any
use or occupancy violates the regulations of this article, they are hereby
empowered to employ a qualified technician or technicians to perform
investigations, measurements and analyses to determine whether or
not the regulations of this article are being violated. In the event that a
violation is found to exist, the violator shall be liable for the reasonable
fees of the technicians employed to perform such investigations,
measurements, and analyses.
A. The definitions contained in the Noise Control Regulations of the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. (N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.1 et
seq.) are hereby incorporated by reference as if they were set forth at
length herein.
B. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit, nor shall any application
for development be approved which produces sound in excess of the
standards listed below when measured at any location outside of the lot
on which the use or source of sound is located:
(1) Continuous airborne sound which has a sound level in excess of 50
dBA; or
§ 140-168 WALL CODE § 140-169
139:436
(2) Continuous airborne sound which has an octave band soundpressure
level in decibels which exceeds the values listed below in
one or more octave bands; or
Octave Band Center
Frequency
(Hz)
Octave Band Sound Pressure
Level
(dB)
31.5 86
63 71
125 61
250 53
500 48
1,000 45
2,000 42
4,000 40
8,000 38
(3) Impulsive sound in air which has an impulsive sound level in excess
of 80 decibels.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Agricultural uses.
(2) Bells, chimes or carillons while being used in conjunction with
religious services.
(3) Commercial motor vehicle operations.
(4) Emergency energy release devices.
(5) Emergency work to provide electricity, water, or other public
utilities when public health or safety are involved.
(6) National Warning System (NAWAS) signals or devices used to warn
the community of attack or imminent public danger such as
flooding or explosion. These systems are controlled by the New
Jersey Civil Defense and Disaster Control Agency.
(7) Noise of aircraft flight operations.
(8) Public celebrations.
(9) Public roadways.
(10) Stationary emergency signaling devices.
(11) The unamplified human voice.
§ 140-169 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-169
139:437
§ 140-170. Air pollution.
No substance shall be emitted into the atmosphere in quantities which
are injurious to human, plant or animal life or to property, or which will
interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property
anywhere in the municipality. All provisions of the New Jersey Air Pollution
Control Code, as amended and as augmented and all the following
provisions stated, whichever shall be more stringent, shall be complied
with:
(12) The use of explosive devices which are regulated by the New Jersey
Department of Labor and Industry under the 1960 Explosive Act
(N.J.S.A. 21:1A-1-27).44
D. In commercial recreation zones, no outdoor loudspeaker, sound system,
or other source of airborne sound shall be permitted where the
commercial recreation property abuts a residential use or a property
zoned for residential uses.
A. Smoke. In any zone, no smoke, the shade or appearance of which is
darker than No. 1 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, shall be emitted into
the open air from any incinerator or fuel burning equipment; provided,
however, that smoke emitted during the cleaning of a fire box or the
building of a new fire, the shade or appearance of which is no darker
than No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, may be permitted for a
period or periods aggregating no more than three minutes in any 30
consecutive minutes.
B. Solid particles.
(1) In any residential zone, no discharge of solid particles through a
stack, duct or vent shall be permitted that is greater than 50% of
the allowable emission in pounds per hour established by Chapters
7 and 8 of the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code.
(2) In any other zone, except industrial zones, the allowable discharge
shall be 75% of the allowable emission permitted by the New Jersey
Air Pollution Control Code.
(3) In the industrial zone, the allowable discharge shall be the
allowable emission permitted by the New Jersey Air Pollution
Control Code.
(4) No open burning shall be permitted in any zone.
(5) Any road, parking area, driveway, truck loading or unloading
station, or any other exterior area having a substantial movement
of vehicles or equipment shall be paved or otherwise stabilized
during construction sufficient to prevent the generation of dust
from the movement of such vehicles or equipment.
44.Editor's Note: Repealed L. 1960, c. 55. See N.J.S.A. 21:1A-128 et seq.
§ 140-169 WALL CODE § 140-171
139:438
§ 140-171. Odors.
In any zone, no odorous material may be emitted into the atmosphere in
quantities sufficient to be to be detected without instruments. Any process,
which may involve the creation or emission of any odors, shall be provided
with a secondary safeguard system, so that control will be maintained. Table
1 (Odor Thresholds in Air) in Part 1 (Odor Thresholds for 53 Commercial
Chemicals) of "Research on Chemical Odors," copyrighted October 1968,
by the Manufacturing Chemists Association, Inc., Washington, D.C., shall be
used as a guide in determining quantities of offensive odors.
§ 140-172. Liquid waste.
No liquid waste shall be discharged into any watercourse, storm drain or
sewage collection and disposal system, nor into any ground sump, any
well or percolation area, except in accordance with plans approved by the
Township Engineer, and where required, by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
§ 140-173. Solid waste.45
All uses in the Township shall:
§ 140-174. Radiation.
All use of materials, equipment or facilities, which are or may be sources
of radiation, shall comply with all controls, standards and requirements
of the U.S. Atomic Energy Act of 1965, as amended and any codes, rules
or regulations promulgated under such Act, as well as the New Jersey
Radiation Protection Law, N.J.S.A. 26:2D-1 et seq., as amended, whichever
is more stringent.
A. Assume full responsibility for adequate and regular collection and
removal of all refuse, except if the municipality assumes the
responsibility.
B. Comply with all applicable provisions of the Air Pollution Control Code.
C. Comply with all provisions of the State Sanitary Code, Chapter 8,
Refuse Disposal, Public Health Council of the State Department of
Environmental Protection.
D. Permit no accumulation on the property of any solid waste, junk, or
other objectionable materials.
E. Not engage in any sanitary landfill operation on the property.
45.Editor's Note: See Ch. 191, Solid Waste.
§ 140-171 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-175
139:439
§ 140-175. Fire and explosion hazards.
All activities shall be carried on only in buildings classified as fire resistant
by the Building Code of the Township,46 and as determined by the Fire
Department. The operation shall be conducted in such a manner and with
such precautions against fire and explosion hazards as to produce no
explosion hazard as determined by the New Jersey Inspection Bureau of
Fire Prevention to a use on an adjacent property and must conform to
the rules and regulations of the most recent adopted edition of the Fire
Prevention Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters and the Fire
Department.
§ 140-176. Vibration.
A. No use may generate any ground-transmitted vibration that is
perceptible to the human sense of touch measured at the outside
boundary of the immediate space occupied by the enterprise generating
the vibration if the enterprise is one of several located on a lot, or the
lot line if the enterprise generating the vibration is the only enterprise
located on a lot.
B. No use may generate any ground-transmitted vibration in excess of the
limits set forth in Subsection E. Vibration shall be measured at any
adjacent lot line or residential district line as indicated in the table set
forth in Subsection D.
C. The instrument used to measure vibrations shall be a three-component
measuring system capable of simultaneous measurement of vibration in
three mutually perpendicular directions.
D. The vibration maximum set forth in Subsection E stated in terms of
particle velocity, which may be measured directly with suitable
instrumentation or computed on the basis of displacement and
frequency. When computed, the following formula shall be used:
PV = 6.28 F x D
Where:
PV = Particle velocity, inches-per-second
F = Vibration frequency, cycles-per-second
D = Single amplitude displacement of the vibration, inches.
The maximum velocity shall be the vector sum of the three
components recorded.
E. The maximum ground-transmitted vibration shall be 0.2 particle
velocity, inches per second.
46.Editor's Note: See Ch. 90, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 140-175 WALL CODE § 140-176
139:440
§ 140-177. Electromagnetic interference.
There shall be no electromagnetic interference that:
§ 140-178. Heat.
Every use and activity shall be so operated that it does not raise the ambient
temperature more than 2ºC. at or beyond the boundary of any lot line.
§ 140-179. Fire-resistant construction.
All new construction and additions shall be fire-resistant construction in
accordance with the requirements of the State Uniform Construction Code.
§ 140-180. Glare.
Any operation or activity producing intense glare shall be conducted so
that direct and indirect illumination from the source of light shall not cause
illumination in excess of 0.1 footcandle in residential districts.
F. The values stated in Subsection E may be multiplied by two for impact
vibrations, i.e., discrete vibration pulsations not exceeding one second
in duration and having a pause of at least one second between pulses.
G. Vibrations resulting from temporary construction activity that occurs
between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. shall be exempt from the requirements
of this section.
A. Adversely affects at any point the operation of any equipment other
than that belonging to the creator of such interference; or
B. Is not in conformance with the regulations of the Federal
Communication Commission.
§ 140-176 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-180
139:441

ARTICLE XXIV
Building Lots
§ 140-181. Residential density.
The maximum gross density for residential development in each zone shall
be as specified on the attached Schedule of Zone Requirements.47
§ 140-182. Lot area.
The minimum lot area in each zone shall be as specified on the attached
Schedule of Zone Requirements. The required area shall be contiguous and
shall be measured within the lot lines of the property. Any portion of a street
right-of-way shall not be included in calculating lot area. Portions of lots
encumbered by easements shall be included in calculating lot area.
§ 140-183. Lot width. [Amended 2-9-2000 by Ord. No. 2-2000]
The minimum lot width in each zone shall be as specified on the attached
Schedule of Zone Requirements.
§ 140-184. Lot frontage. [Amended 2-9-2000 by Ord. No. 2-2000]
The minimum lot frontage in each zone shall be as specified on the attached
Schedule of Zone Requirements. The frontage of any lot resulting from a
subdivision shall equal or exceed that specified for the zone. The frontage
shall be measured horizontally along a continuous uninterrupted lot line
which is coexistent with a street right-of-way line.
§ 140-185. Lot depth.
The minimum mean lot depth in each zone shall be as specified on the
attached Schedule of Zone Requirements. Lot depth shall be measured as
the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines in the
general direction of the side lot lines.
§ 140-186. Flag lots. [Added 8-8-2001 by Ord. No. 30-2001]
A. Flag lots shall be permitted only in the R-60, RR, RR-5 and RR-6 Zone
Districts.
B. Where yard areas of flag lots abut conflicting yard areas of adjacent
properties, a fifteen-foot wide, continuous, year-round screened,
planted buffer shall be maintained. Conflicting yard areas shall be a
rear yard facing a front yard, a front yard facing a rear yard or a side
yard facing a front or rear yard.
C. No dwelling shall be constructed in the staff or right-of-way portion of
the lot. The staff or right-of-way shall provide access to no more than
one lot.
47.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Zone Requirements is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 140-181 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-186
139:443
§ 140-187. Lots considered buildable.
No lot shall be considered a buildable lot for the purpose of constructing a
principal building unless it meets all of the criteria of this article.
D. The area of the lot, exclusive of the staff right-of-way shall be three
times the required lot area of the zone district in which the lot is
located.
E. The building setbacks from each property line and from the extended or
projected length of the staff to the back of the lot shall be twice the
minimum front yard setback for the zone district in which the lot is
located.
F. The minimum staff right-of-way width shall be 40 feet and the maximum
shall be 60 feet. The staff right-of-way shall provide a minimum
eighteen-foot wide cart way improved pursuant to the requirements of
the Residential Site Improvement Standards.
G. Adequate on-site turnaround space for emergency vehicles shall be
provided in the form of a cul-de-sac of a T- or K-type turnaround. The
turnaround space shall be surfaced in accordance with this section and
shall be sized to allow a forty-foot vehicle to reverse direction.
H. No flag lot staff shall be permitted, at a point where it meets the public
right-of-way, within a distance from another flag lot staff in either
direction along the right-of-way equal to the frontage requirement for
the zone district in which the lot is located.
I. In a flag lot subdivision, the nonflag lot shall have the minimum
required frontage and width of the zone district in which the lot is
located, exclusive of the staff of the flag lot.
J. The provisions of this section establishing standards for flag lots are not
intended to nor do such provisions alleviate or negate the bulk
requirements of this chapter, nor are they intended to effect in any way,
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-35 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
§ 140-186 WALL CODE § 140-187
139:444
ARTICLE XXV
Building Setbacks
§ 140-188. General setback requirements.
§ 140-189. Setbacks to conform to Schedule of Zone Requirements.
No principal or accessory building or structure shall be constructed,
erected or placed, except in accordance with and as specified by the
setbacks listed by the Schedule of Zone Requirements.48
§ 140-190. Accessory structures in front yards restricted.
No accessory structures, with the exception of flag poles, light or sign posts,
walks, driveways, patios at ground level, fences, mail boxes, and septic
tanks, shall be erected within any front yard.
§ 140-191. Setbacks in CR-10 Zone.
In the Commercial Recreation-10 (CR-10) Zone, no principal building or
structure, no accessory building or structure, no sport or playing field, and
no eating, picnic or food service area shall be located within 100 feet of any
property line which abuts a residential use or a property which is zoned for
residential uses.
A. No building or structure shall be constructed within the boundaries of
any floodplain or tidal marsh or within 50 feet of the top of the bank of
any nontidal stream or river or within 50 feet of the mean high-water
line of any tidal stream or river.
B. No dock, pier or bulkhead fill or other structure shall be erected or
placed within or abutting any tidal water without first securing proper
riparian grants and construction permits from the state and federal
agencies having control over such construction and any use thereof
shall comply with the requirements of this chapter.
C. No building or structure shall be erected, no land shall be filled and no
land shall be excavated within any easement or right-of-way held by the
Township, except that fences, as regulated herein, may be erected
within easements held by the Township, provided that they comply with
all other federal, state, county and local regulations.
D. No building or structure shall be erected, no land shall be filled, no land
shall be excavated and no vegetation shall be disturbed within any
wetland or wetland transition area within the Township except in
conformance with a valid permit issued by the NJDEP.
48.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Zone Requirements is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 140-188 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-192
139:445
§ 140-192. Setbacks created by new roadways. [Added 2-9-2000 by
Ord. No. 2-2000]
The right-of-way of any new roadway or an extension of any existing
roadway shall be located a distance equal to or greater than the minimum
required front yard depth from any structure located on any adjoining
property.
§ 140-192.1. Property with frontage on State Highway 34. [Added
5-8-2002 by Ord. No. 15-2002]
The following bulk requirements shall apply to properties with frontage on
State Highway 34 and located between Ridgewood Road and Lakewood
Road:
A. OP-10 Zone. For all properties located in the OP-10 Zone in this area,
the rear setback requirement shall be increased from 75 feet to 100
feet. Where property lines abut residential zones, the setback from said
property line shall be increased to 150 feet for two-story buildings and
175 feet for three-story buildings.
B. OB-20 and OB-40 Zones. For properties located in the OB-20 and OB-40
Zones in this area, building height shall be limited to two stories or 30
feet.
C. OP-2 Zone. For properties located in the OP-2 Zone in this area, building
height shall be limited to two stories or 30 feet. Where a property line
abuts a residential zone, the setback from that property line shall be
125 feet for a two-story building.
D. The front yard setback on all properties in the area shall be 100 feet.
§ 140-192 WALL CODE § 140-192.1
139:446
ARTICLE XXVI
General Building and Structure Requirements
§ 140-193. Lot coverage for buildings.
§ 140-194. Lot coverage for impervious surfaces. [Amended
8-8-2012 by Ord. No. 13-2012; 7-24-2019 by Ord. No. 9-2019]
The maximum lot coverage for all impervious surfaces in each zone shall
be as specified on the attached Schedule of Zone Requirements. Coverage
of any lot by surfaces which have been compacted or covered by any
structure or any manufactured coverage system that impedes infiltration of
water shall be limited such that the ratio of impervious surfaces compared
with the area of the lot shall not exceed the limits established for the
zone. The area subject to such limitations shall include all parking and
loading areas, driveways and roadways whether covered by an impervious
or pervious material. Fifty percent of the surface of the pool as measured
along the perimeter of the water's edge shall be considered impervious for
the purposes of calculating lot coverage for impervious surfaces.
§ 140-195. Yards.
A. The maximum lot coverage for all buildings in each zone shall be as
specified on the attached Schedule of Zone Requirements.49 Coverage
of any lot by principal and accessory buildings shall be limited such that
the ratio of the combined building footprint area compared with the
area of the lot shall not exceed the established for the zone.
B. In the Commercial Recreation 40 (CR-40) Zone, tennis courts or
swimming pool facilities, which are covered with temporary structures
for seasonal use or play for no more than seven months each year, shall
be considered at a ratio of 50% in determining building coverage.
[Added 10-14-1998 by Ord. No. 26-1998]
A. The minimum yard depths in each zone shall be as specified on the
attached Schedule of Zone Requirements.
B. Every part of a required yard shall be open and unobstructed from the
ground upward except as follows:
(1) Ordinary projections of principal or accessory buildings allowed by
the State Uniform Construction Code including, but not limited to,
sills, belt courses, chimneys, flues, buttresses, ornamental
features, and eaves, may project not more than 24 inches into
required yard areas.
(2) An open and unscreened entrance porch leading to the basement,
cellar or first floor not more than 10 feet in width may project not
more than six feet, not including steps, into a required front yard
49.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Zone Requirements is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 140-193 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-195
139:447
§ 140-196. Sight triangles.
area, provided the floor of the porch is within three feet of the
adjoining ground level.
(3) On residential properties of 20,000 square feet or less, an open and
unroofed patio or deck not more than two feet above ground level
may extend into a required side or rear yard to within 7.5 feet of a
side or rear property line. On residential properties larger than
20,000 square feet, an open and unroofed patio or deck not more
than two feet above ground level may extend into a required side or
rear yard to within 10 feet of a side or rear property line. This
restriction shall not apply to walks or driveways ground level, or
fabricated ground cover, which may be construction in any yard.
[Amended 7-24-2019 by Ord. No. 9-2019]
(4) Structures limited to utility or lighting poles and fixtures, traffic
control and directional signs and supporting structures, and
pedestrian shelters and benches may be located within required
yard areas.
(5) Driveways and independent walkways not associated with a pool
may be located within required yard areas. [Amended 7-24-2019
by Ord. No. 9-2019]
(6) Parking and driveway facilities may be located in any yard except
where specifically prohibited but shall not be closer than five feet
from any property line. [Amended 10-12-2005 by Ord. No.
31-2005]
(7) A Bilco® door or stairwell accessing a basement not more than
three feet above finished grade level may extend not more than
eight feet into a side or rear yard, provided a minimum ten-foot
setback from side and rear property lines is maintained. [Added
5-9-2007 by Ord. No. 11-2007]
C. All yards facing on a public street shall be considered front yards and
shall conform to the minimum front yard requirements for the zone in
which the property is located. For residential through lots, the area of
the lot generally considered and designated the rear yard for accessory
use and appurtenant accessory structures shall be considered the rear
yard for zoning and land use purposes, except that the front yard
setback for the applicable zone shall be maintained for all structures,
including fences, along the associated right-of-way. No driveway access
shall be permitted and no driveway shall be constructed within this
yard area. [Added 2-9-2000 by Ord. No. 2-2000; amended
8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 22-2005; 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 29-2006]
A. Sight triangles shall be maintained to provide adequate visibility for
vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Sight triangles shall be kept free of
visual obstructions which might otherwise be established, constructed,
§ 140-195 WALL CODE § 140-196
139:448
§ 140-197. Height limitations.
placed or allowed to grow within this area. Obstructions to vision shall
include hedges, fences, walls, parking spaces or driveways and other
objects except essential street appurtenances such as traffic safety or
control signs and devices, utility poles or shade trees which are either
less than one foot in caliper or which have had all limbs below eight
feet removed.
B. Sight triangles at street intersections. An area of unobstructed sight
shall be maintained within a triangular area at the intersection of two
or more streets extending from a plane 18 inches above curb level to a
plane 10 feet above curb level. The triangle shall be formed by the two
intersecting street lines bounding the lot, or the projection of such
lines, and by a line connecting points on each street line located 25 feet
from the intersection of the street lines.
C. Sight triangles at side lot lines. An area of unobstructed sight shall be
maintained within a triangular area at the intersection of any side lot
line and any street line extending from a plane 30 inches above curb
level to a plane eight feet above curb level. The triangle shall be formed
by the intersecting street line and side lot line and by a line connecting
points on each line located six feet from the intersection of the lines.
D. Sight triangles at other locations. Sight triangles may be required on
any site plan or subdivision plat in such locations and at such
dimensions as are specified by the design standards for such
development.
E. No sign, nor any part of a sign, shall obstruct a sight triangle.
A. The maximum height of any building or structure in each zone shall be
as specified on the attached Schedule of Zone Requirements.
B. The height limitations created hereunder for all uses other than singleor
two-family residences may be exceeded by: not more than four feet
by architectural appurtenances and enhancements such as pediments,
parapets, walls, turrets or cornices; not more than six feet by rooftop
equipment such as skylights, heating and air-conditioning equipment
and ventilators; not more than 10 feet by chimneys, stair or elevator
towers, or noncommercial radio and television antennas or lightning
rods; and further provided that the cumulative total of such facilities
shall not cover more than 15% of the building roof area. Architectural
appurtenances such as spires, belfries, cupolas, domes or similar
structures shall be permitted to exceed the height limitations herein by
not more than 10 feet only if they are located on nonresidential
buildings and are proven to the satisfaction of the Board (or Land Use
Officer, if not part of a development application) to be the minimum
height necessary to serve the purpose for which they are constructed.
On principal single- and two-family structures, the permitted height
may be exceeded by up to 10 feet by chimneys or lightning rods if they
§ 140-196 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-197
139:449
are proven to the satisfaction of the Land Use Officer to be the
minimum height necessary to serve the purpose for which they are
constructed.
C. The height limitations created hereunder shall apply to chimneys,
ventilators, skylights, tanks, stair towers, elevator towers,
appurtenances usually carried above the antennae attached to a
building, except that the same may exceed said height limitations by
not more than 15 feet except that skylights, heating and airconditioning
equipment and ventilators may exceed the height
limitation by no more than 10 feet. Such features shall not exceed, in
total coverage, 10% of the total roof area. In single-family residential
zones and on properties adjacent to single-family residential zones any
such appurtenances which exceed the height limit by more than five
feet shall not be located nearer to any property line than a distance
equal to its height above ground.
D. Freestanding accessories. Water towers, noncommercial radio and
television antennae and flag poles which are erected as freestanding
accessories and which might normally exceed the height limitations
established by this chapter may be erected to a height which can be
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Land Use Officer as necessary to
accomplish their intended function, except that in residential zones and
on properties adjacent to residential zones, no such structure may be
located nearer to any property line than a distance equal to its height
above ground.
E. Signs or display. No sign, nameplate, display or advertising device of
any kind whatsoever shall be inscribed upon or attached to any
chimney, tower, tank or any other structure which extends above the
height limitations established in this chapter.
F. Barns on farms. On farms only, barns may be erected to a height which
can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Land Use Officer as
necessary to accomplish their intended function, except that no such
barn shall exceed 35 feet in height.
G. Barn setback requirements. In residential zones and on property
adjacent to residential zones, no barns may be located nearer to any
property line than a distance equal to its height above ground.
H. In the Commercial Recreation 40 (CR-40) Zone, one field house type
structure, up to 20,000 square feet in size, may be erected to a height
not to exceed 46 feet, provided a setback of a minimum of 500 feet from
any property zoned for residential use is maintained. [Added
10-14-1998 by Ord. No. 26-1998]
I. In the OR-2, OR-5 and OR-10 Zones, the maximum permitted building
height may be increased to a maximum of four stories and 80 feet,
provided that the following criteria are met: [Added 2-12-2003 by
Ord. No. 4-2003]
§ 140-197 WALL CODE § 140-197
139:450
§ 140-198. Appearance of dwellings containing home professional
office.
Within any residential district, no building with a permitted home
professional office shall be constructed or altered so as to be inharmonious
to the residential character of adjacent structures. The types of construction
not considered to be residential in character include storefront-type of
construction, garage doors (larger than needed for passenger vehicles or
light commercial vehicles), and an unfinished concrete blocks or cinder
block wall surface.
(1) The area of the lot shall be a minimum of 20 contiguous acres.
(2) All buildings constructed under the exception provided by this
subsection shall be set back a minimum of 500 feet from all public
roads. Additionally, such buildings shall be set back a minimum of
100 feet from all other interior property lines of the subject lot.
(3) Underground or decked parking that is located beneath buildings
may be constructed in the OR Zones under this exception and shall
not be included in the determination of the number of stories, but
shall be subject to the overall building height limitation.
§ 140-197 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-198
139:451

ARTICLE XXVII
Accessory Buildings and Structures
§ 140-199. Conformance to regulations required.
Unless otherwise specified in this chapter on the Schedule of Zone
Requirements50 accessory buildings and structures shall conform to the
following regulations as to their locations on the lot.
§ 140-200. General requirements.
§ 140-201. Storage sheds and barns.
Storage sheds and barns shall be subject to the following limitations:
A. Accessory structures must be located on the same lot as the principal
use to which they are accessory.
B. An accessory building or structure attached to a principal building shall
comply in all respects with the yard requirements of this chapter for the
principal building except as noted herein.
C. Detached accessory buildings shall be located in other than a front
yard, and when located in a side or rear yard area, shall comply with the
Schedule of Zone Requirements, and the requirements of this chapter.
D. No accessory building shall be used for residential purposes by any
person or persons, including members of the family of the occupants of
the principal building, except as otherwise specifically permitted
herein. No accessory building which is intended to be occupied for
dwelling purposes shall be constructed before the principal building.
E. No accessory structure, excluding fences, garages and temporary
buildings necessary for construction purposes and fences otherwise in
compliance with this chapter used to secure a property shall be erected
prior to the completion of the principal structure or building.
Temporary buildings shall be removed within 30 days of the date of
cessation of construction at the site.
A. Single-family residential properties equal to or less than 20,000 square
feet in area may construct one shed, not more than 120 square feet in
area, not more than 16 feet in height, and with minimum side and rear
setbacks of three feet.
B. Single-family residential properties larger than 20,000 but less than
60,000 square feet in area may construct one shed not more than 180
square feet in area, not more than 16 feet in height, and with a
minimum side and rear setback of 10 feet.
50.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Zone Requirements is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 140-199 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-201
139:453
§ 140-202. Garages. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 29-2006;
4-24-2019 by Ord. No. 4-2019]
C. Single-family residential properties larger than 60,000 square feet area
may construct two sheds, each of which may be no more than 180
square feet or not more than 16 feet in height, and with a minimum side
and rear yard setback of 25 feet.
D. Farm properties may construct storage barns to a height demonstrated
to the Land Use Officer as necessary to accomplish a legitimate farming
activity such that the side and rear setback of the barn shall be no less
than the height of the barn and any barn used to house animals or
manure shall have a minimum side and rear yard setback of 150 feet.
No barn shall be higher than 35 feet and all barns shall comply with all
front yard setback requirements.
E. Accessory storage buildings on nonresidential properties may be
constructed to a maximum size of 2,500 square feet, a maximum height
of 20 feet and a minimum side and rear yard setback of 10 feet.
A. A private garage accessory to a principal building is permitted in any
zone district.
B. Private garage space must provide an adequate and accessible
driveway of at least eight feet in width, in compliance with the parking
requirements of this chapter.
C. No garage shall be higher than 1 1/2 stories and 16 feet in height such
that the half-story above shall be nonhabitable and provide no more
than six feet standing room from the top of the floor framing to the roof
framing/collar tie at the underside of the roof.
D. All detached private garages in residential zones shall comply with the
following additional requirements. Except that in cases where the
required principal building setback for the zone is less than the
required setback set forth below, the required principal building
setback shall govern:
Lot Size
(square feet)
Maximum Garage
Size
(square feet)
Side and Rear Yard
Setback
(feet)
0 to 15,000 600 7.5
15,001 to 59,999 900 15
60,000 or larger 1,400 20
E. The exterior finish of all detached garages in residential zones shall be
substantially similar to that of the principal dwelling with regards to
color. Fabric or corrugated metal siding or roofing shall be prohibited.
§ 140-201 WALL CODE § 140-202
139:454
§ 140-203. Noncommercial radio and television antennas.
F. Garage doors on detached garages in residential zones shall be limited
to a maximum of three standard size door bays of nine feet wide by nine
feet high, where a double door, which does not exceed 18 feet in width,
may be substituted for two of the bays.
A. In residential zones, the following antenna structures shall be
permitted as accessory structures to a principal residential structure or
permitted conditional use on the same lot. No such antenna structures
may serve more than one residential lot unless the supporting structure
conforms to the minimum regulations on the lot on which it is located
and no connecting cables cross property other than that owned by the
persons served by the antenna.
(1) Two conventional television and/or radio antenna structures
attached to a building, provided that they do not exceed the height
limitations for the zone by more than 15 feet. Antenna structures
operated by holders of a Federal Communications Commission
amateur radio license may exceed the height limitations for the
zone by 35 feet. Such antennas which exceed 20 feet above the
point of attachment to the building shall be built to withstand winds
of 60 miles per hour.
(2) Freestanding, noncommercial, mast or pole type radio and/or
television antenna structures and one tower-type radio and/or
television antenna structure, provided that they shall only be
placed in the rear yard area, shall be located no closer than 15 feet
to any property line, and may exceed the height limitations for the
zone by not more than 15 feet. Antenna Communications
Commission amateur radio license may exceed the height
limitations for the zone by 35 feet. Such structures over 20 feet in
height shall be built to withstand winds of 60 miles per hour.
(3) One satellite dish antenna structure erected on a secure groundmounted
foundation, provided that it shall only be placed in the
rear yard, shall conform to the setbacks for a principal structure in
the zone, and shall not exceed 16 feet in height or 12 feet in
diameter. Any wires or connecting cables shall be buried
underground unless the antenna is located immediately adjacent to
and mounted no more than seven feet from the structure being
served. Each such structure shall be screened by fencing, other
structures and/or nondeciduous plantings of sufficient number and
height to obstruct any clear view of the antenna from any adjacent
conforming residential property, any residential zone, or any public
street.
B. In nonresidential zones, the following antenna structures shall be
permitted as accessory structures to a principal use, other than a
residential use, on the same lot. No such antenna structures may serve
more than one lot unless the supporting structure conforms to the
§ 140-202 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-203
139:455
§ 140-204. Pools on single-family residential properties. [Amended
11-24-2009 by Ord. No. 27-2009; 7-24-2019 by Ord. No. 9-2019]
Private swimming pools on single-family residential properties shall be
subject to the following regulations:
minimum regulations on the lot on which it is located and no connecting
cables cross property other than that owned by the persons served by
the antenna.
(1) Conventional television and/or radio antenna structures attached
to each building, provided that no antenna structure shall exceed
the height limitations for the zone by more than 15 feet. Such
structures which exceed 20 feet above the point of attachment to
the building shall be built to withstand winds of 60 miles per hour.
(2) Freestanding, conventional, noncommercial radio and television
antenna structures, provided that such antenna structures shall
only be placed in the rear yard, shall adhere to setback and yard
requirements for accessory structures in the particular zone but in
no case shall be closer than 50 feet to any residential property line
or zone boundary or closer than 15 feet to any other property line
and shall not exceed the height limitations for the zone by more
than 15 feet. Such structures over 20 feet in height shall be built to
withstand winds of 60 miles per hour.
(3) Satellite dish antennas. Such antenna structures shall be erected
on a secure ground-mounted foundation located in the rear yard or
may be mounted on a flat roof, provided that it is no higher than 15
feet above the roofline and is concealed from public view. No
antenna structure shall exceed 12 feet in diameter. Groundmounted
antenna structures shall conform to the setbacks for a
principal structure in the zone, shall not exceed 16 feet in height,
and shall in no case be located closer than 50 feet to a residential
property line or zone boundary. Wires or connecting cable for
ground-mounted antenna shall be buried underground. Each
ground-mounted antenna shall be screened by fencing, other
structures and/or nondeciduous plantings of sufficient number and
height to obstruct any clear view of the structure from any adjacent
conforming residential property, any residential zone or any public
street.
A. For property setback purposes, the setback shall be measured from the
permanent walkway or patio adjacent to the pool to the lot line.
B. On residential properties on 20,000 square feet or less, a pool shall be
set back in rear and side yard areas a minimum distance of 7.5 feet
inclusive of pumps, filters, and other mechanical attachments.
§ 140-203 WALL CODE § 140-204
139:456
§ 140-204.1. Gazebos on single-family residential properties.
[Added 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. 31-2005]
Gazebos on single-family residential properties shall be subject to the
following regulations:
C. On residential properties larger than 20,000 square feet, a pool shall be
set back in rear and side yard areas a minimum distance of 10 feet
inclusive of pumps, filters and other mechanical attachments.
D. One poolside cabana shall be permitted on a residential lot on which
there exists a swimming pool pursuant to this chapter. Cabanas shall be
no higher 16 feet and one story, shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet
from the pool walls, and shall comply with the following additional
requirements:
Lot Size
(square feet)
Maximum Cabana
Size
(square feet)
Side and Rear Yard
Setback
(feet)
Up to 19,999 100 5
20,000 to 59,999 180 10
60,000 or more 220 25
E. All private swimming pools shall be enclosed by fencing or a barrier
pursuant to the current International Residential Code adopted by the
UCC and all revisions thereto.
F. No pool shall be constructed within 10 feet of any building foundation,
except that this section shall not apply to an aboveground, selfcontained
hot tub or spa equal to or less than 75 square feet in area and
42 inches in depth.
G. A temporary fence shall be installed and maintained when pool
excavation has commenced. A permanent fence as required by this
chapter shall be installed within 30 days of the completion of the first
building inspection of the pool.
H. All aboveground pool pumps, filters, and other mechanical attachments
shall be thoroughly screened to minimize visibility from public streets
and adjacent properties by a continuous evergreen buffer or solid fence
in compliance with the buffer requirements of this chapter.
A. One gazebo shall be permitted on a residential lot on which there exists
a single-family dwelling. A gazebo shall be subject to the following
requirements and shall be no higher than 16 feet and one story in
height:
§ 140-204 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-204.1
139:457
§ 140-205. Sports courts. [Amended 10-12-2011 by Ord. No.
24-2011]
Sports courts shall be permitted only on single-family residential properties
of 30,000 square feet or larger and shall be subject to the following
regulations:
§ 140-206. Fences and walls.
Fences and walls, hereafter erected, altered or reconstructed in any zone
shall be subject to the following restrictions.
Lot Size
(square feet)
Maximum
Gazebo Size
(square feet)
Side and Rear Yard
(feet)
Up to 19,999 100 5
20,000 to 59,999 180 10
60,000 or more 220 25
A. Courts shall not be located in a front yard area.
B. Courts may be enclosed with a maximum six-foot-high fence of the open
visibility variety such as chain link, except that tennis courts may have
such fences no more than 10 feet in height.
C. Courts shall be located no closer than 15 feet from side and rear
property lines, except that tennis courts shall be located a minimum of
25 feet from side and rear property lines.
D. Courts shall not be illuminated or used for play after dark.
E. Courts shall be limited to a maximum of 4,000 square feet is size,
except that tennis courts shall be no larger than 7,200 square feet.
F. All courts shall be considered impervious coverage as defined herein.
A. All supporting members of a fence shall be located on the inside of a
fence, and if erected along or adjacent to a property line, the supporting
members of the fence shall face the principal portion of the tract of land
of the property upon which the fence is erected.
B. Fences which are painted shall be painted in only one color, harmonious
with the surrounding area. Multicolored fences are prohibited.
C. Fences shall be erected in such a manner so as to permit the flow of
natural drainage and shall not cause surface water to be blocked or
dammed to create ponding.
D. Height permitted in residential zones. Fences in residential zones may
be erected, altered or reconstructed to a height not to exceed six feet
§ 140-204.1 WALL CODE § 140-206
139:458
above natural ground level, except that no fence may be higher than
four feet above natural ground level in any front yard or between a front
property line and the established principal building setback, whichever
distance is greater.
E. Height permitted in business zones. Fences in a business zone may be
erected to a height not to exceed six feet above ground level in any
yard.
F. Height permitted in industrial zones. Fences in an industrial zone may
be erected to a height not to exceed six feet above ground level in any
yard except that open wire fences may be erected to a height not to
exceed eight feet above ground level in a side or rear yard.
G. Placement. All fences must be erected entirely within the property lines
and are further subject to the sight triangle provisions herein except
that an open metal or wire fence shall be permitted in a sight triangle
such that adequate visibility is maintained within the sight triangle.51
H. No fence shall be erected in a public right-of-way.
I. Farm regulations.
(1) On farms only, open wire fences may be erected to a height not to
exceed six feet in height within any part of the farm premises. Any
other type fence may be erected to a height not to exceed five feet
when located within 25 feet of any street line and six feet when
located more than 25 feet from a street line.
(2) No zoning permit shall be required to be obtained prior to the
construction, alteration or erection of any fence within a farm
which is to be located more than 25 feet from any street line.
J. Barbed wire fences. Barbed wire fences shall not be permitted except
on farms and in an industrial zone. When used in an industrial zone,
barbed wire may only be used when needed for security purposes and
must be mounted on the top of a fence having a minimum height of six
feet above ground level.
K. Electronically charged fences. Electrically charged fences may only be
used on farms. All electrically charged fences shall be posted with signs
designed to warn persons of their presence and nature.
L. Maintenance. All fences shall be maintained in a safe, sound and
upright condition.
M. Hazardous fences. No fences shall be erected which is embedded with
or made of pieces of glass, sharpened metal or sharp or otherwise
hazardous material, nor shall any fence be erected which is intended to
wound or injure persons or animals, except as provided in Subsection J
above.
51.Editor's Note: See § 140-196 of this chapter.
§ 140-206 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-206
139:459
§ 140-207. Outdoor barbecue structures.
Outdoor barbecue structures on single-family residential properties shall be
subject to the following restrictions:
§ 140-208. Domestic pet shelters.
For domestic pet shelters on residential properties, the building area shall
not exceed 30 square feet in area and five feet in height and that any fencedin
area shall not exceed 100 square feet. Such structures shall be setback a
minimum of 10 feet from side and rear property lines.
§ 140-209. Greenhouses and screenhouses.
Greenhouses and screenhouses on residential properties shall not exceed
150 square feet. For the purposes of this section, a greenhouse is a glassor
plastic-enclosed structure used for the cultivation or protection of plants
and a screenhouse is a portable enclosed, screened-in structure capable of
being dismantled and stored when not in use. Such structures should be
setback a minimum of 10 feet from rear or side property lines.
§ 140-210. Decks.
Decks on residential properties are subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
§ 140-211. Uses essential to operation of principal use.
Those structures, building and uses which are essential to the operation
of the principal use situated on the premises, which are incidental to and
subordinate to the principal use, and which conform to the requirements of
this chapter, shall be permitted.
§ 140-212. Buffers, landscaping and screening. [Amended 2-9-2000
by Ord. No. 2-2000; 6-11-2003 by Ord. No. 16-2003; 4-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 4-2009; 5-27-2015 by Ord. No. 10-2015]
N. Retaining wall. Nothing in this section shall be applied as to restrict the
construction of a retaining wall necessary to retain earth at the level
which it existed at the time of the passage of this chapter.
A. On lots of 20,000 square feet and under, such structures shall be set
back a minimum of five feet from side and rear property lines.
B. On lots greater than 20,000 square feet in area, such structures shall be
set back a minimum of 10 feet from side and rear property lines.
C. No such structure shall be higher than six feet.
A. Buffers. Buffers shall be established to buffer potential land use
conflicts.
§ 140-206 WALL CODE § 140-212
139:460
(1) Buffers shall be open and unobstructed from the ground upward
except for walks, bikeways and landscape screening in the form of
walls, fences, earthwork and plantings.
(2) Buffers shall be established as follows.
(a) At the time of construction, enlargement, alteration or increase
of the capacity or change in use of any building, structure or
property in the Township, there shall be provided buffers,
landscaping and screening in accordance with the
requirements of this section.
(b) Where any lot or property in an office, industrial, research,
retail, commercial, recreational or airport zone district or any
lot or property developed for office, industrial, research, retail,
commercial, recreational or airport use abuts or is in a
residential zone, a landscaped buffer of at least 75 feet in width
shall be permanently established and maintained along the
property line(s) abutting the residential zone. Where such a
property abuts a residential use in a nonresidential zone, a
buffer of at least 25 feet in width shall be permanently
established and maintained along the property line(s) abutting
the residential use as long as it exists.
(c) On any lot or property proposed for residential development of
two or more lots or two or more residential units which abuts a
property zoned or used for commercial, retail, recreational,
office, industrial, medical, manufacturing or airport use, a
landscaped buffer strip of at least 25 feet in width shall be
permanently maintained along the property line abutting such
use or zone.
(d) Parking areas in residential zones. In any residential zone, all
parking areas, exclusive of the ingress and egress drive,
having a capacity of more than four vehicles shall be screened
from adjacent properties by a buffer strip of at least five feet in
width.
(e) Requirements of buffer areas.
[1] Buffer areas shall consist of lawn area and massed
evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs planted in such
a manner that will provide a continuous visual screen
throughout the entire year within a period of two full
growing seasons following the planting of the buffer.
Evergreen coniferous trees shall have a minimum height of
six feet when planted. Deciduous trees shall have a
minimum caliper of 2 1/2 inches when planted. All plant
material shall conform to the current American Standard
for Nursery Stock sponsored by the American Association
of Nurseryman, Inc.
§ 140-212 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-212
139:461
§ 140-213. Lighting.
Artificial lighting or illumination provided on any property or by any use
shall adhere to the following standards:
[2] All nonpaved areas on properties used for any purpose
other than farming shall be suitably landscaped with trees
and other landscaping materials.
(3) Use of buffer areas. Required buffers may be used for no other
purpose than as a buffer. The only structures which may be erected
within a buffer area are fences as elsewhere regulated in this
chapter.
B. Aboveground utility installations; buffers required.
(1) All aboveground utility installations, including but not limited to
generators exceeding 25 kilowatts, convertors, communication
terminal house, air-conditioning condensers exceeding five tons
(60,000 BTU) and fuel storage tanks, which are not roof-mounted,
shall be thoroughly screened by a continuous evergreen buffer or
solid fence in compliance with this chapter of a sufficient height
and depth so as to effectively shield views of the installation year
round. Utility installation s shall also comply with the performance
standards on noise established in this chapter.
(2) All aboveground utility installations must comply with the principal
building setbacks of this chapter, except that air-conditioning
condensers not exceeding five tons (60,000 BTU) and generators
not exceeding 25 kilowatts shall be permitted no closer than 7.5
feet from side and rear property lines in the R-7.5, R-10 and R-15
Zone Districts, and 10 feet from rear and side property lines in all
other residential zone districts.
(3) Those air-conditioning condensers not exceeding five tons (60,000
BTU) that exist at the time of adoption of this chapter shall be
permitted to be replaced in the same location, provided that they
do not extend any further into a nonconforming setback.
A. The illumination provided by artificial lighting on a property shall not
exceed 0.5 footcandles beyond any property line when that property
abuts a residential use or residential zone.
B. Spotlights or other types of artificial lighting, that provide a
concentrated beam of light, shall be so directed that the beam or glare
of light does not extend beyond any property line.
C. There shall be no direct or sky-reflected glare exceeding 1 1/2
footcandles measured at the boundaries of the lot on which the source
is located. This regulation shall not apply to lights which are used solely
for the illumination of entrances or exits or driveways leading to a
parking.
§ 140-212 WALL CODE § 140-213
139:462
D. In commercial recreation zones, no outdoor lighting for the purpose of
lighting playing fields, sport courts or outdoor picnic or eating areas
shall be permitted within 300 feet of any property line which abuts a
residential use or a property zoned for residential uses.
§ 140-213 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-213
139:463

ARTICLE XXVIII
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 140-214. Off-street parking requirements. [Amended 5-9-2001 by
Ord. No. 14-2001;2-12-2003 by Ord. No. 4-2003]
At the time of the construction, enlargement, alteration or increase of
capacity, or change in the use of any building, structure or property in the
Township, there shall be provided approved and usable off-street parking
spaces in accordance with the requirements of this article. All such parking
shall be generally at grade and one level. No multilevel, underground,
elevated or rooftop parking facilities shall be permitted, except as may be
specifically provided for in this chapter.
§ 140-215. Parking space and loading space layout requirements.
A. Parking facilities may be located in any yard area in all zones.
B. No required off-street parking area shall be encroached upon by any
buildings, open storage or any other uses other than the parking of
motor vehicles.
C. No parking space or aisle shall be located closer than 10 feet to any
street line.
D. No ingress or egress drive shall enter upon a public road or highway at
a point closer than 50 feet to any street intersection or closer than 30
feet to any other property. These distances shall be measured between
the curbline or the pavement edge nearest to the other drive or road in
question.
E. In the case of mixed or multiple uses on a single property, the total
requirements for off-street parking spaces shall be the sum of the
requirements of all the various uses computed separately.
F. The interconnection of parking areas between abutting properties shall
be encouraged. The parking areas of adjacent properties may be
interconnected by not more than two driveways having a width of not
less than 20 feet nor more than 30 feet.
G. All parking areas and related access drives shall be adequately
illuminated during all hours between sunset and sunrise when the use
is in operation. All such illumination shall be adequately shielded in
such a manner as to protect any residential properties from glare
generated by the illumination.
H. No lawn area, buffer strip or other unpaved area shall be used for the
parking of motor vehicles except on an emergency basis. If the
minimum required parking areas do not prove sufficient to
accommodate all vehicles parking on a property such additional
parking spaces shall be provided as to permit all vehicles to park on a
paved area in accordance with the standards established in this section.
§ 140-214 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-215
139:465
§ 140-216. Required off-street parking spaces. [Amended 5-9-2001
by Ord. No. 14-2001; 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 29-2006]
I. Facilities that provide for the use, design or construction of a drivethrough
aisle for any type of customer service shall provide for a
continuous bypass lane along the entire length of the drive-through
aisle with a minimum width of 12 feet, such that any vehicle needing
access past the drive-through aisle, whether in the drive-through aisle
or otherwise, shall have such access.
J. Facilities that provide for the use, design or construction of a drivethrough
aisle shall provide a drive-through aisle length which is able to
stack a minimum of 10 standard length vehicles and which has a
minimum stacking length from the first service on approach of 175 feet.
Such a drive-through aisle shall not directly block or otherwise hinder
access to and from parking spaces, loading zones, pedestrian building
entries or refuse areas.
A. The number of required off-street parking spaces for particular uses
shall be as follows, with all references to parking spaces to mean
standard size parking spaces, unless otherwise noted: [Amended
5-22-2013 by Ord. No. 12-2013]
Use
Minimum
No.
of Spaces Per
Hotels and motels 1.2 Rentable room
plus 0.5 Employee on maximum
shift
Office:
Medical and dental 1 150 square feet of GFA
(minimum of 10 spaces)
General, executive,
administrative, business
and other professional
5 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA
(minimum of 4 spaces)
Banks 6 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA
(minimum of 12 spaces)
Research center,
laboratory
4 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA
(minimum of 8 spaces)
Commercial:
Self-service food stores
and fast-food
convenience stores, self
standing
10 1,000 sq. ft. of GLA
§ 140-215 WALL CODE § 140-216
139:466
Use
Minimum
No.
of Spaces Per
plus 2
large-vehicle
Up to 4,000 sq. ft. of GLA
plus 1
large-vehicle
5,000 sq. ft. or part
thereof above 4,000 sq. ft.
GLA
Stand-alone retail
stores:
Up to 20,000 sq. ft.
GFA
6 1,000 sq. ft. GLA
20,001 to 60,000 sq. ft.
GFA
5.5 1,000 sq. ft. GLA
60,001 to 100,000 sq.
ft. GFA
5 1,000 sq. ft. GLA
100,001 plus GFA 4.5 1,000 sq. ft. GLA
Furniture, motor
vehicle, boat, trailer,
sales or showrooms
1
1
400 sq. ft. GFA plus per
employee maximum shift
Auto service and repair,
car wash
2
1
service bay plus per
employee maximum shift
Personal service
(barber, beauty salon)
2 barber or beautician
maximum shift
Shopping center:
With maximum 20,000
sq. ft. food store and
maximum 40,000 sq. ft.
total GLA
8 1,000 sq. ft. of GLA
With 20,001 to 40,000
sq. ft. food store and
maximum 80,000 sq. ft.
total GLA
6.5 1,000 sq. ft. of GLA
With 80,001 to 400,000
sq. ft. GLA with or
without a food store
5 1,000 sq. ft. of GLA
With 400,001 sq. ft. or
more GLA with or
without a food store
4 1,000 sq. ft. of GLA
§ 140-216 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-216
139:467
Use
Minimum
No.
of Spaces Per
Where a shopping
center includes a fastfood
convenience store
or fast-food restaurant
add 2
large-vehicle
Up to 4,000 sq. ft. GLA
plus 1 sq. ft.
GLA
large-vehicle
5,000 sq. ft. or part
thereof above 4,000
Eating and drinking establishments:
Fast-food restaurants,
no seating, self-standing
2 12 inches of service
counter length
plus 1 Employee on maximum
shift
plus 2
large-vehicle
4,000 sq. ft. GLA or part
thereof
Fast-food restaurants
with counter service
and/or seating
2 12 inches of service
counter length
plus 1 3 seats
plus 1 Employee on maximum
shift
plus 2
large-vehicle
4,000 sq. ft. GLA or part
thereof
Slow turnover with
waitressed table service
only
1 3 seats at tables
plus 1 Seat at bar or stool
plus 1 Employee on maximum
shift
Bars and taverns
without live
entertainment
1 2 table seats
plus 1 Bar seat or stool
plus 1 Employee on maximum
shift
Night clubs and cocktail
lounges with live
entertainment
1 2 patrons at maximum
occupancy
§ 140-216 WALL CODE § 140-216
139:468
Use
Minimum
No.
of Spaces Per
plus 2 3 employees on maximum
shift
Recreational and public assembly:
Bowling alley 5 Lane or alley
Skating rinks 1 100 sq. ft. of rink area
Auditorium, places of
worship, theaters,
community centers,
union hall, and similar
places of public
assembly
1 3 seats
Tennis, racquet ball and
similar facilities
providing courts
designed for play by a
maximum of four
persons
4 Court
plus 1 Employee on maximum
shift
Health care facilities:
Hospitals 1.5 Bed
Convalescent, rest or
nursing homes,
sanitariums or similar
facilities
1 3 beds
plus 1 Staff doctor
plus 1 2 employees on maximum
shift
Industrial uses:
Manufacturing and
fabrication plants with a
single shift
2.5 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA
(minimum 10 spaces)
Manufacturing and
fabrication plants with
consecutive shifts
2.75 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA
(minimum 12 spaces)
Warehouse and storage .75 1,000 sq. ft. of GFA
(minimum 6 spaces)
Educational:
§ 140-216 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-216
139:469
§ 140-217. Off-street loading requirements.
Use
Minimum
No.
of Spaces Per
Nursery, grade or
elementary school
1 Teacher and employee
plus 1 Transport vehicle
High school or
preparatory school
10 Classroom
plus 1 Transport vehicle
College or university 1 2 students
plus 1 Facility and staff
Other uses not specifically
listed above
As determined by the approving authority
B. Large-size parking spaces shall be provided, in addition to the required
number of loading spaces, for uses that require general employee or
customer parking for large-size vehicles such as trucks or buses. The
number of spaces shall be approved by the Board through the site plan
process.
A. For every building or structure erected and occupied for nonresidential
use involved in the receipt and distribution by vehicles of materials,
supplies or merchandise, there shall be provided and permanently
maintained adequate spaces for standing, loading, and unloading
services in order to avoid undue interference with on-site circulation in
accordance with the following schedule:
Use Minimum No. Spaces Size of Space
(feet)
Office 1 per building or 1 per
25,000 square feet GFA,
whichever is greater
10 (w) x 20 (l) x 14
(h)
Retail sales and
service
1 for the first 3,000 square
feet GLA
10 (w) x 20 (l) x 14
(h)
1 per each 15,000 square
feet GLA thereafter
12 (w) x 45 (l) x 14
(h)
Wholesale sales,
industrial,
warehouse,
or storage
1 for the 10,000 square
feet GFA
12 (w) x 45 (l) x 14
(h)
1 per each 15,000 square
feet GFA thereafter
12 (w) x 45 (l) x 14
(h)
§ 140-216 WALL CODE § 140-217
139:470
§ 140-218. General requirements.
B. Wherever possible, access to truck loading spaces should be separated
from access to automobile parking areas, particularly for any uses
which require large volumes of trucking traffic.
C. Loading spaces shall be separately distinguished from all drive aisles,
refuse areas, parking spaces and pedestrian building access areas. No
loading space shall be designed or constructed to share space with any
other use on site.
A. In computing the number of required parking spaces, where fractional
spaces result, the required number shall be construed to be the next
highest whole number.
B. Only directly accessible parking and loading spaces shall be counted
toward compliance with this article. No parking spaces located within a
garage with individual doors shall be counted.
C. The minimum size of standard parking spaces shall be nine feet by 19
feet where spaces are provided with "looped" or "hairpin" stall
markings, or 10 feet by 19 feet where spaces are provided with singleline
stall markings. The minimum size of large vehicle parking spaces
shall be 12 feet by 45 feet where the spaces are provided with "looped"
or "hairpin" stall markings, or 13 feet by 45 feet where spaces are
provided with single-line stall markings. Looped or hairpin markings
shall provide that the center line of the loop or hairpin shall be a
minimum of four inches on-center to either inside edge of the loop or
hairpin marking.
D. Required off-street loading spaces and access drives shall be paved,
drained and located in accordance with the requirements established in
§ 140-234 herein.
E. Where the total number of off-street parking spaces required may not
be immediately required for a particular use, a staged development
plan may be permitted which requires that only a portion of the parking
area subject to the following regulations:
(1) The site plan shall clearly indicate both that portion of the parking
area to be initially paved and the total parking needed to provide
the number of spaces required.
(2) The site plan shall provide for adequate drainage of both the partial
and total parking areas.
(3) The portion of the parking area not to be paved initially shall be
landscaped.
(4) Any change in occupancy on a site for which the Planning Board
may have approved a partial paving of off-street parking areas shall
result in the termination of the staged development plan except
§ 140-217 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-218
139:471
that, where the new use requires a number of parking spaces equal
to or fewer than are provided on the site, the staged development
plan shall automatically be continued.
F. Off-street parking spaces, together with appropriate access thereto,
shall be provided on the same lot as the building it is intended to serve,
except as otherwise herein permitted.
(1) Joint parking facilities. The off-street parking requirements for two
or more nonresidential neighboring uses of the same or different
types located on the same lot or on contiguous lots and within the
same zoning district may be satisfied by the allocation of the
required number of spaces for each use in a common parking
facility, provided that the number of off-street parking spaces is not
less than the sum of individual requirements, and provided, further,
that there be compliance with all other provisions of these
regulations.
(2) Sharing of parking facilities. Off-street parking facilities for one use
shall not be considered as providing the required facilities for any
other use; provided, however, that 1/2 of the off-street parking
space required by any use whose peak attendance will be at night
or on Sundays, such as places of worship, theaters and assembly
halls, may be assigned to a use which will be closed at night or on
Sundays.
G. Handicapped parking shall be provided for all nonresidential use in
accordance with all municipal, state and federal ordinances, laws and
regulations.
§ 140-218 WALL CODE § 140-218
139:472
ARTICLE XXIX
Signs and Billboards
§ 140-219. Prohibited signs.
A. All signs not specifically permitted are prohibited.
B. No sign shall be maintained where by reason of its position, size, shape,
content or color, it may, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, obstruct,
impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be confused with, any
traffic control sign, signal or device, or where it may interfere with,
mislead or confuse traffic.
C. No sign which uses the words "Stop," "Look," "Caution," "Danger," or
any similar wording, which may confuse or mislead the public, shall be
permitted.
D. Advertising flags, banners, pinwheels. No advertising flags, banners,
pinwheels, portable signs, or similar advertising devices shall be
permitted.
E. Animated, moving and LED signs. [Amended 7-18-2007 by Ord. No.
19-2007; 6-25-2014 by Ord. No. 15-2014]
(1) Prohibition. No lighted LED (light-emitting diode), fiber-optic, neon
or otherwise electronically lighted or unlighted message sign, sign
board, sign box, other type of sign structure or object which is
moving, animated, scrolling, flashing, variable, auto-changing or
programmable shall be permitted, except for the required
movement of time-and-temperature displays. Time-andtemperature
display signs shall be permitted only as part of a site
plan approved by the Planning Board.
(2) Exception. Signs at gasoline stations on which the unit pricing of
fuel is shown electronically shall be permitted, provided that the
remainder of the sign remains static at all times, and further
provided that the unit pricing changes no more than once every 24
hours.
F. Painted signs. No sign may be painted directly on the surface of any
building facade, wall, fence or similar structure.
G. Sparkling and glittering signs. No sign may utilize reflection enhanced
or fluorescent colors or contain any material which sparkles, reflects or
glitters, however, nothing herein is intended to prohibit the use of
reflective paint on signs directing traffic or identifying various locations
within a property.
H. Commercial advertising billboard signs.
(1) The further erection, construction or enlargement of signs known
as commercial advertising billboards is prohibited.
§ 140-219 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-219
139:473
§ 140-220. Exempt signs.
The following signs shall be exempt from the requirement of obtaining a
development permit, provided that they are not specifically prohibited:
(2) Existing billboard signs or structures may be repaired or
maintained in the same location, but may not be enlarged,
relocated to another lot, or replaced in the event of the total
destruction thereof.
A. Governmental signs erected or authorized by a governmental unit.
B. Nameplate signs, provided that such signs are limited to no more than
one facade or ground-mounted sign per occupancy; are no more than 75
square inches in area; are nonilluminated, or externally illuminated;
and, if ground mounted, are no more than three feet in height.
C. Warning signs, provided that such signs are limited to no more than two
facade or ground-mounted signs per occupancy; are no more than three
square feet in area each; are nonilluminated; and if ground mounted,
are no higher than three feet in height.
D. Construction signs, provided that such signs are limited to no more
than one facade or ground-mounted sign per parcel; are no more than
32 square feet in area; are nonilluminated; and are maintained for no
more than 14 days following the conclusion of the construction in
question.
E. Temporary window mounted signs, provided that the area of window
mounted signs displayed does not exceed 25% of the area of the window
in which they are mounted.
F. Special events signs, provided that there are no more than three placed
in any business at any given time and they are nonilluminated, and are
maintained for a period of no longer than 45 days before the applicable
event nor more than three days after such event.
G. Real estate signs, provided that such signs are limited to no more than
one facade or ground-mounted sign per property; are not more than six
square feet in area per residential lot; or 32 square feet in area per
nonresidential lot are no higher than six feet if a ground-mounted sign.
Use of the word "sold" or any other notation to indicate that the real
estate is no longer on the market is specifically prohibited.
H. On-site informational signs, provided that each sign is limited to a
window, facade or ground-mounted sign of not more than two square
feet in area and not more than seven feet in height above grade. The
sign may include a business name or logo but shall not include any
advertising message. In locations where more than one business share
a common vehicular access, signs marking entrances and exits shall
contain only the name of the shopping or business center. Multiple
signs identifying each tenant or use are specifically prohibited.
§ 140-219 WALL CODE § 140-220
139:474
I. Flags and emblems of a government or of a political, civic,
philanthropic, educational or religious organization.
J. Private sale and event signs, provided that such signs are no more than
six square feet in area; are located entirely on the premises where such
sale or event is to be conducted or on other private property pursuant
to the owner's consent; are clearly marked with the name, address and
telephone number of the person responsible for the removal of such
sign; are erected not more than 36 hours in advance of such sale or 45
days in advance of such event; and are removed on the day following
the conclusion of such sale or event. No more than four signs may be
placed on any business property nor more than one on any residential
property.
K. Temporary or permanent traffic signs and signals, provided that they
are installed or authorized by the Township, county, or state for the
purpose of directing and regulating the flow of traffic.
L. Signs indicating public transportation stops provided that they are
installed or authorized by the Township or a Public Transportation
Authority or agency.
M. Vacated property signs, provided that only one such sign shall be
provided either affixed to a building facade or located within a window;
not exceeding six square feet in area; nor displayed for longer than 60
days following vacating the property.
N. Signs which are an integral part of vending machines, including
gasoline pumps, milk and ice machines, provided that they do not
collectively exceed three square feet in area per machine.
O. Interior signs, provided that such signs which are located within
buildings and are not visible from a public street or public parking
facility.
P. Political signs, provided that such signs shall not be erected more than
21 days prior to election day and shall be removed within three days
after the election. Political signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in area
if located within a nonresidential zoning district and shall not exceed
six square feet located within a residential zoning district. Political
signs shall not be illuminated in any manner. All political signs shall be
located entirely upon private property with the consent of the owner,
and such signs shall be clearly marked with the name, address and
telephone number of the person responsible for removal of such sign.
Only one political sign per public office up for election shall be
permitted. Any political sign posted in a manner not in compliance with
the terms of this section shall be subject to a fine of up to $500 a day for
each day that such sign is posted in violation of the conditions relating
to such signs. [Amended 6-11-2008 by Ord. No. 10-2008]
Q. Historical or architectural designation signs, provided that such signs
are limited to no more than one facade or ground-mounted sign per
§ 140-220 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-220
139:475
§ 140-221. Signs to relate to use of property.
All signs, unless specifically stated otherwise in this article, shall relate to
the use or occupancy of the property upon which the sign is located.
§ 140-222. Sign location.
§ 140-223. Sign structures.
occupancy; are not more than six square feet in area; are not
illuminated and contain no commercial advertising.
A. Obstruction of accessways. No sign or sign structure shall obstruct a
fire escape, door, window, or other required accessway. No sign shall be
attached to a standpipe or fire escape, except those signs required by
the municipal authority.
B. Obstruction of window surface. No sign shall project over, occupy or
obstruct any window surface required for light or ventilation.
C. Signs in rights-of-way. No sign or any part of a sign, except publicly
owned or authorized signs, shall be placed in or extend into or over any
public right-of-way.
D. Signs affixed to certain structures. No sign shall be affixed to any roof,
tree, fence, utility pole, or other similar structure nor placed upon
motor vehicles which are continually or repeatedly parked in a
conspicuous location to serve as a sign; however, nothing is intended to
prohibit the placement of signs not exceeding three feet in any
dimension, directing traffic or identifying various parking locations
within a lot on light poles and utility poles erected therein. Signs
painted on pavement surfaces shall be restricted to traffic control
markings only.
A. All wiring for permanent illuminated signs shall be installed and
maintained so that it is not within public view. The running of wiring or
conduit along the facade of a building to access a sign is specifically
prohibited except that the Construction Official may permit exterior
conduit if in the judgment of the Official there is no practical way to run
the conduit so that it is not within public view.
B. Signs shall be mounted so as to project less than one foot into or over
any walkway whether suspended from or attached to a building or other
structure, including a sign hung under a canopy.
C. Sign permanency. All signs shall be securely affixed in a permanent
manner to either the ground or building.
D. Sign area.
(1) Area to be included. The supporting structure or bracing of a sign
shall be omitted in measuring the area of the sign unless such
§ 140-220 WALL CODE § 140-223
139:476
§ 140-224. Sign illumination.
§ 140-225. Permitted signs in connection with rural-residential and
residential uses.
The following kinds of signs will be permitted in connection with ruralresidential
and residential uses:
structure or bracing is made part of the message or sign face
and provided that such structure or bracing has a total horizontal
projected width less than 20% of the sign width or six inches.
Where a sign has two sign faces back-to-back and parallel to each
other, the area of only one face shall be included in determining the
area of the sign.
(2) Area of signs with backing. The area of all signs with backing shall
be measured by computing the area of the sign backing.
(3) Area of signs without backing. The area of all signs without backing
shall be measured by computing the area of the smallest geometric
figure or figures which can encompass all words, letters, figures,
emblems and other elements of the sign message with a clearance
of at least four inches from any such element.
(4) Height of signs. Sign height shall be measured between average
grade and the highest point of the highest element of the sign.
E. Multiple sign faces. No double faced sign shall be greater than 18
inches in thickness as measured between sign faces.
A. An illuminated sign located on a lot adjacent to or across the street from
any residential district and visible from such residential district shall
not be illuminated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless
the use to which the sign pertains is open for business during those
hours.
B. No sign shall contain blinking, flashing, flickering, tracer or sequential
lighting and all signs shall remain stationary and constant in intensity
and color at all times.
A. One sign advertising a permitted use or indicating the home or office of
a member of a recognized profession, provided that such sign shall not
exceed three square feet in area.
B. One temporary sign on each lot, indicating real property for sale or rent
which shall not be larger than six square feet, advertising the sale or
letting of only the premises on which the sign is maintained.
C. Not more than two temporary ground signs on an approved subdivision,
(irrespective of the number of lots in the subdivision), provided that
each such sign does not exceed 36 square feet in total area. In no case
shall any sign be located closer than 40 feet to any street line.
§ 140-223 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-225
139:477
§ 140-226. Permitted signs and sign areas in connection with
commercial, industrial and airport zones or uses.
Permitted signs and sign areas in connection with commercial, industrial
and airport zones or uses shall be as follows:
D. Temporary subdivision signs will not be permitted after residences have
been erected on 75% of the lots in the subdivision or after more than
75% of the lots have been sold by the developer.
E. No off-site sign advertising a subdivision, whether temporary or
permanent, shall be permitted. [Amended 10-10-2001 by Ord. No.
39-2001]
F. Any temporary sign erected shall be removed within 30 days after the
temporary need has ceased to exist.
G. The Land Use Officer may permit signs to be artificially illuminated
upon finding that the need for such illumination has been clearly
demonstrated and is necessary to the permitted use and public welfare,
except that this shall apply only to signs in connection with a
professional office. The signs shall not be illuminated between 11:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m. of the following day.
H. All signs shall be set back at least 10 feet from the property lines.
I. Signs advertising the sale of farm or dairy products to be sold from the
farm upon which it is produced, provided that there shall not be more
than two separate signs not exceeding 36 square feet each.
J. Not more than two signs indicating the name of an active farm and not
exceeding a total area of 10 square feet.
K. Any sign used upon property warning the public against hunting,
fishing or trespassing thereon may be placed on the property.
L. Political signs not to exceed six square feet in total area. These signs
may be erected 45 days prior to the election but shall be removed 10
days thereafter.
M. For nonconforming businesses in a residential zone, signs are permitted
as if located within the business zone.
A. Those signs permitted in § 140-225.
B. One freestanding advertising sign; one building-attached sign no larger
than 50 square feet. Separate and incidental building-attached accent
or identification signs advertising unique and distinct services or uses
within a building shall be prohibited. [Amended 10-10-2001 by Ord.
No. 39-2001; 5-12-2004 by Ord. No. 10-2004]
C. Airport uses with over 100 acres and 1,000 feet of state highway
frontage shall be permitted two freestanding signs with an aggregate
§ 140-225 WALL CODE § 140-226
139:478
§ 140-227. Permitted sign types in connection with commercial,
industrial or airport zones or uses.
area of 250 square feet. When one tenant exists in a building, one
building attached sign no more than 50 square feet in area is permitted.
Where more than one tenant exists in a building, each tenant shall
be permitted one building attached sign not to exceed two square
feet for each foot of store frontage or 50 square feet, whichever is
less. Building-attached signs shall be exclusive of the aggregate
freestanding sign area.
D. Where more than one tenant exists on a commercial or industrial site,
each tenant may have one building-attached sign not to exceed two
square feet for each foot of store frontage or 50 square feet in area,
whichever is less, exclusive of the aggregate freestanding sign area
permitted. Such signage shall be exclusively located along the store
frontage, being that portion of the store serving as the primary
entryway for customers, and generally facing the majority of the
customer parking spaces.
(1) Anchor stores with a footprint larger than 50,000 square feet
located in shopping centers may have a building attached sign no
larger than 175 square feet. The area of the sign shall not exceed
5% of the area of the front facade of the anchor store. [Added
10-10-2001 by Ord. No. 39-2001]
(2) Stores, typically known as "big-box" stores, with a footprint larger
than 100,000 square feet may have a building attached sign no
larger than 200 square feet. The area of the sign shall not exceed
5% of the front facade of the Big Box store. [Added 10-10-2001 by
Ord. No. 39-2001]
(3) Separate and incidental building-attached accent or identification
signs on anchor stores or big-box stores advertising unique and
distinct services or uses within the store shall be prohibited.
[Added 10-10-2001 by Ord. No. 39-2001]
E. All freestanding ground signs identifying a site and or the tenants
therein shall contain a street address number whose characters are not
less than two inches wide and six inches high. [Added 10-10-2001 by
Ord. No. 39-2001]
A. (Reserved) 52
B. Wall signs such that the sign shall be on a parallel plane with the
building facade, shall not project more than 18 inches from the facade
and shall maintain a minimum under clearance to grade of 10 feet.
52.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, regarding roof signs, was repealed 5-12-2004 by Ord.
No. 10-2004.
§ 140-226 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-227
139:479
§ 140-228. Nonconforming signs.
C. Marquee signs such that these signs shall be limited to places of public
assembly, shall conform to the setback of the principal structure to
which it is attached, and shall maintain a minimum under clearance to
grade of 10 feet.
D. Projecting sign attached to a building such that these signs shall not
extend more than four feet from the building face, shall not exceed
more than four feet above the roofline of the building, shall maintain a
minimum under clearance to grade of 10 feet, shall be limited to one
sign per building and the area of the sign shall be counted toward the
aggregate sign area permitted on the site.
E. Freestanding ground signs, as follows:
(1) A Type I ground sign shall be permitted such that the maximum
sign area not exceed 150 square feet, the sign be setback at least
15 feet from the front, side and rear property lines and the sign not
exceed a height of 15 feet above grade.
(2) A Type II ground sign shall be permitted such that the maximum
sign area not exceed 100 square feet, the sign be set back at least
10 feet from the front, side and rear property lines, and the sign not
exceed a height of 10 feet above grade. [Amended 5-12-2004 by
Ord. No. 10-2004]
(3) A Type III ground sign shall be permitted such that the maximum
sign area not exceed 50 square feet, the sign be set back at least
five feet from the front, side and rear property lines, and the sign
not exceed a height of seven feet above grade. [Amended
5-12-2004 by Ord. No. 10-2004]
A. The provisions of this section shall apply to all signs heretofore erected,
although not in conformity with the provisions of this article.
B. A nonconforming sign may be continued unless it constitutes a traffic
hazard or a public hazard or nuisance. In such event, the Construction
Official may order it removed on 10 days written notice, giving the
reason therefor. If not removed, legal proceedings shall be taken as
shall be necessary for its removal or as a violation under this section.
§ 140-227 WALL CODE § 140-228
139:480
Part 5
Design Guidelines And Construction Specifications
ARTICLE XXX
General Requirements
§ 140-229. Purpose.
The purpose of these provisions is to provide minimal standards and
restrictions for the design of structures and improvements in conjunction
with review and approval of subdivision plats and site plans. All sites which
are proposed for such development shall conform to these requirements.
The necessity of adhering to these standards may be waived pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51. Because the purpose of good subdivision and site design
is to create a functional and attractive development, to minimize adverse
impacts, and to ensure that a project will be an asset to Wall Township, a
developer shall only be permitted to build the maximum density, intensity
of development, and floor area ratio permitted by the zone district schedule
requirements where it is demonstrated that the development adheres to all
design guidelines and standards set forth herein and creates no exceptional
adverse impacts.
§ 140-230. Conformance with guidelines required.
All development shall be designed to provide appropriate improvements
in accordance with the following design standards and objectives. Existing
conditions shall be upgraded to conform with these requirements. Should
improvements be required for which standards and guidelines are not
established, they shall be designed and in accordance with accepted
practices as approved by the approving authority.
§ 140-231. Nature of lot lines.
All existing and proposed lot lines to be created or incorporated in any
subdivision application shall be straight, perpendicular and/or radial in
nature.
§ 140-229 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-231
139:481

ARTICLE XXXI
Circulation Design Standards
§ 140-232. General guidelines.
All development shall provide adequate systems, structures and physical
improvements for the movement of people, goods, water, air, sewerage or
power.
§ 140-233. Roadways and driveways.
Roadways and drives shall provide safe and convenient access for vehicles
of occupants and visitors as well as service and emergency vehicles.
A. Hierarchy. Roadway design shall be consistent with a hierarchical
system of functions. All roadways shall be classified according to their
types. In making a determination as to the classification of a particular
roadway, the provisions of the Master Plan and the existing and
proposed conditions in the vicinity of the development shall be
considered along with the intended function of the roadway itself.
Functional criteria for classifying roadways not specifically designated
in the master plan are as follows:
(1) Freeways. This class of roadway in primarily intended to provide
for movement of large volumes of traffic over long distances at high
speeds with no direct access to adjacent properties.
(2) Primary arterial roadways. This class of roadway is primarily
intended to form an interconnected system serving lengthy trips
and linking major traffic generators. They also serve as carriers of
major regional traffic flows where the freeway system is incomplete
or inadequate. The first and most important function of arterial
roadways is to carry traffic and provision of access to adjoining
property is relegated to a secondary function and is minimized.
Traffic turning onto and off of these roads can reduce capacity and
access points should be restricted as much as possible. With high
traffic volumes and truck traffic, noise levels can be disruptive to
residential areas and arterial roadways should not penetrate
identifiable neighborhoods.
(3) Secondary arterial roadways. This class of roadway is similar to
primary arterial roadways except that they serve shorter trips and
lower traffic volumes.
(4) Collector roadways. Collectors differ from arterials in that they
should not form an interconnected system and are generally not
continuous over long distances. They are intended primarily for
interneighborhood traffic and as feeder roads to industrial and
commercial areas. Some are intended to provide access to
residential neighborhoods and in those cases are exclusively for
that purpose. They should simply carry traffic to the arterials and
§ 140-232 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-233
139:483
should not form linkages and interconnections which would
accommodate unwanted through traffic. This class of roadway is
intended to siphon traffic from local roadways before their capacity
is exceeded and the two functions of traffic movement and property
access are of equal importance. Traffic on collector roadways
should be given priority over local roadways and not interrupted
by sharp turns or stop signs. On-street parking is undesirable and
should be avoided where possible.
(5) Local roadways. Local roadways differ from other roadways in that
they are not intended to carry any through traffic whatsoever. The
intended function of this class of roadway is to provide direct
access to adjoining properties; traffic capacity is of only secondary
importance.
(6) Driveways. Driveways differ from other roadways in that they
connect site facilities to the local roadways. The design of
driveways must be adapted to accommodate a wide variety of
intended facilities such as parking, loading, and passenger dropoff
and the circulation between these various automobile facilities.
Design speed and lane width can be reduced to severely restrict
traffic speed if desired.
B. Layout. Roadways shall be laid out to conform as much as possible to
the topography, to permit efficient drainage and utility systems, and to
require the minimum number of roadways necessary to provide
convenient and safe access to property.
(1) Roadways shall be designed to form an overall system of public and
private ways for the efficient circulation of vehicles in which every
building, facility, parking, loading or service area shall have a
convenient and safe means of ingress and egress.
(2) All roadways shall be properly integrated with the existing and
proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated rights-of-way
established on the Official Map and/or Master Plan.
(a) All roadways shall be properly related to special traffic
generators such as industries, business districts, schools,
places of worship, and shopping centers; to population
densities; and to the pattern of existing and proposed land
uses.
(b) Roadways shall be laid out so as to discourage through traffic
on local roadways, to occupy no more land than is required to
provide access, and to avoid unnecessary fragmentation of
land into smaller blocks.
(c) Roadways shall be planned in connection with the grouping of
buildings and parking or loading areas so as to minimize
conflict of movement between the various types of traffic,
including pedestrian.
§ 140-233 WALL CODE § 140-233
139:484
(d) Roadways shall be designed to enhance the aesthetic qualities
of the roadside.
(e) The rigid rectangular gridiron roadway pattern is discouraged
and the use of curvilinear roadways and U-shaped roadways
shall be encouraged where such use will result in a more
desirable layout.
(f) Looped roadways shall be preferred and stub or cul-de-sac
roadways are discouraged as not in conformance with the
intent of this chapter. No dead-end roadway shall exceed a
length of 700 feet unless turnaround areas are provide at a
rate of one for each 600 linear feet.
(g) All roadways shall be arranged so as to obtain as many as
possible of the building sites at, or above, the grades of the
roadways.
(h) Roadways shall be designed to preserve and enhance scenic
vistas and landmarks.
C. Public rights-of-way and blocks and lots. Public rights-of-way shall be
established to provide reasonable public access and all lots shall front
on a public right-of-way.
(1) The right-of-way shall be measured from lot line to lot line and shall
be sufficiently wide to contain the cartway, curbs, shoulders,
sidewalks, graded areas, utilities and shade trees.
(2) The right-of-way width of a new roadway that is a continuation of
an existing roadway shall in no case be continued at a width less
than the existing roadway.
(3) Block size shall be the maximum consistent with use and shape of
the site and the convenience and safety of the occupants.
(4) Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of
appropriate depths. Exceptions of this prescribed block width shall
be permitted in blocks adjacent to major roadways, railroads, or
waterways.
(5) The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be such as are
appropriate for the locality and the type of development
contemplated, but block lengths in residential areas shall not
exceed 1,200 feet nor be less than 400 feet in length.
(6) In long blocks, easements through the block shall be provided to
accommodate utilities, drainage facilities, or pedestrian traffic.
D. Roadway extensions. The arrangement of roadways shall provide for
the continuation of principal roadways between adjacent properties for
convenient movement of traffic, effective fire protection, for efficient
provision of utilities.
§ 140-233 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-233
139:485
(1) Proposed roadways shall be extended to the boundary lines of the
tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other
physical conditions.
(2) If the adjacent property is undeveloped arid the roadway must be a
dead-end roadway temporarily, the right-of-way shall, except where
reserved, be extended to the property line. A temporary cul-de-sac
turnaround, and/or a T-shaped or L-shaped turnaround shall be
provided on all temporary dead-end roadways, with the notation on
the subdivision plan that land outside the normal roadway right-ofway
shall revert to abutting property owners wherever the roadway
is continued. The approving board may limit the length of
temporary dead-end roadways.
(3) Where a roadway does not extend to the boundary of the
subdivision and its continuation is not required by the approving
authority for access to adjoining property, its terminus shall not be
nearer to such boundary than 50 feet. However, the approving
board may require the reservation of an appropriate easement to
accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian traffic, or utilities. A
cul-de-sac turnaround shall be provided at the end of a permanent
dead-end roadway. For greater convenience to traffic and more
effective policing and fire protection, permanent dead-end
roadways shall be limited in length.
E. Alignment.
(1) Roadways shall be aligned to ensure adequate visibility and to
control the speed of traffic.
(2) Minimum center-line radius, minimum tangent length between
reverse curves, and curb radii requirements shall be as shown in
Exhibit 1 in Subsection F below.
F. Grade. Roadways shall be graded to ensure adequate visibility and to
encourage a smooth flow of traffic.
(1) Grades of roadways shall conform as closely as possible to the
original topography.
(2) A combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided.
(3) Minimum roadway grade permitted for all roadways shall be 0.5%;
but roadways constructed at this grade shall be closely monitored
and strict attention paid to construction techniques to avoid
ponding. Where topographical conditions permit, a minimum grade
of 0.75% shall be used.
(4) Maximum roadway grade shall be 8%.
(5) Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever
practical. Maximum grade within intersections shall be 5% except
for collectors which shall be 3%.
§ 140-233 WALL CODE § 140-233
139:486
Exhibit 1
Intersection Standards
Local
Roadway
(feet)
Collector
Roadway
(feet)
Maximum grade within 50
feet of intersection
5% 3% minimum
Minimum center-line radius 150 300
Minimum tangent length
between reverse curves
100 150
Curb radii 25 35
G. Roadway width. Roadways shall be of suitable width to accommodate
prospective traffic and afford satisfactory access to police, fire fighting,
snow removal, sanitation, and road maintenance equipment, and to
coordinate roads so as to compose a convenient system and avoid
undue hardships to adjoining properties.
(1) Roadways shall conform with the Schedule of Required Roadway
Dimensions.53
(2) Where a nonresidential collector or a collector roadway serving
more than 100 lots intersects with another collector roadway or
major roadway, both the right-of-way and the pavement shall be
widened by 24 feet for a distance of 200 feet back from the
intersection of the center lines of both roadways.
(3) Where no parking is provided, interior drives shall be not less than
12 feet wide for one-way traffic and not less than 20 feet wide for
two-way traffic and shall be not more than 36 feet in width.
H. Intersection of roadways. Roadway intersections shall link separate
roadways with minimal interference of traffic flow.
(1) Hierarchical order. Vehicular access between roadways should
follow a hierarchical order of interconnection insofar as practical.
Direct interconnections between dissimilar classes of roadway
should be avoided and traffic from one class of roadway should be
combined and controlled so as to channel traffic between different
roadway classes conveniently, safely, and in a manner which
minimizes marginal traffic friction and promotes free traffic flow. In
no case shall local roadways connect in such a way as to encourage
their use for through traffic. Changes in roadway class shall occur
at intersections and not along a linear roadway segment.
53.Editor's Note: The design criteria known as "Schedule I," as promulgated by the Land Use
Office, are on file in the Land Use Office.
§ 140-233 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-233
139:487
(2) Driveways serving residential developments should connect with a
local roadway and to separate residential development from
arterial roadways the following should be used.
(a) A marginal service road shall be provided along such
expressways and arterials and shall be separated from it by a
raised divider strip at least eight feet in width.
(b) The frontage shall be reversed so that the lots contiguous to
such arterials will front on an internal roadway, with a buffer
strip at least 50 feet in width for planning provided along the
arterial or major road.
(c) Such other means of separating through and local traffic and of
providing a suitable buffer shall be provided, as the approving
board may determine to be appropriate.
(3) Separation of intersections. Intersections shall be arranged to
encourage smooth traffic flow with controlled turning movement
and minimum hazards to vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(a) No more than two roadways shall cross the same point. Use of
"T" intersections shall be encouraged. To avoid corner-cutting
when inadequate offsets exist between adjacent intersections,
offsets shall be at least 150 feet between center lines.
(b) No part of any driveway may be located within five feet of a
side property line for single and/or two-family dwellings and
within 30 feet of a side property line for other use except for a
driveway serving two or more adjacent sites.
(4) Intersection angle. Intersection angles shall provide for rapid and
safe maneuvers.
(a) Intersections shall be at right angles wherever possible and
intersections of less than 60º measured at the center line of
roadways, shall not be permitted.
(b) Approaches of any roadway to any intersection of another
roadway shall follow a straight line course within 100 feet of
the intersection.
(c) Driveway angle, one-way operation. Driveways used by
vehicles in a one-way direction of travel (right turn only) shall
not form angles smaller than 45º with the roadway, unless
acceleration and deceleration lanes are provided.
(d) Drive angle, two-way operation. Driveways used for two-way
operation will intersect the roadway at any angle as near 90º
as site conditions will permit, and in no case shall it be less
than 60º.
§ 140-233 WALL CODE § 140-233
139:488
(e) Where a driveway connecting to a roadway serves traffic from
parking areas of a major traffic generator, acceleration and/or
deceleration lane may be required. Merging and turnout lanes
as well as traffic dividers shall be provided where existing or
anticipated heavy flows indicate need.
(5) Sight triangles. Proper sight distance should be provided at the
intersections of ingress and egress driveways by establishing sight
triangles.
(a) Sight triangles shall be delineated in accordance with
Transportation and Traffic Engineering Handbook.
(b) Sight triangles at roadway intersections shall extend from a
plane 18 inches above curb level to a plane 10 feet above curb
level.
(c) Sight triangles at driveway intersections shall extend from a
plane 30 inches above curb level to a plane eight feet above
curb level and be so designed with regard to profile, grading
and location to permit the following site distance measured in
each direction. The measurement shall be from the existing
driveway 10 feet from the intersection.
Allowable Speed on
Roadway
(miles per hour)
Required Site Distance
(in feet)
25 150
30 200
35 250
40 300
45 400
50 475
(6) Pavement and shoulders/curbs and gutters. Roadways shall be
improved to provide a serviceable all weather surface.
(a) Roadways shall be paved with a durable dust free surface.
(b) Curbing shall be required for drainage purposes, safety, and
delineation and protection of pavement edge.
[1] Curbing shall be provided along both sides of all roadways
and adjacent to the edge of all aisles, drives, and off-street
parking areas.
[2] Curbing shall be designed to provide a ramp for bicycle
and/or wheelchairs.
[3] Minimum curb radius.
§ 140-233 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-233
139:489
[a] Intersections shall be rounded at the curbline, with
the roadway having the highest radius requirement as
shown in Exhibit 1, Intersection Standards, in
§ 140-233F(5) determining the minimum standard for
all curblines.
[b] Parking areas for 25 or more cars and access drives
for all parking areas on arterial highways provide
curbed return radii of not less than 15 feet for all
right-turn movements and left-turn access from oneway
roadways and concrete aprons on entrance and
exit drives.
[c] Parking areas for less than 25 cars may utilize
concrete aprons without curb returns at entrance and
exit drives which are not located on a minor arterial or
principal arterial highway.
[d] Maximum curb depression width for single- and twofamily
dwellings shall be the driveway width plus four
feet, but not more than 25 feet.
[e] For all other uses shall be the driveway width plus 10
feet, but not more than 35 feet.
(7) Shoulders. Shoulders and/or drainage swales shall be required
instead of curbs when soil and/or topography make the use of
shoulders and/or drainage swales preferable, or where curbing
would unnecessarily detract from the intended character of the
area.
(8) Utility and shade tree strips. Strips along shall be established along
roadways to accommodate utilities and shade trees.
(a) Utility strips shall be of suitable width for maintenance access.
(b) Shade tree planting strips shall have a minimum width of three
feet outside of the curbline, sidewalk area and utility strip.
(9) Roadway names. All roadways other than driveways shall be
named.
(a) Roadway names and subdivision names shall not duplicate or
nearly duplicate the names of existing roadways or
subdivisions in the Township or surrounding communities.
(b) Roadway names shall be subject to the approval of the
Township Committee.
(c) The continuation of an existing roadway shall have the same
name.
§ 140-233 WALL CODE § 140-234
139:490
§ 140-234. Off-street parking and loading.
Off-street parking, loading and service areas shall provide for safe and
convenient maneuvering and parking of vehicles.
A. Auto parking. All parking spaces shall be usable and safely and
conveniently arranged.
(1) Off-street parking areas shall be oriented to and within a
reasonable walking distance of the buildings they are designed to
serve. This distance shall be a maximum of 1,000 feet.
(2) All parking spaces shall be of sufficient size to allow parking in one
maneuver.
(a) Parking spaces, ramps, etc., shall be provided for the
physically handicapped, in accordance with the New Jersey
barrier-free design regulations and the Americans with
Disabilities Act.
(b) Backup areas with a minimum depth of 10 feet shall be
provided in all parking lots where there are dead-end aisles.
(3) All parking spaces shall be serviceable in all weather conditions
and shall minimize the inherent potential for damage to property or
vehicles.
(a) Off-street parking spaces shall be separated from walkways,
roadways and landscaped areas by a wall, fence, bollards or
curbing.
(b) Each parking space shall consist of a suitably graded, drained
and unobstructed area in the plane of which no straight line
shall have a grade in excess of 6% or less than 1%.
(c) Parking areas shall be surfaced with bituminous pavement or
concrete pavement.
(d) Parking areas shall be clearly marked by painted lines or curb
or other means to indicate individual parking spaces.
(e) Safety islands shall be located at ends of parking rows.
[1] Single-island parking length shall be a minimum of 19 feet,
and double-island parking length shall be a minimum of 38
feet parked in each parking row.
[2] Curb return radii adjacent to traffic flow shall be a
minimum of five feet.
[3] All islands shall be enclosed by a poured concrete curbing.
B. The surface of pavement in any parking area with a capacity of more
than four vehicles shall be marked with solid white or yellow painted
§ 140-234 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-234
139:491
lines in such a manner as to indicate each individual parking stall and
direction of traffic flow in each access drive and aisle.
C. Ingress and egress drives shall have a width of at least 12 feet for oneway
drives and at least 20 feet for two-way drives. No ingress egress
drive shall have a width of greater than 30 feet.
D. Aisles.
(1) Aisles providing direct access to parking stalls have minimum
widths as specified herein:
(a) For parking at 61° up to and including 90°: 25 feet.
(b) For parking at 46° to 61°: 18 feet.
(c) For parking at less than 45°: 12 feet.
(2) Only one-way traffic shall be permitted in aisles providing access to
other than ninety-degree parking stalls, except that two-way traffic
may be permitted in aisles serving parallel parking spaces,
provided said aisles have a minimum width of 18 feet.
E. Loading. Loading and unloading space shall be provided directly from a
roadway that will not interfere with public convenience and that will
permit orderly and safe movement of truck vehicles.
F. Parking and loading specifications.
(1) All off-street parking spaces, aisles and access drives shall be
graded so as to have a minimum longitudinal slope of 0.75% (nine
inches per 100 feet) on open surface swales, channels or gutters
designed for or receiving surface water flow and 0.50% (six inches
per 100 feet) on surfaces subjected to sheet flow when finished.
Subsurface drainage facilities shall be constructed, where
required, to remove surface water runoff from such areas and
convey it to existing drainage facilities or natural streams having
the capacity to accept the additional runoff. The design standards
and specifications of this chapter shall apply and, where
appropriate, the words “site or tract under consideration” shall be
used in place of the word “subdivision” and the words “parking
area driveways and access roads” shall be used in place of the
words “street” or “streets” therein.
(2) The minimum requirement for the pavement thickness of any
parking spaces, aisles and access drives shall be:
§ 140-234 WALL CODE § 140-234
139:492
§ 140-235. Bikeways.
All development shall accommodate the use of bicycles.
Use Classification
Poor
Subgrade*
(inches)
Fair to Good
Subgrade
(inches)
Surface
Course
(inches)
Residential
driveways;
passenger car
parking lots and
access aisles:
bituminous concrete
4.5 3 1.5
Commercial and
light industrial
service roads and
access aisles:
bituminous concrete
6 5 1.5
Heavy industrial
service roads and
access aisles, truck
and bus parking
lots: bituminous
concrete
7 5 2
*Poor subgrade shall be those subgrades having a California
Bearing Ratio of less than 5.0.
(3) The base course and surface course material shall be as specified in
this chapter except that crushed stone or bank-run gravel may be
substituted for the base course in accordance with the “Pavement
Base Course Equivalencies” of the New Jersey Asphalt Pavement
Association.
(4) For residential driveways and access and parking areas for
agricultural and farm businesses, six inches of crushed stone or
bank-run gravel or a minimum of five inches of portland cement
concrete for poor subgrade or four inches of portland cement
concrete for fair to good subgrade may be used.
A. Bicycle parking areas shall be provided which are protected from
damage by vehicles. To encourage usage, such facilities shall be a
minimal distance from building entrances. To deter theft, they shall be
clearly observable from within the building and provided with locking
facilities.
B. Drainage grates in roadways and parking lots shall be of a bicycle safe
design.
§ 140-234 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-235
139:493
§ 140-236. Sidewalks.54
Designated walkways shall form a logical, safe and convenient system for
pedestrian access to all dwelling units, project facilities and principal offsite
pedestrian destinations.
C. Separate bicycle paths shall be required when such paths have been
specified as part of the adopted master plan or if substantial bicycle
traffic is anticipated. Bicycle paths, if provided, shall be coordinated
with the pedestrian walkway system so that bicycle and pedestrian
roadway crossings are combined wherever feasible. Paths shall be eight
feet wide.
D. Surface material shall be limited to bituminous mixes, concrete, and
wood planking.
A. Design walking distance in the open between dwelling units and
parking spaces, delivery areas and trash and garbage storage areas
intended for use of occupants shall be minimized.
B. Walkways to be used by substantial number of children as play areas or
routes to school or other destinations shall be so located and
safeguarded as to minimize contacts with normal automotive traffic.
Major roadway crossings shall be held to a minimum on the walkways,
and shall be located, designed and appropriately marked for safety.
Pedestrian crossings shall be safely located, marked and controlled,
and fences on other barriers shall be used to restrict crossings where
appropriate to because of substantial exposure of pedestrians to
automotive traffic. Walkways may be combined with other easements
and used by emergency or service vehicles, but shall not be used by
other automotive traffic.
C. Sidewalks shall be placed parallel to the roadway within the right-ofway
except to preserve topographical or natural features or unless a
separated pedestrian circulation system is provided.
(1) Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of all roadways and
throughout site development for ease of pedestrian access.
(2) Pedestrian way easements at least 10 feet wide may be required by
the Planning Board through the center of blocks more than 600 feet
long or to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds,
shopping, or other community facilities.
(3) One-family dwellings less than 500 feet distant from an existing
sidewalk on the same side of the roadway shall be required to have
a sidewalk constructed along the entire roadway.
D. Acceptable materials shall include, concrete, brick and cement payers.
54.Editor's Note: The design criteria known as "Schedule I," as promulgated by the Land Use
Office, are on file in the Land Use Office.
§ 140-235 WALL CODE § 140-236
139:494
§ 140-237. Additional roadway structure details.
For additional roadway structure details, see Schedule I.
E. Sidewalk width shall be four feet.
(1) Wider walks may be necessary near pedestrian generators and
employment centers.
(2) Where sidewalks abut the curb and cars overhang the sidewalk,
widths shall be six feet.
(3) Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the Schedule I,
Required Sidewalks.55
55.Editor's Note: The design criteria known as "Schedule I," as promulgated by the Land Use
Office, are on file in the Land Use Office.
§ 140-236 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-237
139:495

ARTICLE XXXII
Water and Sewer
§ 140-238. Water supply.
All development shall be properly connected with an approved functioning
public community water system, either regulated by the Board of Public
Utilities or owned and operated by the Township prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
A. Water supply system.
(1) Subdivisions shall be connected to an existing public water supply
system if public service is available within the following distances:
200 feet for one-unit, 400 feet for two-unit, 600 feet for three-unit,
800 feet for four-unit, and 1,000 feet for five-unit to fifteen-unit
developments. For developments of greater than 15 units which are
within one mile from an existing public water system, adequate
justification should be provided as to why they should not provide a
connection to the existing public water supply system. For
developments of greater than 15 units which are more than one
mile from an existing system, the water supply strategy shall be
determined on a case-by-case basis taking into consideration the
density of the development, economic considerations, and
groundwater availability and quality.
(2) If a public water supply system will be provided to the area as
indicated in the municipal Water Master Plan, Official Map, or
other official document, a municipality may require installation of a
capped system or "dry lines" (mains, only) within the road right-ofway;
or alternatively, a municipality may require a payment in lieu
of the improvement.
(3) The water supply system shall be adequate to handle the necessary
flow based on complete development.
(a) The water system shall be designed to carry peak-hour flows
and be capable of delivering the peak hourly demands
indicated in Exhibit 4.
Exhibit 4
Design Standards for Peak-Hour Flow
Total Houses Served
Peak Hourly Rates
(GPM per house)
5 8.0
10 5.0
50 3.0
100 2.0
§ 140-238 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-238
139:497
Exhibit 4
Design Standards for Peak-Hour Flow
Total Houses Served
Peak Hourly Rates
(GPM per house)
250 1.3
500 0.8
750 0.7
1,000 or more 0.6
(b) For developments of one- and two-family dwellings, not
exceeding two stories in height, the short method indicated in
Exhibit 5 may be used.
Exhibit 5
Short Method for Calculating Fire Flows
Distance Between
Building*
(feet)
Required Fire Flow
(gallons per minute)
Over 100 500
31 - 100 750 - 1,000
11 - 30 1,000 - 1,500
10 or less 1,500 - 2,000
NOTES:
* For contiguous buildings (attached dwelling units of two or
more two-family units and/or multifamily units), a minimum
of 2,500 gallons per minute may be used.
(4) Fire protection facilities shall be furnished for all developments.
Minimum fire flows shall be based on recommendations by the
American Insurance Association and the National Board of Fire
Underwriters, as indicated in Exhibit 3 and Exhibit 4 [Subsection
A(3)(a) above].
Exhibit 3
Fire Flows
Population
Flow
(gpm)
Duration of Flow
(hours)
Under 100 500 4
1,000 1,000 4
1,500 1,250 5
§ 140-238 WALL CODE § 140-238
139:498
Exhibit 3
Fire Flows
Population
Flow
(gpm)
Duration of Flow
(hours)
2,000 1,500 6
3,000 1,750 7
4,000 2,000 8
5,000 2,250 9
6,000 2,500 10
10,000 3,000 10
(5) Fire hydrants.
(a) Hydrants shall be spaced to provide necessary fire flow, and
the average area per hydrant typically should not exceed
120,000 square feet. In addition, hydrants shall be spaced so
that each residence or commercial structure shall be within
400 feet of a hydrant. [Amended 4-22-2015 by Ord. No.
5-2015]
(b) A hydrant shall be located at all low points and at all high
points with adequate means of drainage provided.
(c) Hydrants shall be located at the ends of lines, and valves of full
line size shall be provided after hydrants tees at the ends of all
dead lines and lines which may be extended in the future.
B. System design and placement.
(1) System design and placement shall comply with the construction
specifications and with the requirements of the public community
water supply company, or Township Engineer, as applicable.
(2) All proposals for new public community water supplies or
extensions to existing public community water supply systems
exceeding $150,000 in construction costs must receive a permit
from the Bureau of Safe Drinking Water in the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, prior to the construction
and use of the water supply facilities.
(3) Sanitary systems designs shall reflect New Jersey state regulations
and guidelines which implement the New Jersey Water Pollution
Control Act (N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.) and the New Jersey Water
Quality Planning Act (N.J.S.A. 58:11A-1 et seq.) and shall conform
to the requirements of the Western Monmouth Utilities Authority.
C. For water system details see Schedule II.56
§ 140-238 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-239
139:499
§ 140-239. Sanitary sewers.
All development shall be properly connected with an approved and
functioning sanitary sewer system prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
A. Sanitary sewer system.
(1) Subdivisions shall be connected to an existing public sanitary
sewer system if public service is available within the following
distances: 200 feet for one-unit, 400 feet for two-unit, 600 feet for
three-unit, 800 feet for four-unit, and 1,000 feet for five-unit to
fifteen-unit developments. For developments of greater than 15
units which are within one mile from an existing public sanitary
sewer system, adequate justification should be provided as to why
they should not provide a connection to the existing public water
supply system. For developments of greater than 15 units which
are more than one mile from an existing system, the sanitary sewer
strategy shall be determined on a case-by-case basis, taking into
consideration the density of development and economic
considerations.
(2) If a public system is not in place or cannot be extended, the
developer may provide individual subsurface disposal systems
subject to applicable Board of Health and New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) regulations.
(3) If a public sanitary sewer system will be provided to the area as
indicated in the municipal Sewer Master Plan, Official Map, or
other official document, a municipality may require installation of a
capped system (mains only) within the road right-of-way; or
alternatively a municipality may require a payment in lieu of the
improvement. Capped sanitary sewers shall be allowed only in
areas indicated for sewer service in State of New Jersey Statewide
Water Quality Management (WQM) plans and where permitted by
the NJDEP through sewer connection approval.
B. System planning, design and placement.
(1) The planning, design, construction, installation, modification, and
operation of any treatment works shall be in accordance with the
applicable NJDEP regulations implementing the New Jersey Water
Pollution Control Act (N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.) and the New Jersey
Water Quality Planning Act (N.J.S.A. 58:11A-1 et seq.).
(2) System design and placement shall comply with the specifications
set forth in the construction specifications and with the rules,
regulations and requirements of the applicable utilities authority.
(3) For sanitary sewerage details see Schedule III.57
56.Editor's Note: Schedule II is on file in the Land Use Office.
§ 140-239 WALL CODE § 140-239
139:500
57.Editor's Note: Schedule III is on file in the Land Use Office.
§ 140-239 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-239
139:501

ARTICLE XXXIII
Stormwater Management
[Amended 7-18-2007 by Ord. No. 20-2007]
§ 140-240. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural BMPs. Structural BMPs should be
integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies and
proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both
environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed to
stormwater. Source control plans should be developed based upon
physical site conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated
quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater
management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established
performance standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater
recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for major
development, as defined in § 140-241.
C. Applicability.
(1) This article shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This article shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Township of Wall.
D. Compatibility with other requirements. Development approvals issued
for subdivisions and site plans pursuant to this article are to be
considered an integral part of development approvals under the
subdivision and site plan review process and do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals
for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or
ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
article shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion
of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This article is not
intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinances,
rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except that, where
any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those
§ 140-240 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-240
139:503
§ 140-241. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this article its most reasonable application. The definitions
below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-52.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-52.3.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center as designated by the State Planning Commission, such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, development
means: any activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed
imposed by any other article, rule or regulation, or other provision of
law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards shall control.
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A 58:16A-55.5,
if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to approve,
conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
B.
§ 140-240 WALL CODE § 140-241
139:504
by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural
Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not
exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body
or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction with" the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land or increasing impervious surface
by one-quarter acre or more. Disturbance for the purpose of this rule
is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement of
soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.[Amended
4-8-2009 by Ord. No. 9-2009]
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, Township of Wall, or political subdivision of this state subject
to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
§ 140-241 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-241
139:505
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
§ 140-241 WALL CODE § 140-241
139:506
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
§ 140-242. General standards.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
A. Design and performance standards for stormwater management
measures.
(1) Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in § 140-242.1. To the maximum extent practicable,
these standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural
stormwater management strategies into the design. If these
strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these standards,
structural stormwater management measures necessary to meet
these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
(2) The standards in this article apply only to new major development
and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on
water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and
maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new
major development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or water quality management plan adopted in
§ 140-241 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-242
139:507
§ 140-242.1. Stormwater management requirements and standards
for major development.
accordance with Department rules. Such alternative standards
shall provide at least as much protection from stormwater-related
loss of groundwater recharge, stormwater quantity and water
quality impacts of major development projects as would be
provided under the standards in this subchapter.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 140-242.7 of this article.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of § 140-242.1F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of § 140-242.1F and G may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis that,
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of § 140-242.1F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
§ 140-242 WALL CODE § 140-242.1
139:508
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of § 140-242.1F and G, existing structures currently in use, such as
homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
§ 140-242.1F and G that were not achievable on site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in § 140-242.1F
and G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth herein into the design. The
applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures incorporated
into the design of the project. If the applicant contends that it is not
feasible for engineering, environmental, or safety reasons to
incorporate any nonstructural stormwater management measures
identified in Subsection E(2) below into the design of a particular
project, the applicant shall identify the strategy considered and
provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance, deer-resistant landscaping that
encourages retention and planting of native vegetation and
minimizes the use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
§ 140-242.1 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-242.1
139:509
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under Subsection E(2)(i)[2] above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches, or
is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest
dimension. Examples of grates subject to this standard
include grates in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curbopening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm
sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of
spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
§ 140-242.1 WALL CODE § 140-242.1
139:510
area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater
than two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in § 140-242.G(1) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in § 140-242.1G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register-listed historic property.
[5] Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater
management measure to meet the performance standards
in § 140-242.1F and G shall be dedicated to a government
agency, subjected to a conservation restriction filed with
the appropriate county clerk's office, or subject to an
approved equivalent restriction that ensures that measure
or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in
perpetuity.
[6] Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management
strategies is available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be
obtained from the address identified in § 140-242.4, or
found on the Department's Web site at
www.njstormwater.org.
§ 140-242.1 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-242.1
139:511
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
actors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 140-242.2, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to postconstruction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the "urban redevelopment area," or to
projects subject to § 140-242.1F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 C.F.R.
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
§ 140-242.1 WALL CODE § 140-242.1
139:512
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surface ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 140-242.2, complete one of
the following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten- and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten- and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten- and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%
§ 140-242.1 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-242.1
139:513
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the postconstruction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to
be constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to
postconstruction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with § 140-242.1F above shall only
be applied if the increased volume of stormwater runoff
could increase flood damages below the point of
discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development in § 140-241 shall be submitted to
the appropriate soil conservation district for review and approval in
accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable soil conservation district guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
postconstruction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater
runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the developed site,
expressed as an annual average. Stormwater management
measures shall only be required for water quality control if an
additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being proposed on a
development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to
any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric
effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in
a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of
rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of rain from the water quality design
storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of
runoff may take into account the implementation of nonstructural
and structural stormwater management measures.
§ 140-242.1 WALL CODE § 140-242.1
139:514
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 140-242.4, or found on the Department's
Web site at www.nistormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other
sources of technical guidance are listed in § 140-242.4. TSS
reduction shall be calculated based on the removal rates for the
BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative removal rates and methods of
calculating removal rates may be used if the design engineer
provides documentation demonstrating the capability of these
alternative rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any
approved alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate
shall be provided to the Department at the following address:
Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize
the following formula to calculate TSS reduction: [Amended
4-8-2009 by Ord. No. 9-2009]
R = A + B - (AXB)/100
Where:
§ 140-242.1 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-242.1
139:515
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90
Extended detention basin 40-60
Infiltration structure 80
Manufactured treatment device See § 140-242.3C
Sand filter 80
Vegetative filter strip 60-80
Wet pond 50-90
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in § 140-242.1F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 140-242.4.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
county soil surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
§ 140-242.1 WALL CODE § 140-242.1
139:516
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area shall only be allowed where
previous development or disturbance has occurred (for
example, active agricultural use, parking area or
maintained lawn area). The encroachment shall only be
allowed where applicant demonstrates that the functional
value and overall condition of the special water resource
protection area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable. In no case shall the remaining special water
resource protection area be reduced to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the top of bank of the
waterway or center line of the waterway where the bank is
undefined. All encroachments proposed under this
subparagraph shall be subject to review and approval by
the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the standard for off-site stability in the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
standard for off-site stability in the Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
§ 140-242.1 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-242.1
139:517
§ 140-242.2. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS
postconstruction removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and soil conservation district
staff to identify necessary stabilization measures; and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to § 140-242.1G has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to
§ 140-242.1G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current
functional value and overall condition of the special water
resource protection area as defined in § 140-242.1G(8)(a)[1]
above. In no case shall a stream corridor protection plan allow
the reduction of the special water resource protection area to
less than 150 feet as measured perpendicular to the waterway
subject to this subsection.
(e) The provisions of § 140-242.1G(8) does not apply to the
construction of one individual single-family dwelling that is not
part of a larger development on a lot receiving preliminary or
final subdivision approval on or before February 2, 2004,
provided that the construction begins on or before February 2,
2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
§ 140-242.1 WALL CODE § 140-242.2
139:518
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 — Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds; or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at § 140-242.2A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at § 140-242.2A(1)(a). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing
condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design
engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the
site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover have
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the
time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the
presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the
land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover (if the land
use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and
conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
[Amended 4-8-2009 by Ord. No. 9-2009]
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
§ 140-242.2 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-242.2
139:519
§ 140-242.3. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following: The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A Method
for Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference, as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological Survey, 29
Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0427; (609)
984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 140-242.5.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosionresistant.
Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C.
5:21-7.3,7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 140-242.4.
§ 140-242.2 WALL CODE § 140-242.3
139:520
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established in § 140-242.1 of this article.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 140-242.1, provided the pollutant removal rates are verified by the
New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and certified by the
Department.
D. Pipe, catch basins, inlets and manholes shall conform to the following:
(1) Pipe size shall be dictated by design runoff and hydraulic capacity.
(2) Hydraulic capacity shall be determined by the Manning equation,
except, where appropriate, capacity shall be based on tailwater
analysis and one-year high tide.
(3) In general, no pipe size in the storm drainage system shall be less
than 15 inches in diameter. A twelve-inch diameter pipe will be
considered as a cross drain to a single inlet. [Amended 4-8-2009
by Ord. No. 9-2009]
(4) All discharge pipes shall terminate with a precast concrete or
corrugated metal end section or a cast-in-place concrete headwall
with or without wingwalls, as conditions require. In normal
circumstances, a cast-in-place concrete headwall is preferred. Use
of other types shall be justified by the designer and approved by the
Engineer.
(5) Pipe bedding shall be provided as specified in Design and
Construction of Sanitary and Storm Sewers, ASCE Manuals and
Reports on Engineering Practice No. 37, prepared by A Joint
Committee of the Society of Civil Engineers and the Water Pollution
Control Federation, New York, 1969.
(6) Inlets, catch basins and manholes shall be designed in accordance
with State Highway Department Standard Plans and Specifications.
(7) Inlet spacing shall be designed to limit gutter flow width to six feet
but shall not be more than 400 feet.
(8) Manhole spacing shall be increased with pipe size.
Pipe Size
(inches)
Manhole Spacing
(feet)
15 or less 500
18-36 600
§ 140-242.3 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-242.3
139:521
§ 140-242.4. Sources for technical guidance. [Amended 4-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 9-2009]
§ 140-242.5. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
Pipe Size
(inches)
Manhole Spacing
(feet)
42-60 700
60+ 700
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at § 140-242.4A(1) and § 140-242.4A(2)
below, which are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O.
Box 420, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures, such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey, promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the soil conservation districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each soil
conservation district may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306; and
(3) The soil conservation districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each soil conservation
district may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609)
292-5540.
§ 140-242.3 WALL CODE § 140-242.5
139:522
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin. The
provisions of this section are not intended to preempt more stringent
municipal or county safety requirements for new or existing stormwater
management basins. Municipal and county stormwater management
plans and ordinances may require existing stormwater management
basins to be retrofitted to meet one or more of the safety standards set
forth herein.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) The trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(e) The trash rack shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be designed
to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
§ 140-242.5 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-242.5
139:523
(3) For purposes of this subsection, escape provisions means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
Section § 140-242.5C, a freestanding outlet structure may be
exempted from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in
width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be
located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface.
See § 140-242.5D for an illustration of safety ledges in a
stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing
agency (municipality, county or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
§ 140-242.5 WALL CODE § 140-242.5
139:524
§ 140-242.6. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this article, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
plan below as part of the submission of the applicant's application
for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this article.
(3) The applicant shall submit five copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
the provisions of § 140-242.6C.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
§ 140-242.5 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-242.6
139:525
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth
in this article.
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet
or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map as
appropriate may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing
and distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of § 140-242 are
being met. The focus of this plan shall be to describe how the site is
being developed to meet the objective of controlling groundwater
recharge, stormwater quality and stormwater quantity problems at
the source by land management and source controls whenever
possible.
§ 140-242.6 WALL CODE § 140-242.6
139:526
§ 140-242.7. Maintenance and repair.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions for
the design storms specified in § 140-242.1.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 140-242.7.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this article may, in
consultation with the Municipal Engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in § 140-242.6 of this article when it can be
demonstrated that the information requested is impossible to
obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant to obtain and
its absence will not materially affect the review process.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 140-240 of this article
shall comply with the requirements set forth herein.
B. General maintenance.
§ 140-242.6 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-242.7
139:527
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 140-242.7B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on § 140-242.7B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, and trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 140-242.7B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 140-242.7B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 140-242.7B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon
§ 140-242.7 WALL CODE § 140-242.7
139:528
§ 140-242.8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of a provision of this article
shall be subject to the penalties outlined in Chapter 1, Article I, of the Code
of the Township of Wall.
§ 140-243. Stormwater details.
For stormwater details, see Schedule IV.58
§ 140-244. (Reserved)
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required above.
(9) The requirements of § 140-242.7B(4) through (7) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) For stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the Township of Wall, the developer shall post with the
Township funds which will defray the estimated costs of
maintenance of the facilities for a ten-year period. The Township's
Engineer shall calculate the maintenance cost. The estimated
maintenance cost contribution for the ten-year period shall be
deposited with the Township Clerk at the time other maintenance
guarantees are posted for the project or acceptance of the lot by
the municipality, whichever shall occur first.
(11) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal
Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Performance or maintenance guarantee. Nothing in this section shall
preclude the municipality in which the major development is located
from requiring the posting of a performance or maintenance guarantee
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
58.Editor's Note: Schedule IV is on file in the Land Use Office.
§ 140-242.7 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-245
139:529
§ 140-245. (Reserved)
§ 140-246. (Reserved)
§ 140-245 WALL CODE § 140-246
139:530
ARTICLE XXXIV
Other Utilities
§ 140-247. Connection to functioning energy and communications
systems required.
All development shall be properly connected with approved and functioning
energy and communications utility systems prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
§ 140-248. Underground wiring.
§ 140-249. Aboveground utilities.
A. All electric, telephone, television, and other communication facilities,
both main and service lines servicing new developments, shall be
provided by underground wiring within easements or dedicated public
right-of-way, installed in accordance with the prevailing standards and
practices of the utility or other companies providing such services.
B. Lots which abut existing easements or public rights-of-way where
overhead electric or telephone distribution supply lines and service
connections have hereto before been installed may be supplied with
electric and telephone service from those overhead lines, but the
service connections from the utilities' overhead lines shall be installed
underground. In the case of existing overhead utilities, should a road
widening, or an extension of service, or other such condition occur as a
result of the subdivision and necessitate the replacement or relocation
of such utilities, such replacement or relocation shall be underground.
A. Where overhead lines are permitted as the exception, the placement
and alignment of poles shall be designed to lessen the visual impact of
overhead lines as follows: Alignments and pole locations shall be
carefully routed to avoid locations along horizons; clearing swaths
through treed areas shall be avoided by selective cutting and a
staggered alignment; trees shall be planted in open areas and at key
locations to minimize the view of the poles and the alignments; and
alignments shall follow rear lot lines and other alignments.
B. Year-round screening of any utility apparatus appearing above the
surface of the ground, other than utility poles, shall be required.
§ 140-247 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-249
139:531

ARTICLE XXXV
Outdoor Storage
§ 140-250. Screened area for storage of refuse.
A screened area or areas for storage of refuse shall be located and arranged
for ease of access and collection and shall be constructed of a masonry
material similar to or compatible with the principal building.
§ 140-251. Recyclables.59
In order to ensure that future development is designed to accommodate the
recycling of solid waste, site plan, subdivision applications shall adhere to
the following:
A. Each major application for residential development shall include
provisions for the collection, disposition, and recycling of recyclable
materials. For major applications, each single-family unit or unit within
a two-family dwelling should provide at least 12 square feet of floor
area conveniently arranged and located as a holding area for a fourweek
accumulation of materials. Such an area may be within a laundry
room, basement or garage. Each multifamily unit or accessory dwelling
unit must provide at least three square feet of area conveniently
arranged and located to hold a one-week accumulation of recyclable
materials. Each multifamily complex must also provide bins in a
convenient location or locations in a common area as dropoffs for
storing recyclables until collection occurs. The holding area shall
provide for truck access and loading and shall be suitably screened
from view and setback from property lines.
B. Each application for a nonresidential use which utilizes 1,000 square
feet or more of land shall include provisions for the collection,
disposition and recycling of recyclable materials. Each application shall
quantify the amount of recyclable material it will generate as part of its
weekly operation including newspapers, white high-grade paper, glass,
aluminum, cardboard, tin and bimetal cans. The application shall
provide a storage area sized to contain a one-week accumulation week
of recyclable material. The storage area shall be designed for truck
access for pickup of materials and be suitably screened from view if
located outside a building.
59.Editor's Note: See Ch. 191, Solid Waste, Art. II, Recycling.
§ 140-250 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-251
139:533

ARTICLE XXXVI
Building Design Standards
§ 140-252. Regulations.
A. In all developments, the following regulations shall apply:
(1) Layout and orientation.
(a) All buildings shall be located with proper consideration of their
orientation and relationship to other buildings, both existing
and proposed in terms of light, air and usable open space,
access to public right-of-way and off-street parking; height and
bulk; drainage and existing topography; trees and vegetation;
and other natural features and land forms.
(b) Development shall be designed to provide protection of the
development from potentially adverse surrounding influence,
and protection of surrounding areas from potentially adverse
influence within the development.
(c) Groups of related buildings shall be designed to present a
harmonious appearance in terms of architectural style and
exterior materials.
(d) New buildings should strengthen particular design features of
the area by, for example, framing views, enclosing open space,
or continuing particular design features or statements. The
height and bulk of new buildings should be compatible with the
planned scale of surrounding development.
(e) Elevators, vestibules and corridors of new buildings shall be
designed so as to accommodate the gurneys, used by the
Township Emergency Services Department and the Township's
volunteer first-aid squads. [Added 2-9-2000 by Ord. No.
2-2000]
(f) New building construction shall be required to incorporate any
communications equipment necessary to insure the proper
operation of the mobile communications equipment utilized by
the Police Department, such as satellite receivers or frequency
enhancers, as determined by the Chief of Police or his
designate. [Added 2-9-2000 by Ord. No. 2-2000]
(2) Exterior appearance.
(a) All openings in the wall of a building such as windows and
doors should relate to each other on each elevation, vertically
and horizontally, in a clearly defined order; and should take
into account orientation to the sun for sun-shading and
consideration of the efficiencies of heat loss and gain through
such openings.
§ 140-252 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-252
139:535
(b) All major entrances to buildings shall be properly identified
with architectural elements such as recessed entranceways,
projected overhangs, and porticoes.
(c) Window and door openings shall include appropriate trim and
either recesses or overhangs to promote a harmonious variety
of light and shade on the facade of the building.
(d) Appurtenances such as, but not limited to, tanks, condenser
units and other equipment shall be fully screened from view.
(e) All roof planes or caps meeting the exterior facade shall have
overhangs or appropriate cornice and trim details.
(f) Flat roof canopies on metal pipe columns shall not be used on
commercial buildings.
(3) Exterior treatment.
(a) Buildings shall be designed to be attractive from all vantage
points, including fences, storage areas and rear entrances.
(b) Accessory buildings should be architecturally treated in the
same manner as principal buildings.
(c) Colors, materials and finishes shall be coordinated in all
exterior elevations of buildings to achieve continuity of
expression. All roof and wall projections such as gutter, flues,
louvers, utility boxes, vents, grills, downspouts, exposed
flashing, overhead doors, shall be painted or installed with an
anodized or acrylic finish, in a color to match adjacent
surfaces.
(d) Exposed basement walls are not acceptable as an architectural
treatment. All exposed basement walls must be treated to
relate properly to the design of the building.
(e) Exterior materials shall include appropriate texture and trim to
prevent large undifferentiated facades of the same material.
(f) Metal-sided buildings. Metal siding shall not be permitted as
an exterior material on any principal or accessory structure in
any NB, HB, OB, OP or OR Zone, except on a barn on farm
properties pursuant to § 140-201D hereof. [Added 3-8-2006
by Ord. No. 4-2006]
B. Residential development design in multifamily developments. For all
residential developments other than detached single-family dwellings,
the following building design standards shall apply:
(1) Buildings shall be designed to avoid long straight, unbroken lines.
No principal building when viewed from any elevation shall be
greater than one hundred 175 feet in length. Buildings shall have
§ 140-252 WALL CODE § 140-252
139:536
no more than two dwelling units in a horizontal line without
setbacks or breaks in building elevations of at least six feet.
Attached single-family dwelling units and townhouses shall have
not less than four and no more than eight dwelling units in a
continuous building.
(2) The minimum distance between principal buildings shall be as
follows:
(a) Where neither of the facing walls has windows: 15 feet.
(b) Where only one of the facing walls has windows: 25 feet.
(c) Where both of the facing walls have windows: 45 feet.
(d) Courtyards. Courtyards bounded on three or more sides by
wings of the same building shall have a minimum court width
of two feet for each one foot in height of the tallest building or
building wing but not less than 60 feet in width.
(e) Garages and/or carports, when not attached to a principal
building, shall be located no closer than 25 feet to a facing wall
of a principal building containing windows, nor closer than 15
feet to a facing wall of a principal building which does not
contain windows.
C. Open space and recreation design standards.
D. Nonresidential development design.
(1) Pole barns. Pole barns shall not be permitted as a principal or
accessory structure in any NB, HB, OB, OP or OR Zone, except as a
barn on farm properties pursuant to § 140-201D hereof. [Added
3-8-2006 by Ord. No. 4-2006]
(2) OR-5 Zone, Ridgewood Road. Those properties located in the OR-5
Zone on Ridgewood Road shall comply with the following additional
design standards: [Added 7-26-2006 by Ord. No. 24-2006]
(a) As many parking spaces as practicable shall be located behind
the front building line.
(b) The entire area between the front building line and the front
property line shall be landscaped in such a manner that the
building and property is visually enhanced, the appearance of
the building is reduced in size and scale, and any parking or
storage areas to the side or behind the building are screened
from the public view. Berms may be used in conjunction with
landscaping to accomplish such enhancement.
(c) The entrance and exit access drives shall be combined in one
location, if possible, and the entrance and exit approaches
shall be separated by a decorative, landscaped island that shall
§ 140-252 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-252
139:537
be planted with year-round and seasonal plantings to enhance
the appearance of the property's frontage.
(d) The building and parking layout shall be such that there are no
loading docks on site.
(e) Building architecture.
[1] Primary elements of traditional American architectural
styles shall be utilized in building architecture to the
extent practicable, including Colonial, Georgian, Federal
and Victorian styles.
[2] Buildings shall feature decorative cornices, parapet walls
or traditional pitched roofs with a minimum slope of 8/12
and a maximum slope of 12/12, unless otherwise permitted
by this section. When buildings are greater than 10,000
square feet, and where a fully pitched roof throughout
would not be practical, a sloped fascia roof with a slope of
8/12 or greater shall be permitted in coordination with a
flat roof, provided that the appearance is that of a full roof.
The primary roofing materials shall be standing seam
metal or dimensional shingles.
[3] All buildings shall provide architectural elements such as
wall articulations and roofline variations. Box-like building
shapes that offer minimal articulation of the walls and
roofline shall be prohibited.
[4] Where nonresidential building facades exceed 80
horizontal feet in length, vertical divisions no greater than
40 feet shall be designed on all street-side building
facades, defined by wall projections featuring a
combination of piers, projecting bays, arcades or changes
in roof configuration, so as to appear to be multiple
structures.
[5] Facades shall be articulated with horizontal divisions to
reflect the traditional building elements of cap, wall and
base. The cap shall feature either pitched roofs or
articulated cornices and a change of color and material.
The wall should include a horizontal division for the top of
the ground story. The base traditionally includes a
watercourse line and is often a more durable material that
articulates how the mass of the building meets its grade.
These architectural divisions shall have sufficient reveal to
promote shadows on the facade of the building.
[6] Building facades facing streets shall contain between
twenty- and fifty-percent nonreflective glass. A significant
percentage of the remainder of the facades shall be
treated with stone, cultured stone, brick or brick veneer.
§ 140-252 WALL CODE § 140-252
139:538
The use of vinyl siding, dry-vit and/or stucco shall be
limited.
[7] Primary building materials shall feature earth-tone colors.
For the purposes of this chapter, earth-tone colors are
defined as colors that draw from a palette of muted or
weathered colors in an emulation of the predominant
natural coloration of brown and gray soils, tree bark, leafy
vegetation and rocks. The preferred earth tones on
buildings shall be tans, beiges, sands, browns, warm
grays, and soft greens. In addition, creams, pale peach,
pale yellows, soft blues, cool grays, white, off-whites, and
soft red colors are also acceptable. Accent colors may be
used, provided that they appear as secondary visual
elements to the primary materials. Bold, disjointed or
recognizable color combinations or color patterns that
form a corporate or commercial identity or logo shall be
considered a sign for the purposes of this section and shall
be prohibited. [Amended 11-25-2014 by Ord. No.
25-2014]
(f) The maximum size of any one building shall be 20,000 square
feet.
(g) Freestanding site identification signs shall be no higher than
seven feet in height and no larger than 50 square feet in area.
Acceptable sign materials include painted, routed or
sandblasted wood, and simulated wood when routed or
sandblasted and painted, and masonry such as natural stone or
brick. Acceptable support materials for freestanding signs
include but are not limited to brick, natural stone and painted
wood.
(h) Grading.
[1] The proposed grading shall respect and complement the
existing topographic features of Wall Township, and shall
protect natural resources and environmentally sensitive
areas. Slopes shall be no greater than 3:1, except slopes
along a right-of-way, which shall be no steeper than a ratio
of 5:1 (horizontal to vertical). If a proposed slope exceeds
10 feet in elevation change, the slope should undulate in
conformity with that of existing naturally occurring slopes.
[2] If retaining walls are proposed, no single wall may exceed
six feet in height. Tiered walls may be proposed, provided
that no single tier exceeds five feet, and no more than
three tiers may be proposed, and where a minimum of 10
feet horizontal is provided between tiers.
§ 140-252 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-252
139:539
[3] Retaining walls shall be constructed of durable masonry
materials that complement the site design and building
architecture, such as brick and natural fieldstone facing.
Timber retaining walls shall not be permitted.
(i) Lighting.
[1] All outdoor lighting shall be aimed, located, designed,
fitted and maintained so as not to present a disabling glare
hazard to drivers or a nuisance to neighboring properties.
[2] Directional fixtures such as floodlights and spotlights shall
not be permitted.
[3] Glare shall be controlled through the use of sharp cutoff
fixtures, the appropriate application of mounting height,
wattage, aiming, fixture placement, and fixture design,
etc. and the addition of shields and baffles as necessary.
[4] Lighting shall be controlled by automatic switching
devices, such as timers, motion detectors, and/or
photocells, to extinguish potentially offending,
nonessential light sources overnight, to minimize glare
and sky-lighting consequences.
[5] Externally illuminated signs shall be lighted by fixtures
mounted at the top of the sign, wherever feasible, and
aimed downward, rather than by fixtures mounted at the
bottom of the sign and aimed up.
[6] Freestanding signs shall not be internally illuminated.
§ 140-252 WALL CODE § 140-252
139:540
ARTICLE XXXVII
Landscaping Design Standards
§ 140-253. Landscaping requirements.
Landscaping shall be provided as part of site plan and subdivision design.
It shall be designed as an overall pattern throughout the site, integrating
the various elements of site design, preserving and enhancing the particular
identity of the site, and creating a pleasing site character. Landscaping may
include plant materials such as trees, shrubs, ground cover, perennials and
annuals, and other materials such as rocks, water, sculpture, art, walls,
fences, and building and paving materials.
§ 140-254. Site protection.
Natural features such as lakes, rocks, outcrops, streams, topsoil, trees,
shrubs and understory shall be preserved and incorporated into the
landscaping and site design to the maximum extent feasible. Attention in
design shall be given to enhancement of views, vistas, panoramas and local
points. In subdivision and site design, the following areas shall be preserved
as undeveloped open space:
§ 140-255. Topsoil.60
A. Wetlands (as defined in Section 404, Federal Water Pollution Control
Act Amendments of 1972 and delineated on wetlands maps prepared by
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and/or N.J.A.C. 7:7A, the New Jersey
Freshwater Protection Act Rules, field verified by an on-site inspection).
B. Significant trees, (defined as the largest known individual trees of each
species in New Jersey as listed by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJDEP) Bureau of Forestry; large trees
approaching the diameter of the known largest tree; and/or species that
are rare to the area or of particular horticultural or landscape value).
C. Lands identified as floodways on current Township Flood Insurance
Rate Maps.
D. Steep slopes (in excess of 15% as measured over a ten-foot interval
unless appropriate engineering measures concerning slope stability,
erosion, and resident safety are taken).
E. Habitats of endangered wildlife (as identified on federal or state lists);
and historically significant structures and sites (as listed on the Federal
or New Jersey List of Historic Places or the Wall Township Master Plan).
A. Topsoil preservation. Topsoil moved during the course of construction
shall be redistributed on all regraded surfaces. At least four inches of
even cover to all disturbed areas of the development and shall be
stabilized by seeding or planting.
60.Editor's Note: See Ch. 188, Soil Removal.
§ 140-253 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-255
139:541
§ 140-256. Slopes.
B. Topsoil protection. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as
spoil. Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be
redistributed so as to provide nearly equal amounts to all areas of the
subdivision and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting on all slopes
up to 10% as shown on the final grading plan. All slopes and minor
drainage swales over 10% shall be sodded. All major drainage swales
shall be sodded or stabilized by fiber mats. Before construction of the
development has begun, selected samples of the existing topsoil at
various locations of the site shall be taken as directed by the Township
Engineer and shall be sent to Rutgers University for analysis and
classification. During the course of construction as lots are finished as
to grading, seeding, etc., selected samples shall again be taken as
directed by the Township Engineer and sent to Rutgers University for
analysis, classification and comparison with the original sample of the
general area to determine whether topsoil has been properly preserved
and redistributed.
A. Slope plantings. Landscaping of the area of all cuts and fills and/or
terraces shall be sufficient to prevent erosion, and all roadway slopes
steeper than one-foot vertically to three feet horizontally shall be
planted with ground covers appropriate for the purpose and soil
conditions, water availability, and environment.
B. Changes in grade levels. Changes of grade levels may be achieved by
any combination of the following methods, and minimum standards
shall be found in the Township construction specifications.
C. Raised flower beds shall be constructed with timber, railroad ties, brick,
brick veneer, precast stone, rock, stone or similar materials. Precast
planters, as well as planters constructed on site, shall have properly
designed drainage or weeping holes and shall incorporate proper
footings where required.
D. Terracing shall be designed to prevent soil erosion.
(1) Turf by grade levels of soil with turf providing grade differential.
Installation of underground sprinkling systems or alternate
systems may be required to prevent soil erosion and assure
maximum maintenance.
(2) Raised terrace of flagstone, brick, precast stone, precast concrete,
cobblestone or installed concrete slab.
(3) Wood decking over footing.
(4) Below-grade terracing with low retaining walls.
(5) Retaining walls with properly installed weeping and drainage
holes, on proper footings, with approved anchorage and supports.
Materials may be of, but not limited to timber, railroad ties, brick,
§ 140-255 WALL CODE § 140-256
139:542
§ 140-257. Stream corridors.
cinder block, brick veneer, rock, stone, precast stone, precast
concrete with veneered surfaces or any similar materials approved
by the Township Engineer.
(6) Other techniques.
(a) Rock gardens, reflecting pools, artificially cycled fountains,
waterfalls, formal and/or informal sunken gardens.
(b) Landscaped swales and depressed walkways of tan bark, wood
chips, pine needles, pebbles or sand.
(c) Incorporation of berms. Mounding of soil on-site, either natural
or man-made, may be used to achieve changes of grade,
provided it is properly landscaped with turf or ground cover.
(d) Ravine slopes, drainage and swale slopes, steep stream banks
properly landscaped with permanent ground cover, or drywall
rock or similar material or rock gardening so as to prevent soil
erosion and promote plant growth. May be terraced or slope
grade.
A. The objective of landscaping of stream valleys and other water features
is to protect adjacent, upstream and downstream, private and public
lands from direct and substantial increased flood damage from:
(1) Increased flood heights and velocities due to obstructions in
waterways.
(2) Increased siltation caused by erosion.
(3) Increased runoff.
(4) Incompatible land uses adjacent to brooks or springs, streams,
creeks or estuaries of both tidal and fresh water.
B. All streams, estuaries, creeks, brooks, tributaries and floodplains
(hereinafter referred to as streams) are subject to the following:
(1) All streams shall be properly de-snagged of all extraneous debris,
dead and decaying vegetation.
(2) All banks shall be protected from erosion caused by runoff and
flooding or win damage. Protection against erosion may be
achieved, but not limited to, the use of permanent ground cover,
vegetation, drywall construction or any approved combination of
the same. The encouragement of plants, ferns and shading
vegetation is desired.
(3) A conservation area of a minimum of 50 feet in depth from the
center line of said stream shall be clear of all extraneous debris,
dead and decaying vegetation. This area may incorporate
§ 140-256 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-257
139:543
§ 140-258. Woodlands and trees.
§ 140-259. Landscape plan.
A landscape plan prepared by a certified landscape architect shall be
submitted with each subdivision or site plan application, unless an
exception is granted pursuant to this chapter. The plan shall identify
existing and proposed trees, shrubs, ground cover, natural features and
other landscaping elements. The plan should show where they are or will
be located and planting and/or construction details. When existing natural
growth is proposed to remain, applicant shall include in the plans proposed
methods to protect existing trees and growth during and after construction.
§ 140-260. Additional landscaping.
appropriate approved selective thinning, the result of which will
encourage the healthy woodland growth of existing trees and
shrubs which enhances the degree of recharge. No removal of
trees, shrubs, etc., on the list of New Jersey protected trees will be
permitted. Landscaping of this buffer zone is permitted in keeping
with a natural setting. The type and amount of vegetation cover
shall encourage the stabilization of the soil and prevent erosion and
increased runoff.
A. Protection of existing plantings. Maximum effort should be made to
save fine specimens (because of size or relative rarity). No material or
temporary soil deposits shall be placed within four feet of shrubs or 10
feet of trees designated to be retained on the preliminary and/or final
plat. Protective barriers or tree wells shall be installed around each
plant and/or group of plants that are to remain on the site. Barriers
shall not be supported by the plants they are protecting, but shall be
self-supporting. They shall be a minimum of four feet high and
constructed of a durable material that will last until construction is
completed. Snow fences and silt fences are examples of acceptable
barriers.
B. Removal of debris. All stumps and other tree parts, litter, brush, weeds,
excess or scrap building materials, or other debris shall be removed
from the site and disposed of in accordance with the law. No tree
stumps, portions of tree trunks or limbs shall be buried anywhere in the
development. All dead or dying trees, standing or fallen, shall be
removed from the site. If trees and limbs are reduced to chips, they
may, subject to approval of the Township Engineer, be used as mulch in
landscaped areas.
C. Existing vegetation. In all residential developments, it shall be required
to preserve as much of the existing vegetation as possible. All
applicable provisions of this chapter shall be stringently adhered to.
The preservation of existing healthy trees along roadways may reduce
the requirements for the planting of additional trees.
§ 140-257 WALL CODE § 140-260
139:544
§ 140-261. Trees.
A. In residential developments, besides the screening and trees required,
additional plantings or landscaping elements shall be required
throughout the subdivision where necessary for climate control,
privacy, or for aesthetic reasons in accordance with a planting plan
approved by the municipal agency.
B. In nonresidential developments, all areas of the site not occupied by
building and required improvements shall be landscaped by the
planting of grass or other ground cover, shrubs, and trees as part of a
site plan approved by the Planning Board.
C. The periphery of all buildings and the yard areas, not covered by
parking and not subject to other special landscaping requirements
contained herein, shall be suitably landscaped. Such landscaping shall
employ low maintenance, hardy shrubs, hedges, ground covers and
trees as well as gravel, mulches, decorative concrete and brick. At a
minimum, the equivalent of at least two shrubs and one shade or
ornamental tree of two inches and 2 1/2 inches caliper or greater shall
be provided for each 1,500 square feet of area of a residential
development not covered by buildings or improvements and for each
1,000 square feet of nonresidential development. Existing healthy
specimen trees may be included in satisfying these requirements. These
plantings shall be in addition to any other landscaping requirements
including landscaping of off-street parking areas and buffer areas.
D. On slopes, the landscape plan shall recommend plantings that prevent
erosion. Along major roads, the plantings should buffer from noise and
lights; on north slopes, it should serve as a wind screen; and to the
south, the landscaping should provide shade from the hot summer sun.
E. The overall landscaping plan should "break up" long buildings and
screen off parking, service and utility areas. The plan should provide for
a variety of different species to protect against disease attacking all the
trees. A variety should be selected with consideration for various
seasons and of different colors, textures, shapes, blossoms and foliage.
F. The plan should be particularly sensitive to local soil conditions, lack of
or overabundance of water, topography and climatological factors.
A. All developments shall be provided with trees planted at the following
intervals:
Tree Size
(in feet)
Planting Interval
(in feet)
Large trees (40+) 50
Medium-sized trees (30 - 40) 40
Small trees (to 30) 30
§ 140-260 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-261
139:545
§ 140-262. Parking area design criteria.
All parking lots of 20 or more spaces for both residential and nonresidential
developments to be constructed, enlarged or reconstructed shall conform to
the following design standards:
B. The trees shall be planted so as not to interfere with utilities, roadways,
sidewalks, sight easements, or lights.
A. All parking lot landscaping shall be of such quality as to improve and
enhance the site and its surrounding areas. Appropriate places for
landscaping include the raised walkways or sidewalk areas, at the end
of bays, and in specific planting islands established throughout the lots.
B. The primary landscaping materials used in parking lots shall be trees
which provide shade or are capable or providing shade at maturity.
Shrubbery, hedges and other planting material may be used to
complement the tree landscaping but shall not be the sole contribution
to the landscaping. Effective use of earth berms and existing
topography is also encouraged as a component of the landscape plan.
C. The landscaping and planting areas shall be reasonably dispersed
throughout the parking lots. Trees should be a mixture of flowering,
decorative, evergreen and deciduous. Trees in parking areas should be
clumped at critical corners or areas to break up the mass of cars
apparent to the eye. They should also be located with care so as not to
obstruct the vision of the driver.
D. The interior dimensions of any planting area or planting median shall
be sufficient to protect the landscaping materials planted therein and to
insure proper growth.
E. In those instances where plant material exists on a parking lot site prior
to its development, such landscape material may be used if approved as
meeting the requirements of this chapter.
F. Peripheral coverage.
(1) Peripheral landscaping shall be required along any side of a
parking lot of 20 or more spaces that abuts adjoining property that
is not a right-of-way.
(2) A landscaping strip at least five feet in width shall be located
between the parking area and the abutting property lines.
(3) One tree for each 50 linear feet shall be planted in the landscaping
strip.
(4) In addition to the required trees, a wall, hedge or other durable
landscape barrier shall be planted or installed. The height of any
such hedge shall be no less than three feet and no more than seven
feet. The height of any wall or other durable landscape barrier shall
be no less than five feet and no more than seven feet.
§ 140-261 WALL CODE § 140-262
139:546
(5) One shrub or vine for each 10 feet of nonliving durable barrier shall
be planted between the parking lot and the barrier, and the barrier
and the abutting property line.
G. Roadway coverage.
(1) Roadway landscaping shall be required along any side of a parking
lot of 20 or more spaces that abuts any roadway.
(2) A landscaping strip at least 10 feet in depth shall be located
between the abutting right-of-way and the parking lot.
(3) One tree shall be planted for each 40 linear feet of the landscaping
strip.
(4) A hedge wall or other durable landscape barrier of at least 2 1/2
feet shall extend the entire length of the landscaping strip. The first
25 feet on both sides of any accessory driveway pavement is
excluded from this requirement.
(5) One shrub or vine for each 10 feet of nonliving durable barrier shall
be planted between the barrier and the roadway and between the
barrier and the parking lot.
H. Interior requirements.
(1) Not less than 10% of the interior of any parking lot shall be
landscaped with plant material. The percentage of landscaped area
shall be based upon the area encompassed by the parking stalls
and the adjacent access aisle. Such landscaping is separate and
apart from the peripheral and roadway coverage requirements.
(2) The landscaping should be located in protected areas, such as
along walkways, in center islands, at the end of bays, or in
diamonds between parking stalls.
(3) All landscaping in parking areas is exclusive of other planting
requirements.
(4) Shade trees shall be planted 70 feet on center as part of the
landscape requirement in all parking lots.
(5) Wherever planted material is likely to interfere with vehicular
parking, island width shall be increased by two feet and that area
covered with mulch.
(6) Planting beds shall have a minimum width of five feet.
I. Buffering and screening. Buffering shall be required when
topographical or other barriers do not provide reasonable screening
there is a need to shield the site from adjacent properties and to
minimize adverse impacts such as incompatible land uses, noise,
glaring light, and traffic. Buffering shall provide a year-round visual
screen in order to minimize adverse impacts from a site on the adjacent
§ 140-262 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-262
139:547
§ 140-263. Prohibited shade trees.
The following shade trees are prohibited for use in all development
proposals in the Township:
property or from adjacent areas. It may consist of fencing, evergreens,
berms, rocks, boulders, mounds, or combinations to achieve the stated
objectives. Arrangement of planting in buffers shall provide maximum
protection to adjacent properties and avoid damage to existing plant
material. Possible arrangements include planting in parallel,
serpentine, or broken rows.
(1) In small-lot developments, when building design and siding do not
provide privacy, landscaping, fences, or walls shall be provided to
ensure privacy and screen dwelling units.
(2) All aboveground utility installations including but not limited to
generators, convertors, fiber optic houses and fuel storage tanks
that are not roof-mounted shall be thoroughly screened by a
continuous evergreen buffer of a sufficient height and depth so as
to effectively shield views of the installation year round. Utility
installations shall also comply with the performance standards on
noise established in this chapter. [Amended 2-13-2002 by Ord.
No. 3-2002]
A. Box elder (Acer negundo).
B. Sycamore maple (Acer pseudpiatanus).
C. Silver maple (Acer saccaharinum).
D. Horse chestnut (Aesculus hipporastanum).
E. Hickory (Carya).
F. Catalpa (Catalpa).
G. Modesta ash (Fraxinum modesta).
H. Honey locust (Gleditsia).
I. Walnut (Jugians).
J. Mulberry (Morus).
K. Poplar (Populus).
L. Common cherry tree (Prunus serotina).
M. Black locust (Robinia).
N. Willow (Salix).
O. Elm (Ulmus).
§ 140-262 WALL CODE § 140-264
139:548
§ 140-264. Walls and fences.
Walls and fences may be erected where required for privacy, screening,
separation, security, or to serve other necessary functions.
§ 140-265. Furnishings and appurtenances.
Street furniture such as trash receptacles, benches, and phone booths shall
be provided in accordance with the functional needs of the development.
A. Design and materials shall be functional, they shall complement the
character of the site and type of building, and they shall be suited to the
nature of the project.
B. No fence or wall shall be so constructed or installed so as to constitute a
hazard to traffic or safety.
A. Street furniture elements shall be compatible in form, material, and
finish. Style shall be coordinated with that of the existing or proposed
site architecture.
B. Selection of street furniture shall consider durability, maintenance, and
long-term cost.
§ 140-264 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-265
139:549

ARTICLE XXXVIII
Lighting
§ 140-266. Adequate lighting required.
Adequate lighting shall be provided to ensure safe movement of persons and
vehicles and for security purposes.
§ 140-267. Location of lighting.
Lighting shall be located along roadways, in parking areas, at intersections
and where various types of circulation systems merge, intersect, or split.
Stairways and sloping or rising paths shall be illuminated, along with
building entrances and exits.
§ 140-268. Installation of illumination fixtures.
A. Roadway lighting shall be provided in accordance with a plan designed
by the utility company, or using as a guideline the standards set forth by
IES Lighting Handbook.
B. Parking lots should be given a fairly uniform lighting pattern with a
design average of at least 1.0 footcandles throughout the lot. Standards
upon which lights are placed should be spaced at a distance
approximately equal to four times their height.
C. Intersecting, converging and diverging roadway areas at grade require
higher illumination. The illumination in these areas should be at least
equal to the sum of the illumination values provided on the roadways
which form the intersection.
D. The lowest footcandle value at any point on the pavement should not be
less than 1/3 the average value. The only exception to the requirement
applies to residential roadways, where the lowest footcandle value at
any point may be as low as 1/6 the average value.
E. Spotlights or other types of artificial lighting used to illuminate signs or
building faces shall not emit beams of light that extend beyond the
vertical plane of the sign or building face that they illuminate and shall
not be located in such a manner as to cause the beams of light to be
reflected upon any adjoining property, public street or vehicular
circulation area.
F. The maximum intensity of illumination permitted on roadways and
walkways is as follows:61
A. Illumination fixtures shall be arranged and installed to minimize glare
on and into dwellings. All fixtures except incandescent fixtures of less
than 100 watts shall conform with the following:
61.Editor's Note: Exhibit 500-10, Illumination Guidelines, is on file in the Land Use Office.
§ 140-266 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-268
139:551
(1) Directional lights shall be arranged so that the illumination source
is not visible from any dwelling.
(2) Fixtures should be shielded to restrict the maximum apex angle at
the core illumination to 150º.
(3) Lights should not be located on buildings and aimed outward but
should point toward the structures.
(4) Pathways, sidewalks and trails should be lit using low or
mushroom-type standards. Any poles should be less than 12 feet
high.
B. Pole-mounted lighting for roadways and parking areas should conform
with the following:
(1) The maximum height should be in scale with the surroundings and
should not exceed the maximum building height permitted.
(2) The standards and style of light should be consistent with the type
and style of the architecture of the buildings.
§ 140-268 WALL CODE § 140-268
139:552
ARTICLE XXXIX
Signs
§ 140-269. Adequate signage required.
Adequate signage shall be provided to ensure safe and convenient
movement of persons and vehicles.
§ 140-270. Design and placement of traffic signs.
Design and placement of traffic signs shall follow the requirements
specified in Manuals on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways, published by the U.S. Department of Transportation and adopted
by the N.J. Department of Transportation.
§ 140-271. Street name signs.
At least two street name signs shall be placed at each four-way intersection
and one at each "T" intersection. Signs shall be installed under light
standards and free of visual obstruction. The design of street name signs
should be consistent, of a style appropriate to the community, and of a
uniform size and color.
§ 140-272. Design of signs.
Signs shall be designed so as to be aesthetically pleasing, harmonious with
other signs on the site, and located so as to achieve their purpose without
constituting hazards to vehicles and pedestrians.
§ 140-269 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-272
139:553

ARTICLE XL
Improvement Standards and Construction Specifications
§ 140-273. Installation of improvements.
All improvements shall be installed in accordance with the standards and
specifications prescribed as follows. Should improvements be made for
which standards are not provided herein, the developer shall submit
detailed designs and supporting documentation for approval by the
Township Engineer prior to construction.
§ 140-274. Circulation system.
All circulation system improvements shall conform with the Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction of the New Jersey
Department of Transportation (latest edition) including all addenda and
the Standard Construction Details of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation as modified, supplemented, amended or superseded by the
requirements of this chapter as shall be incorporated on the approved plat
or plan.
A. Roadway pavement. Pavement design for local and collector roadways
and parking areas shall adhere to the specifications for their full paved
area as shown on Exhibit 11.62
B. Curbs.
(1) The standard curb section used shall be 20 feet in length. All
concrete used for curbs shall be prepared in accordance with the
requirements by class concrete of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation, Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction (latest edition). The twenty-eight-day compressive
strength of the concrete used shall be not less than the following:
Type of Concrete
Average Strength
(pounds per square inch)
Class P 6,500
Class A 5,500
Class B, B-1 5,000
Class C, C-1 4,500
(2) Curbs and/or combination curbs and gutters shall be constructed of
Class B concrete, air-entrained (5,000 psi).
(3) Where drainage inlets are constructed, but curbs are not required,
curbing must be provided at least 10 feet on each side of the inlet,
set back one foot from the extension of the pavement edge.
62.Editor's Note: Exhibit 11 is on file in the Land Use Office.
§ 140-273 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-274
139:555
§ 140-275. Utilities.
(4) Open joints shall be provided every 10 feet. One-half-inch
bituminous expansion joints shall be provided every 20 feet.
C. Bikeways. Gradients of bikepaths should generally not exceed a grade
of 5%, except for short distances.
D. Sidewalks.
(1) Sidewalks shall be four inches thick except at points of vehicular
crossing where they shall be at least six inches thick. At vehicular
crossings, sidewalks shall be reinforced with welded wire fabric
mesh or an equivalent.
(2) Concrete sidewalks shall be Class C concrete, having a twentyeight-
day compressive strength of 4,500 psi. Other paving
materials may be permitted depending on the design of the
development.
A. Water supply. Systems shall comply with all applicable public
community water supply company, Township of Wall, NJDEP, and
AWWA, with the strictest standards governing.
B. Fire hydrants.
(1) Size type, and installation of hydrants shall be in accordance with
local practice, or shall conform to the American Water Works
Association Standard for Dry Barrel Fire Hydrants (AWWA C-502).
Hydrants shall have at least three outlets; one outlet shall be a
pumper outlet and other outlets shall be at least two-and-one-halfinch
nominal size. Roadway main connections should be not less
than six inches in diameter. Hose threads on outlets shall conform
to National Standard Dimensions. A valve shall be provided on
connections between hydrants and roadway mains. All pipe,
fittings, and appurtenances supplying fire hydrants shall be AWWA
or ASTM approved.
(2) All fire hydrants shall conform to the color-code system as follows:
(a) Class A (1,000 gpm or greater and water mains of 10 and
greater): green caps and bonnets.
(b) Class B (greater than 500 gpm but less than 1,000 gpm and
water mains of at least eight but less than 10): orange caps and
bonnets.
(c) Class C (500 gpm or less and water mains of at least six but
less than eight): yellow caps and bonnets.
(d) Barrels: All fire hydrant barrels shall be painted red.
§ 140-274 WALL CODE § 140-275
139:556
(e) Disabled hydrants: All disabled fire hydrants shall be painted
black.
C. Sanitary sewers: system design and placement.
D. Stormwater facilities. Bicycle-safe drainage grates shall be used in the
construction of all residential roadways.
E. Stormwater.
(1) Stormwater management: system design - pipe capacity, materials
and placement.
(a) Materials used in the construction of storm sewers shall be
constructed of reinforced concrete, ductile iron, corrugated
aluminum, or corrugated steel. In normal circumstances,
reinforced concrete pipe is preferred. Use of other types shall
be justified by the designer and approved by the Engineer.
Specifications referred to, such as ASA, ASTM, AWWA, etc.,
should be the latest revision.
(b) Reinforced concrete pipe:
[1] Circular reinforced concrete pipe and fittings shall meet
the requirements of ASTM C-76.
[2] Elliptical reinforced concrete pipe shall meet the
requirements of ASTM C-507.
[3] Joint design and joint material for circular pipe shall
conform to ASTM C-443.
[4] Joints for elliptical pipe shall be bell and spigot or tongue
and groove sealed with butyl, rubber tape, or external
sealing bands conforming to ASTM C-877.
[5] All pipe shall be Class II unless a stronger pipe (i.e., higher
class) is indicated to be necessary.
[6] The minimum depth of cover over the concrete pipe shall
be as designated by the American Concrete Pipe
Association, as follows:
Pipe
Diameter
(inches)
ASTM
Class
Pipe
Minimum
Cover
(surface to top
of pipe)
(inches)
Pipe
Diameter
(inches)
ASTM
Class
Pipe
Minimum
Cover
(surface to top
of pipe)
(inches)
III 17 III 15
12 IV 12 24 IV 6
V 7 V 6
§ 140-275 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-275
139:557
Pipe
Diameter
(inches)
ASTM
Class
Pipe
Minimum
Cover
(surface to top
of pipe)
(inches)
Pipe
Diameter
(inches)
ASTM
Class
Pipe
Minimum
Cover
(surface to top
of pipe)
(inches)
III 16 III 10
15 IV 11 30 IV 6
V 7 V 6
III 16 36 III 6
18 IV 10 and IV 6
V 6 above
(c) Ductile iron pipe shall be centrifugally cast in metal or sandlined
molds to ANSI A21.51-1976 (AWWA C151-76). The joints
shall conform to AWWA C111. Pipe shall be furnished with
flanges where connections to flange fittings are required. Pipe
should be Class 50 (minimum). The outside of the pipe should
be coated with a uniform thickness of hot applied coal tar
coating and the inside lined cement in accordance with AWWA
C104. Ductile iron pipe shall be installed with Class C,
Ordinary Bedding.
(d) Corrugated aluminum pipe. Within the public right-of-way and
where severe topographic conditions or the desire to minimize
the destruction of trees and vegetation exists, corrugated
aluminum pipe, pipe arch or helical corrugated pipe may be
used. The material used shall comply with the Standard
Specifications for Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Culvert and
Under Drains AASHTO designation M196 or the Standard
Specification for Aluminum Alloy Helical Pipe AASHTO
designation M-211. The minimum thickness of the aluminum
pipe to be used shall be:
[1] Less than 24 inches in diameter or equivalent: 0.75-inch
(14-gauge);
[2] Twenty-four inches in diameter and less than 48 inches in
diameter or equivalent: 0.105-inch (12-gauge);
[3] Forty-eight inches but less than 72 inches in diameter or
equivalent: 0.135-inch (10-gauge); and
[4] Seventy-two inches in diameter or equivalent and larger:
0.164-inch (eight-gauge).
(e) Corrugated steel pipe may be used in place of corrugated
aluminum and shall meet the requirements of AASHTO
Specification M-36. Coupling bands and special sections shall
§ 140-275 WALL CODE § 140-275
139:558
§ 140-276. Outdoor storage.
also conform to AASHTO M-36. All corrugated steel pipe shall
be bituminous coated in accordance with AASHTO M-190,
Type A minimum.
(2) Stormwater management: system design inlets - catch basins, and
manholes.
(a) Manholes shall be precast concrete, brick or concrete block
coated with two coats of portland cement mortar.
(b) If precast manhole barrels and cones are used, they shall
conform to ASTM Specification C-473 with round rubber
gasket joints, conforming to ASTM Specification C-923.
Maximum absorption shall be 8% in accordance with ASTM
Specification C-478, Method A.
(c) If precast manholes are utilized, the top riser section shall
terminate less than one foot below the finished grade and the
manhole cover shall be flush with the finished grade.
(d) Manhole frames and covers shall be of cast iron conforming to
ASTM Specification A48 Class 30 and be suitable for H-20
loading capacity. All manhole covers in rights-of-way or in
remote areas shall be provided with a locking device. The
letters "Year 20____." and the words "WALL STORM SEWER"
shall be cast integrally in the cover.
(3) Stormwater management: detention and retention facilities.
(4) Detention components: principal outlets.
(5) Detention components: emergency spillways.
(6) Detention components: dams and embankments.
(a) All earth fill shall be free from brush, roots, and other organic
material subject to decomposition.
(b) Cutoff trenches are to be excavated along the dam or
embankment center line to impervious subsoil or bedrock.
(c) The fill material in all earth dams and embankments shall be
compacted to at least 95% of the maximum density obtained
from compaction tests performed by the appropriate method in
ASTM D698.
A. Refuse.
B. Recyclables.
C. Miscellaneous.
§ 140-275 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-277
139:559
§ 140-277. Buildings.
§ 140-278. Landscaping.
A. General.
B. Residential.
C. Recreational.
D. Nonresidential.
A. Site protection.
B. Planting. If planted berms are used, the minimum top width shall be
four feet, and the maximum side slope shall be 3:1.
(1) Planting specifications. Plant materials shall be sufficiently large
and planted in such a fashion that a screen at least eight feet in
height shall be produced within three growing seasons. All
plantings shall be installed according to accepted American
Nurserymen's Association standards.
(2) No buildings, structures, storage of materials, or parking shall be
permitted within the buffer area; buffer areas shall be maintained
and kept free of all debris, rubbish, weeds, and tall grass.
C. Plant selection.
(1) The plant species selected should be hardy for the particular
climatic zone and specific conditions in which the plant is to be
located.
(2) Plant material used should not be of the exotic variety requiring
substantial maintenance or material highly subject to pollution, salt
damage along highways and current insect disease manifestations.
D. Specifications.
(1) Plant size. The following sizes of trees and shrubs are the permitted
minimums except as otherwise approved by the approving board:
(a) Street trees: two to 2 1/2 inches dbh.
(b) Screening plants: four to five feet tall.
(2) Minimum specifications for new plantings of trees and shrubs.
(a) All plant materials must conform to the horticulture standards
as set forth by the American Association of Nurserymen.
(b) All trees shall be nursery grown, of substantially uniform size
and shape, and have straight trunks.
§ 140-277 WALL CODE § 140-278
139:560
(c) All plants shall be of a species suitable for U.S. Department of
Agriculture Hardiness Zone 7.
(d) Planting holes must be a minimum of 12 inches larger in
diameter and six inches deeper than the soil ball or root mass,
excluding ground covers and backfilled with a planting mixture
incorporating a minimum of 25% organic matter, by volume.
(e) Each tree planted in residential areas must be tagged with a
durable label bearing the following information:
[1] Genus, species, variety and plant, patent number, if a
patented tree;
[2] Cultural requirements including watering and fertilization.
(f) Trees shall be staked in the following manner:
[1] Two stakes shall be driven a minimum of two feet into
undisturbed soil outside the planting hole.
[2] Stakes when driven must be 1/2 to 2/3 the height of the
tree measured from ground level.
[3] Stakes shall be two inches diameter minimum at the thick
end.
[4] Stakes shall be placed in line with prevailing winds.
[5] Stakes shall be attached to the tree with twelve-gauge
galvanized wire covered with rubber or plastic hose.
Where wire is likely to come in contact with the tree trunk,
an alternate may be any of the commercially available
materials designed for staking trees with the approval of
the Township Engineer. The loop in contact with the tree
shall be loose enough to permit growth and prevent
girdling for two years but shall be tightly bound to the
stake to prevent slipping.
(g) Wrapping. Each tree shall be wrapped with an expandable
paper or cloth treated to last at least one year.
[1] This wrap shall extend from the ground level up the trunk
to the first branches.
[2] This wrap to prevent sun scald shall be attached or
fastened at each end with a material that will permit tree
growth without girdling.
(h) Saucer ring of packed soil shall be placed around the finished
planting hold of each tree.
[1] The saucer shall be a minimum of six inches higher than
the finished grade.
§ 140-278 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-278
139:561
[2] Saucers placed on slopes shall be level at the top and
perpendicular to the tree trunk.
(i) Trees and shrubs must be planted only when the soil is frost
free and friable.
(j) Plantings shall be watered regularly and in a manner
appropriate for the specific plant species through the first
growing season, and dead or dying plants shall be replaced by
the applicant during the next planting season.
E. Ground covers.
(1) All planting beds must be covered and type of covering to be used
noted on the landscape plan. Where mulches are used, a layer of
black, four-mil polyethylene or its equivalent must be used to
reduce weed growth. Minimum required depth of placement is four
inches. An approved chemical preemergence, nonselective
herbicide may be used in lieu of the polyethylene. The chemical to
be used must be specified on the landscape plan and used
according to directions.
(2) Ground covers are required in place of grass in small restricted
areas such as tree and shrub planters.
(3) All planted beds surrounded by grass must be edged by a physical
edging, in accordance with Township Standard Specifications, flush
with the soil to permit mowing.
(4) Sod is to be used in place of seeding for more rapid establishment
and effect, except for areas exceeding two acres. In any area
exceeding two acres, at least two acres must be sodded, the
location of which is to be determined by the Township Engineer.
(5) Ground cover areas and steep banks greater than 15% must be
planted with an approved ground cover and an approved mulch.
(6) If wood chips are to be used as a mulch, they must follow Township
Standard Specifications.
(7) All seed mixtures and sod types must meet the approval of the
Township Engineer.
F. Protection of existing trees and shrubs.
(1) Trees designed to remain on the construction site are to be
protected with a physical barrier in accordance with Township
Standard Specifications. The barrier shall be installed before a tree
removal permit will be granted and/or before any excavation or
construction is begun.
§ 140-278 WALL CODE § 140-278
139:562
(2) The grade of land located within six feet of a tree shall not be raised
or lowered more than six inches unless compensated by welling or
retaining methods herein described.
(3) Tree wells are to be constructed around each tree or group of trees
before any grades are increased. Wells are to be constructed of
uncemented stone, block or any other suitable material. This well
should be a minimum of three feet in diameter for four inches or
less caliper tree with the wall located 18 inches from the trunk with
the construction starting on existing grade so as not to disturb
roots with foundation construction. For trees of more than four
inches caliper, there should be added one foot to the diameter of
the well for each inch caliper over four inches as measured 12
inches above natural ground level.
(4) Retaining walls are to be constructed around each tree or group of
trees immediately after the grade is lowered. This retaining wall is
to be constructed of railroad ties, or any other suitable material
subject to approval by the Township Engineer.
(5) Any cleaning within six feet of tree trunks must be done by hand.
No equipment is to be over this area, and no building materials are
to be attached against the tree or within the area of the barrier.
(6) No tree is to support any scaffolding, signs, temporary utility or any
other device. Topsoil is to be stockpiled in an area at least eight feet
from any tree designated to remain.
G. Paving.
H. Walls and fences.
I. Furnishings and appurtenances.
§ 140-278 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-278
139:563

Part 6
[AddeAdff 1o2rd-1a2b-l2e0 H01o uBsyin Ogr Rd.e gNuol.a 4ti7o-n2s00163]
ARTICLE XLI
General Requirements
§ 140-279. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 6 is to implement the Housing Plan Element and
Fair-Share Plan of the Township of Wall as approved by the Superior Court
of the State of New Jersey in conjunction with Docket No. L-051262-84,
Cove Industries, Ltd. v. Wall Township. and related Mount Laurel cases, by
His Honor Eugene D. Serpentelli, A.J.S.C. on February 17, 1998.
§ 140-280. Resolution of conflicting provisions.
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance to the contrary, the
provisions of this Part 6 shall apply to development within Mount Laurel
zoning districts containing inclusionary affordable housing units.
§ 140-281. Definitions.
The following words and phrases used in this Part 6 are intended to have
the same meaning as given to them by the New Jersey Supreme Court
in the Mount Laurel II decision and as clarified or otherwise modified by
subsequent decisions, if any, by a court of competent jurisdiction and by the
New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing in N.J.A.C. 5:91-1.3 and 5:93-1.3,
Definitions. All other terms contained herein shall be as set forth in the
Municipal Land Use Act, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-l et seq. and this Chapter 140,
Land Use and Development Regulations, of the Code of the Township of
Wall.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering the
affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program
for Wall Township to ensure that the restricted units under administration
are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as applicable, only to low-
63.Editor's Note: This Ordinance Also Provided As Follows: Section 1. The Purpose Of This
Chapter Is To Amend Article Six, (Now Part 6 Of Chapter 140 Of The Code Of The
Township Of Wall) Affordable Housing Regulations, As Consolidated By Ordinance
27-1995 Adopted October 27, 1995, As Follows: A. To Implement The Housing Plan
Element And Fair Share Plan Of The Township Of Wall As Approved By The Superior Court
Of The State Of New Jersey In Conjunction With Docket No. L-051262-84, Cove Industries,
Ltd. V. Wall Township, And Related Mount Laurel Cases, By His Honor Eugene D.
Serpentelli, A.J.S.C. On February 17, 1998. B. To Create A New ML-13SC Mount Laurel
Senior Citizen District To Memorialize The Approval And Construction Of The Twenty-sixunit
Colfax Senior Citizen Apartments Approved By The Board Of Adjustment On
December 11, 1991, And Constructed In 1992 As A 100% Affordable Senior Rental
Apartment Development And To Amend The Zoning Map To Include The ML-13SC Zone At
The Intersection Of Belmar Boulevard And New Bedford Road. C. To Revise Article Six As
Amended Through Ordinance 2-97 Adopted On February 2, 1997, With The Revisions
Contained Herein Into An Updated "Article Six — Affordable Housing Regulations,"
Attached Hereto And Made A Part Hereof. Section 2. This Ordinance Does Not Change The
Requirements And Responsibilities Contemplated By Those Portions Of The Housing Plan
Element And Fair-Share Plan Approved On September 24, 1990, And The Amendments
Thereto Approved To Date By His Honor Eugene D. Serpentelli, A.J.S.C. And Incorporated
Herein.
§ 140-279 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-281
139:565
and moderate-income households.[Added 11-20-2007 by Ord. No.
25-2007]
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent within the means of a low- or
moderate-income household as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4.
APPROVABLE SITE — A site that may be developed for low- and moderateincome
housing in a manner consistent with the rules or regulations of all
agencies with jurisdiction over the site. A site may be approvable although
not currently zoned for low- and moderate-income housing.
AUTHORITY — The official or entity designated by the municipality for the
purpose of monitoring the occupancy, resale and rental restrictions of lowand
moderate-income housing units.
AVAILABLE SITE — A site with clear title, free of encumbrances which
preclude development for low- and moderate-income housing.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household determined to be income-eligible
for a low- or a moderate-income housing unit by a municipal authority
after the authority has verified the household's gross annual income, credit
history and compared the household's family size to the occupancy
requirements delineated in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1(b)14.
COUNCIL or COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
established under the Fair Housing Act.
DEVELOPER — The developer, its heir, successors, administrator, assigns
or successors in interest.
DEVELOPABLE AREA — Land excluding existing streams, bodies of water,
wetlands, wetlands transition areas, one-hundred-year floodplains and
natural slopes of 15% or greater.
DEVELOPABLE SITE — A site that has access to appropriate water and
sewer infrastructure, and has received water consistency approvals from
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or its
designated agent authorized by law to issue such approvals.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The value of a property determined by
the Municipal Tax Assessor through a process designed to ensure that all
property in the municipality is assessed at the same assessment ratio or
ratios required by law. Estimates at the time of building permit may be
obtained by the Municipal Tax Assessor utilizing estimates for construction
cost. Final equalized assessed value will be determined at project
completion by the Municipal Tax Assessor.
EXEMPT SALES — Include the transfer of ownership between husband and
wife; the transfer of ownership between former spouses ordered as a result
of a judicial decree of divorce or judicial separation, but not including sales
to third parties; the transfer of ownership between family members as a
result of inheritance; the transfer of ownership through an executor's deed
to a Class A beneficiary; and the transfer of ownership by Court order.
FAIR MARKET VALUE — The unrestricted price of a low- or moderateincome
housing unit if sold at a current real estate market rate.
§ 140-281 WALL CODE § 140-281
139:566
HOUSING REGION — The East Central Housing Region consisting of
Monmouth, Ocean and Mercer Counties in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:91
and 5:93.
INCLUSIONARY COMPONENT — The result of subtracting the
rehabilitation component, credits (granted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-3), the
impact of the twenty-percent-cap (pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-2.16) and the
impact of the one-thousand-unit limitation (pursuant to N.J.A.C 5:93-14)
from the precredited need, provided the result shall not be less than zero.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing low- and
moderate-income units. This term includes, but is not necessarily limited
to, new construction, the conversion of a nonresidential structure to a
residential structure and the creation of new low- and moderate-income
units through the gut rehabilitation of a vacant residential structure.
JUDGMENT OF REPOSE — A judgment issued by the Superior Count
approving a municipality's plan to satisfy its fair-share obligation.
LOW-INCOME HOUSING — Housing affordable according to Federal
Department of Housing and Urban Development or other recognized
standards for home ownership and rental costs, and occupied or reserved
for occupancy by households with a gross household income equal to 50%
or less of the median gross household income for households of the same
size within the housing region in which the housing is located, and which is
subject to affordability controls.
MANDATORY DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by an individual, person,
partnership, association, company or corporation for the improvement of
property pursuant to this Part 6, as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:93-8, under
circumstances where the zoning or development rights of the subject
properties are not enhanced in any way.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing within an inclusionary development, not
restricted to low- and moderate-income households, that may sell at any
price determined by a willing seller and a willing buyer or a willing owner
and a willing renter.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING — Housing affordable according to
Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or other
recognized standards for home ownership and rental costs, and occupied
or reserved for occupancy by households with a gross household income
equal to or more than 50% but less than 80% of the median gross household
income for households of the same size within the housing region in which
the housing is located, and which is subject to affordability controls.
MOUNT LAUREL DEVELOPMENT — A development which includes
affordable units on site or provides a contribution to the Wall Township
Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the governing
body with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the
affordable housing program for Wall Township.[Added 11-20-2007 by
Ord. No. 25-2007]
§ 140-281 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-281
139:567
NET DENSITY — The total number of dwelling units within a designated
portion of a tract divided by the total land area of the designated portion of
the tract, including the open space, roadways, parking areas and common
facilities devoted exclusively to that portion of the tract. The result is
expressed as dwelling units per acre.
PRICE DIFFERENTIAL — The difference between the controlled unit sales
price and the fair market value as determined at the date of a proposed
contract of sale, after reasonable real estate broker fees have been paid.
REPAYMENT CLAUSE — The obligation of a seller exercising a repayment
option to pay 95% of the price differential to a municipality at closing for
use in the Municipal Housing Plan.
REPAYMENT OPTION — The option of a seller of a low- or moderate-income
unit to sell a unit pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9 at fair market value subject to
compliance with the terms of a repayment clause.
SENIOR CITIZEN — A person who is 62 years of age or older.
SET-ASIDE — The percentage of housing units devoted to low- and
moderate-income households within an inclusionary development.
SLOPE — The natural slope of the land.
SUITABLE SITE — A site that is adjacent to compatible land uses, has
access to appropriate streets and is consistent with the environmental
policies delineated in N.J.A.C. 5:93-4.
TOWNHOUSE — A single-family house that is connected to a similar house
by a common sidewall.
VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTION FEE — Any contributions paid pursuant to
the Wall Township Housing Element and Fair Share Plan approved by the
Court when the developer is given a choice of developing under zoning in
which only a deminimus mandatory fee is required or developing under the
zoning the developer deems preferable on the basis of a greater fee.
§ 140-281.1. Establishment of Municipal Housing Liaison position,
powers and duties. [Added 11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
A. Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is hereby
established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison for Wall
Township.
B. Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH),
the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the governing
body and may be a full- or part-time municipal employee.
C. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for Wall Township,
including the following responsibilities which may not be contracted
out, exclusive of Subsection C(6) which may be contracted out:
§ 140-281 WALL CODE § 140-281.1
139:568
§ 140-282. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
(1) Serving as Wall Township's primary point of contact for all inquiries
from the state, affordable housing providers, administrative agents,
and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in Wall Township's Fair
Share Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as required by
COAH;
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable;
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
(6) If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or all of
the restricted units in Wall Township.
D. Subject to approval by COAH, Wall Township may contract with or
authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency charged by
the governing body, which entity shall have the responsibility of
administering the affordable housing program of Wall Township, except
for those responsibilities which may not be contracted out pursuant to
Subsection C above. If Wall Township contracts with another entity to
administer all or any part of the affordable housing program, including
the affordability controls and affirmative marketing plan, the Municipal
Housing Liaison shall supervise the contracting administrative agent.
E. Administrative powers and duties assigned to the Municipal Housing
Liaison. The five required responsibilities outlined in Subsection C
above will be handled by Wall Township's Municipal Housing Liaison.
All other duties will be delegated to an approved administrative agent.
A. Establishment of fund. There is hereby established an interest-bearing
account known as the "Wall Township Affordable Housing Trust Fund,"
which shall have as its primary purpose the support of low- and
moderate-income housing in the Township of Wall and the region in
which it is included, in furtherance of the mandates of the Constitution
of the State of New Jersey. The trustees of the fund shall be the
Township Committee of the Township of Wall.
B. Designation of administrative authority. For the purposes of
administering these affordable housing provisions, the authority shall
be the Township Administrator and, as may be required, the Township's
designee appointed or contracted by the Township Committee
responsible for assuming continuing affordability of such units
including monitoring of the occupancy, resale and rental restrictions of
low- and moderate-income housing units.
§ 140-281.1 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-282
139:569
C. General provisions.
(1) All moneys generated through the applicable provisions of this Part
6 for the purpose of supporting low- and moderate-income housing
shall be paid into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund into one of the
following interest-bearing accounts as applicable:
(a) Mandatory Fee Account; or
(b) Voluntary Contribution Account.
(2) The Township Committee, in the name of the Affordable Housing
Trust Fund, shall have the right to apply for and receive grants
from any source to further the purposes of the fund.
(3) No money shall be expended from the Affordable Housing Trust
Fund unless the expenditure conforms to a spending plan approved
by the Court. If the Court determines that the Township of Wall is
not in conformance with the Court's approved use of these fees, the
Court is authorized to direct the manner in which all development
fees collected pursuant to this Part 6 shall be expended.
D. General powers. The Township Committee, acting as trustees of the
fund, shall have the following powers:
(1) To appoint a person or organization as Affordable Housing Officer
to administer the fund on its behalf and at its direction.
(2) Use the money, generated from the fund to:
(a) Transfer funds to other municipalities or other public entities
in the region to provide for the regional housing needs through
any method approved by the Court;
(b) Provide funds for costs of administering the fund;
(c) Provide funds for planning, program development, and
administration for any other method of developing affordable
housing, including professional planning, architectural,
engineering and legal expenses; provided, however, that:
[1] No funds shall be used for legal or other professional fees
incurred in litigation opposing compliance with the
Township's lower income housing obligations;
[2] Adequate funds are available from the Trust Fund or other
sources to fund the Township's commitments to provide
lower income housing, as detailed in its adopted housing
element, fair share plan, and any Judgment of Repose
entered by the Court in Cove Industries, Ltd., Inc. v. Wall
Township (Mt. Laurel II); Docket No. L-051262-84, and
consolidated cases; and
§ 140-282 WALL CODE § 140-282
139:570
§ 140-283. Mandatory development fees. [Amended 2-9-2005 by
Ord. No. 1-2005; 4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 10-2005; 8-24-2005 by Ord.
No. 25-2005; 9-13-2006 by Ord. No. 27-2006; 12-10-2008 by Ord.
No. 24-2008]
[3] No surplus in the trust fund, consisting of revenues from
contributions from developers in excess of expenditures
for Court-approved mechanisms of developing affordable
housing, shall be expended without prior approval of the
Court.64
E. Retention of fees collected prior to December 13, 1990. Any fees
collected prior to December 13, 1990, shall be retained by the Township
pursuant to the Court's approval regarding the retention of
development fees.
F. Termination of fund.
(1) The Township may terminate the fund when it is no longer needed
for low- and moderate-income purposes. At that time, any funds on
hand not needed to retire outstanding debt or to pay outstanding
bills shall be transferred to an organization within the State of New
Jersey for the purpose of providing low- or moderate-income
housing first in the region of which Wall is a part and second, within
the state.
(2) Any property owned by the Township which was purchased with
funds contributed for low- and moderate-income purposes shall be
sold at market rates, and the net proceeds shall be transferred to
an organization or agency for the continued benefit of low- and
moderate-income families in the region.65
A. Purpose.
(1) In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985,
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to
the rules adopted by the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
(COAH).
(2) Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, section 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and
the Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-8.1 through 40:55D-8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and
promulgate regulations necessary for the establishment,
implementation, review, monitoring and enforcement of municipal
64.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E, Use of mandatory development fees, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 8-24-2005 by Ord. No. 25-2005. This
ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections F and G as
Subsections E and F, respectively.
65.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection H, Expiration, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 8-24-2005 by Ord. No. 25-2005.
§ 140-282 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-283
139:571
affordable housing trust funds and corresponding spending plans.
Municipalities that are under the jurisdiction of the Council or
court of competent jurisdiction and have an approved spending
plan may retain fees collected from nonresidential development.
(3) This section establishes standards for the collection, maintenance,
and expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's
regulations and in accordance with P.L. 2008, c. 46, Sections 8 and
32-38. Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be used for the
sole purpose of providing low- and moderate-income housing. This
section shall be interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules
on development fees, codified at N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.
B. Basic requirements.
(1) The Township of Wall shall not impose development fees on any
applicant pursuant to this section until COAH or a court has
approved the Development Fee Ordinance pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:96-5.1.
(2) The Township of Wall shall not spend development fees until COAH
or a court has approved a plan for spending such fees in
conformance with N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.10 and N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.3.
C. Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the
following meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included
in the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is
not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal construction
project, or a one-hundred-percent affordable development.
COAH OR THE COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing established under the Act which has primary jurisdiction for
the administration of housing obligations in accordance with sound
regional planning considerations in the State.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted under N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property
divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for
the municipality in which the property is situated, as determined in
accordance with sections 1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c.123 (N.J.S.A.
54:1-35a through 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment and enhance health, safety
and well-being of residents by producing durable, low-maintenance,
§ 140-283 WALL CODE § 140-283
139:572
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of existing
infrastructure and community services.
D. Residential development fees.
(1) Imposed fees.
(a) Within the RR-6, RR-5, RR, R-60, R-40, R-30, R-25, R-20, R-15,
R-15 corner, R-10, R-10 corner, R-7.5 and R-7.5 corner zoning
districts, residential developers, except for developers of the
types of development specifically exempted below, shall pay a
fee of 1.5% of the equalized assessed value for residential
development, provided no increased density is permitted.
(b) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers shall be required to pay a development fee of 6% of
the equalized assessed value (EAV) for each additional unit
above that permitted by right which may be realized. However,
if the zoning on a site has changed during the two-year period
preceding the filing of such a variance application, the base
density for the purposes of calculating the bonus development
fee shall be the highest density permitted by right during the
two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application. (Example: If an approval allows four units to be
constructed on a site that was zoned for two units, the fees
could equal 1.5% of the equalized assessed value on the first
two units; and the specified higher percentage up to 6% of the
equalized assessed value for the two additional units, provided
zoning on the site has not changed during the two-year period
preceding the filing of such a variance application.)
(2) Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
residential development
(a) Affordable housing developments and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
(b) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a
site plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building
permit shall be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan
approval for this purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested
on the date that the building permit is issued.
(c) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure undergoes a change to a more intense use, is
demolished and replaced, or is expanded, if the expansion is
not otherwise exempt from the development fee requirement.
§ 140-283 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-283
139:573
The development fee shall be calculated on the increase in the
equalized assessed value of the improved structure.
(d) Nonprofit organizations which have received tax exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code,
providing current evidence of that status is submitted to the
Municipal Clerk, together with a certification that services of
the organization are provided at reduced rates to those who
establish an inability to pay existing charges, shall be
exempted from paying a development fee.
(e) Federal, state, county and local governments shall be
exempted from paying a development fee.
(f) Developers of additions to single-family dwellings, and singlefamily
dwellings demolished and replaced, shall be exempt
from paying a development fee.
E. Nonresidential development fees.
(1) Imposed fees.
(a) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except
for developers of the types of development specifically
exempted, shall pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized
assessed value of the land and improvements, for all new
nonresidential construction on an unimproved lot or lots.
(b) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types
of development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee
equal to 2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value
resulting from any additions to existing structures to be used
for nonresidential purposes.
(c) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure is demolished and replaced. The
development fee of 2.5% shall be calculated on the difference
between the equalized assessed value of the preexisting land
and improvement and the equalized assessed value of the
newly improved structure, i.e. land and improvement, at the
time final certificate of occupancy is issued. If the calculation
required under this section results in a negative number, the
nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
(2) Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
(a) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or
market rate development shall be subject to the development
fee of 2.5%, unless otherwise exempted below.
§ 140-283 WALL CODE § 140-283
139:574
(b) The fee of 2.5% shall not apply to an increase in equalized
assessed value resulting from alterations, change in use within
existing footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
(c) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.46, as specified in
the Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Nonresidential
Development Certification/Exemption." Any exemption claimed
by a developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
(d) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from
the nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.46
shall be subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption
no longer applies, and shall make the payment of the
nonresidential development fee, in that event, within three
years after that event or after the issuance of the final
certificate of occupancy of the nonresidential development,
whichever is later.
(e) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit
the fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid
nonresidential development fees under these circumstances
may be enforceable by the Township of Wall as a lien against
the real property of the owner.
F. Collection procedure.
(1) Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable
approval for a development, the applicable approving authority
shall direct its staff to notify the Township's Land Use Officer
responsible for the issuance of a building permit.
(2) For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption" to be
completed as per the instructions provided. The developer of a
nonresidential development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the
instructions provided. The construction official shall verify the
information submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the
instructions provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall
verify exemptions and prepare estimated and final assessments as
per the instructions provided in Form N-RDF.
(3) The Land Use Officer responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local tax assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a
development fee.
§ 140-283 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-283
139:575
(4) Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the municipal tax assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
(5) The Land Use Officer responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy shall notify the local assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which
is subject to a development fee.
(6) Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the municipal assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements
of the development; calculate the development fee, and thereafter
notify the developer of the amount of the fee.
(7) Should the Township of Wall fail to determine or notify the
developer of the amount of the development fee within 10 business
days of the request for final inspection, the developer may estimate
the amount due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the
dispute process set forth in subsection b of section 37 of P.L. 2008,
c.46 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
(8) Fifty percent of the development fee shall be collected at the time
of issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion shall be
collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The
developer shall be responsible for paying the difference between
the fee calculated at issuance of building permit and that
determined at issuance of certificate of occupancy.
(9) Appeal of development fees.
(a) A developer may challenge residential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the County Board of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Board,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow
account by the Township of Wall. Appeals from a determination
of the Board may be made to the tax court in accordance with
the provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A.
54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after the date of such
determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be
credited to the prevailing party.
(b) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division
of Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the
Director, which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the
challenge, collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing
escrow account by the Township of Wall. Appeals from a
determination of the Director may be made to the tax court in
accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after
§ 140-283 WALL CODE § 140-283
139:576
the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
G. Affordable housing trust fund.
(1) There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust
fund to be maintained by the Township's Chief Financial Officer for
the purpose of depositing development fees collected from
residential and nonresidential developers and proceeds from the
sale of units with extinguished controls.
(2) The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source
and amount:
(a) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
(b) Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the affordable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
(c) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(d) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(e) Recapture funds;
(f) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(g) Any other funds collected in connection with the Township of
Wall's affordable housing program.
(3) Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account, the
Township of Wall shall provide COAH with written authorization, in
the form of a three-party escrow agreement between the
municipality, the Township's banking institution, and COAH to
permit COAH to direct the disbursement of the funds as provided
for in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.13(b).
(4) All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH or the
court.
H. Use of funds.
(1) The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan
approved by COAH or the court. Funds deposited in the housing
trust fund may be used for any activity approved by COAH or the
court to address the Township of Wall's fair share obligation and
may be set up as a grant or revolving loan program. Such activities
include, but are not limited to: preservation or purchase of housing
for the purpose of maintaining or implementing affordability
controls, rehabilitation, new construction of affordable housing
units and related costs, accessory apartment, market-to-affordable
§ 140-283 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-283
139:577
or regional housing partnership programs, conversion of existing
nonresidential buildings to create new affordable units, green
building strategies designed to be cost saving and in accordance
with accepted national or state standards, purchase of land for
affordable housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable
housing, extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to
affordable housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase
affordability, administration necessary for implementation of the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as
permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7 through 5:97-8.9 and
specified in the approved spending plan.
(2) Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Township of Wall for
past housing activities.
(3) At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned
shall be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and
moderate-income households in affordable units included in the
municipal fair share plan. One-third of the affordability assistance
portion of development fees collected shall be used to provide
affordability assistance to those households earning 30% or less of
median income by region.
(a) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans,
rental assistance, assistance with homeowners association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance
with emergency repairs.
(b) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal fair share plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income. The use of development fees in this manner shall
entitle the Township of Wall to bonus credits pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.7.
(c) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and
funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be
exempt from the affordability assistance requirement.
(4) The Township of Wall may contract with a private or public entity to
administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
including the requirement for affordability assistance, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.
(5) No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees
may be expended on administration, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, a
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative
marketing program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no
§ 140-283 WALL CODE § 140-283
139:578
§ 140-284. Voluntary contribution with density bonus.
more than 20% of the revenues collected from development fees
shall be expended for such administrative expenses. Administrative
funds may be used for income qualification of households,
monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units, and compliance
with COAH's monitoring requirements. Legal or other fees related
to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or objecting to the
Council's regulations and/or action are not eligible uses of the
affordable housing trust fund.
I. Monitoring. The Township of Wall shall complete and return to COAH
all monitoring forms included in the annual monitoring report related to
the collection of development fees from residential and nonresidential
developers, payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site,
and funds from the sale of units with extinguished-controls barrier-free
escrow funds, rental income, repayments from affordable housing
program loans, and any other funds collected in connection with the
Township of Wall's housing program, as well as to the expenditure of
revenues and implementation of the plan approved by the court. All
monitoring reports shall be completed on forms designed by COAH.
J. Ongoing collection of fees. The ability of the Township of Wall to
impose, collect and expend development fees shall expire with its
judgment of compliance, unless the Township of Wall has filed an
adopted Housing Element and Fair Share Plan with COAH, has
petitioned COAH for substantive certification, or brought a declaratory
relief action in Court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313 and has received
approval of its development fee ordinance by COAH or a court. If the
Township of Wall fails to renew its ability to impose and collect
development fees prior to the expiration of its judgment of compliance,
it may be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining within its
municipal trust fund. Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited into the
"New Jersey Affordable Housing Trust Fund" established pursuant to
section 20 of P.L. 1985, c.222 (N.J.S.A.52:27D-320). The Township of
Wall shall not impose a residential development fee on a development
that receives preliminary or final site plan approval after the expiration
of its substantive certification or its judgment of compliance; nor shall
the Township of Wall retroactively impose a development fee on such a
development. The Township of Wall shall not expend development fees
after the expiration of its substantive certification or its judgment of
compliance.
K. Resolution of conflicting provisions. Notwithstanding the provisions of
any other ordinance to the contrary, the provisions of this section shall
apply to the development within the Mount Laurel zoning districts
containing inclusionary affordable housing units.
A. In all zones designated as MLC-3 on the Zoning Map of the Township of
Wall which permit a density higher than that permitted in the
underlying or prevailing zoning for the premises the developer, if
§ 140-283 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-284
139:579
electing to develop the premises at the higher density provided thereby,
shall pay into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the Township
of Wall the sum of $10,000 for each such unit constructed. Such
developments shall comply with the provisions of § 140-300 et seq.
B. On all premises wherein variances have been granted subsequent to
July 1, 1986, which permit a density higher than that permitted in the
underlying or prevailing zoning for the premises and where the
approvals have been granted on the basis of the payment by the
developer of a cash contribution pursuant to the Township Mt. Laurel
obligation, the developer shall pay into the Affordable Housing Trust
Fund of the Township of Wall the sum of $10,000 for each such unit
constructed.
C. The affordable housing contributions specified in Subsections A and B
above shall be payable into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the
Township of Wall according to the following schedule:
(1) Twenty-five percent upon preliminary subdivision approval, final
site plan approval or variance approval as the case may be.
(2) Twenty-five percent prior to the issuance of the building permit for
each unit.
(3) Fifty percent upon the closing of title and the issuance of a
certificate or occupancy for each unit.
§ 140-284 WALL CODE § 140-284
139:580
ARTICLE XLII
Inclusionary Low- and Moderate-Income Housing Regulations
§ 140-285. Minimum affordability requirements.
Developers of inclusionary housing units of low- and moderate-income
persons and families shall enter into a written agreement, binding on all
successors-in-interest in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.3 et seq. of Resale/
Rental Control, that not less than 10% of the total units constructed shall
be affordable to low-income persons and families, and not less than 10% of
the total units constructed shall be affordable to moderate-income persons
and families at the time of sale, resale, rental or rerental regardless of the
availability of federal, state, county or Township subsidy programs.
§ 140-286. Determination of maximum affordability of sales and
rental housing units.
The affordability of a low- or moderate-income unit shall be a function of the
rent or sales price which shall be established so as to ensure that occupants
do not pay a sum for shelter costs greater than approximately 30% of
gross annual income for rental units or approximately 28% of gross annual
income for sales units in accordance with Council on Affordable Housing
regulations as follows:
A. Shelter costs for rental units shall include gross rent, including an
allowance for utilities, so as not to exceed 30% of the gross monthly
income of the appropriate household size referenced in Subsection D
below. Those tenant-paid utilities that are included in the utility
allowance shall be so stated in the lease. The allowance for utilities
shall be consistent with the utility allowance approved by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development for use in New Jersey.
"Utility allowance" means those expenses that are in addition to the
base rent, such as heat, electricity and cooking fuel, that are included in
the thirty-percent utility allowance as outlined in the lease.
B. Shelter costs for sales units shall include principal, interest, taxes,
condominium fees and insurance.
C. The initial price of a low- and moderate-income owner-occupied singlefamily
housing unit shall be established so that after a down payment of
5% (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of the purchase price and a
market rate of interest), the monthly principal, interest, homeowner
and private mortgage insurances, property taxes (property taxes shall
be based on the restricted value of low- and moderate-income units)
and condominium or homeowner fees do not exceed 28% of the eligible
gross monthly income. Master deeds of inclusionary developments shall
regulate condominium or homeowner association fees or special
assessments of low- and moderate-income purchasers at a specific
percentage of those paid by market purchasers. The percentage that
shall be paid by low- and moderate-income purchasers shall be at least
1/3 of the condominium or homeowner association fees paid by market
§ 140-285 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-286
139:581
purchasers. Once established within the master deed, the percentage
shall not be amended without prior approval from COAH. Price
restrictions for ownership units shall conform to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6,
Price Restrictions for Ownership Units.
D. Rental and sales costs shall be fixed for a unit depending on bedroom
number calculated on the following basis as to household size:
(1) Efficiency units shall be affordable to one person households;
(2) One-bedroom units shall be affordable to households of 1 1/2
persons.;
(3) Two-bedroom units shall be affordable to households of three
persons; and
(4) Three-bedroom units shall be affordable to households of 4.5
persons.
E. Bedroom distribution. The following bedroom distribution shall apply to
the total number of affordable units in each development providing
affordable housing units:
(1) Inclusionary developments that are not age restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands so that:
(a) The combination of efficiency and one-bedroom units is at least
10% and no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units.
(b) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units are twobedroom
units; and
(c) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units are threebedroom
units.
(d) At least 1/3 of all units in each bedroom distribution pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.3 shall be affordable to low-income
households.
(e) In the event the Rules of the Council on Affordable Housing
shall provide for a bedroom mix different than the foregoing,
the requirements of COAH shall control and the foregoing shall
be deemed modified for all projects which have not received
final site plan or subdivision approval.
(2) Age-restricted low- and moderate-income units may utilize a
modified bedroom distribution. At a minimum, the number of
bedrooms may equal the number of age-restricted low- and
moderate-income units within the exclusionary development. The
standard can be met by creating all one-bedroom units or by
creating a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit. Applications
§ 140-286 WALL CODE § 140-286
139:582
to waive this standard shall be made in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:93-15, Waiver Provisions.
F. In the case of owner-occupied housing rehabilitation assistance,
affordability shall be based on unit occupancy by a low- or moderateincome
household.
G. Median income by household size will be established by a regional
weighted average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits published by
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4(b). To compute this regional income
limit, the HUD determination of median county income for a family of
four is multiplied by the households within the county. The resulting
product for each county within the housing region is summed. The sum
is divided by the estimated total households in each housing region.
This quotient represents the regional weighted average of median
income for a household of four. This regional weighted average is
adjusted by household size based on multipliers used by HUD to adjust
median income by household size. The maximum average rent and sales
price of low- and moderate-income units within each inclusionary
development shall be affordable to households earning no more than
70% of median income in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4(b).
Moderate-income sales units shall be available for at least two different
prices and low-income sales units to be available for at least two
different prices. In averaging the 57.5%, developers and/or municipal
sponsors of rental units may establish one rent for a low-income unit
and one rent for a moderate-income unit for each bedroom distribution.
H. For initial occupancy, priority shall be given to households that fall
within the median income categories delineated in Subsection G above.
I. Phasing of affordable units.
(1) Affordable housing units in ML Zoning Districts shall be built,
occupied and receive a certificate of occupancy in accordance with
the following schedule. For purposes of this section, a completed
unit is one which has received its certificate of occupancy.
Minimum Percentage of
Low- and Moderate-Income
Percentage of Market Units
Completed
0 25
10 25 + 1 unit
50 50
75 75
100 100
(2) No initial occupancy of a low- or moderate-income housing sales
unit shall be permitted prior to issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, and no certificate of occupancy for initial occupancy of
a low- or moderate-income housing sales unit shall issue unless
§ 140-286 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-286
139:583
there is a written determination by the authority that the unit is to
be controlled by a deed restriction and mortgage lien as adopted
by COAH.
(3) A certificate of reoccupancy for any occupancy of a low- or
moderate-income housing sales unit resulting from a resale shall be
required, and the Township shall not issue such certificate unless
there is a written determination by the authority that the unit is to
be controlled by the deed restriction and mortgage lien required by
the COAH.
(4) The certificate of reoccupancy shall not be required where there is
a written determination by the authority that controls are allowed
to expire or in that the repayment option is being exercised
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4.
J. Sale/rental and resale/rerental controls. A developer of a Mount Laurel
development shall incorporate deed restrictions on all dwelling units
sold as units affordable to low- and moderate-income households
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2, Council on Affordable Housing
Substantive Rules. Affordability controls shall remain in force for 30
years in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2(a), shall run with the land
and shall require all conveyances of newly constructed low- and
moderate-income sales units subject to this chapter and N.J.A.C. 5:91
and 5:93 to contain the deed restriction and mortgage lien
requirements adopted by COAH as contained in N.J.A.C. 5:93 Appendix
E and upon the resale/rerental of affordable units in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4 through 5:93-9.16.
K. Annual indexed increases while controls are in place: sales and rentals.
(1) The price of an owner-occupied housing unit may increase annually
based on the percentage increase in the regional median income
limit for each housing region. In no event shall the maximum resale
price established by the authority be lower than the last recorded
purchase price.
(2) With the exception of rentals constructed pursuant to low-income
tax credit regulations, the rent of a low- or moderate-income
housing unit may be increased annually based on the percentage
increase in the housing consumer price index for the United States.
This increase shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for units
constructed pursuant to low-income tax credit regulations shall be
indexed pursuant to the regulations governing low-income tax
credits.
L. Assisted living residences as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.3, Definitions,
shall confirm to requirements contained in N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.16, Assisted
Living Residence. Assisted living residences shall enter into an
agreement with the authority and the authority enter into an agreement
with the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs Housing
§ 140-286 WALL CODE § 140-286
139:584
Mortgage Finance Agency to administer and monitor the low- and
moderate-income apartments in an assisted living residence.
M. Eligible capital improvements prior to the expiration of controls: sales
units.
(1) Property owners of single-family owner-occupied housing may
apply to the authority for permission to increase the maximum
price for eligible capital improvements. Eligible capital
improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable for a
larger household. In no event shall the maximum price of an
improved housing unit exceed the limits of affordability for the
larger household. Property owners shall apply to the authority if an
increase in the maximum sales price is sought.
(2) At resale, all items of property which are permanently affixed to the
units and/or were included when the unit was initially restricted
(for example, refrigerator, range, washer, dryer, dishwasher, wallto-
wall carpeting) shall be included in the maximum allowable
resale price. Other items of property may be sold to the purchaser
at a reasonable price that has been approved by the authority at the
time of signing the agreement to purchase. The purchase of central
air conditioning installed subsequent to the initial sale of the unit
and not included in the base price may be made a condition of the
unit resale, provided the price has been approved by the authority.
Unless otherwise permitted by COAH, the purchase of any property
other than central air conditioning shall not be made a condition of
the unit resale. The owner and the purchaser must personally
certify at the time of closing that no unapproved transfer of funds
for the purpose of selling and receiving property has taken place at
resale.
N. Exempt sales. Sales exempted from resale/rerental controls shall
include the transfer of ownership between husband and wife, the
transfer of ownership between former spouses ordered as a result of a
judicial decree of divorce or judicial separation but not including sales
to third parties, the transfer of ownership between family members as a
result of inheritance, the transfer of ownership through an executor's
deed to a Class A beneficiary, and the transfer of ownership by Court
order.
O. Deed restrictions, notice of sale. All deed restrictions governing lowand
moderate-income housing units shall require the owner to notify
the authority and COAH by certified mail of any intent to sell the unit at
least 90 days prior to entering into an agreement for the first
nonexempt sale after controls have been in effect on the housing unit
for the period specified in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2.
P. Subsidy to ensure affordability prior to the expiration of controls, sales
units. If the use of median income data adopted by COAH to index the
cost of housing renders a unit unaffordable to a low- or moderate-
§ 140-286 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-286
139:585
§ 140-287. Procedures for initial sales, resale prior to the
expiration of controls, and rentals.
income household at the time of resale, a municipality shall not lose
credit for the housing unit, provided that adequate controls on
affordability remain in place but the municipality may subsidize the
housing unit to maintain affordability.
A. Low- and moderate-income sales units shall not be offered to nonincome-
eligible households at initial sale without COAH approval.
Parties that petition COAH for such approval shall document efforts to
sell housing units to income-eligible households and shall adhere to the
procedures outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:91-12, Subsidy to Ensure Affordability
Prior to Expiration of Controls; Sales Units.
B. Persons wishing to sell affordable units shall notify the authority
responsible for assuring affordability of the intent to sell. If no eligible
buyer enters a contract of sale for the unit within 90 days of
notification, the authority shall have the option to purchase the unit for
a negotiated price that shall not exceed the maximum price permitted
based on the regional increase in the median income as defined by the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development or other
recognized standard adopted by COAH. If the authority does not
purchase the unit, the seller may apply for permission to offer the unit
to a non-income-eligible household at the maximum price permitted.
The seller shall document efforts to sell the unit to an income-eligible
household as part of this application. In reviewing the request, the
authority shall consider the specific reasons for any delay in selling the
housing unit and the hardship to the seller in continuing to offer the
affordable unit to an income-eligible applicant. The inability to sell a
unit for the maximum permitted resale price shall not, in itself, be
considered an appropriate reason for allowing a housing unit to be sold
to a non-income-eligible household. If the request is granted the seller
may offer a low-income housing unit to a moderate-income household
and a moderate-income housing unit to a household earning in excess of
80% of median. In no case shall the seller be permitted to receive more
than the maximum price permitted. In no case shall a sale pursuant to
this section eliminate the resale controls on the unit or permit any
subsequent seller to convey the unit except in full compliance with the
terms of this Part 6.
C. Owners of low- and moderate-income rental units shall not offer rental
units to non-income-eligible households without prior approval of
COAH. Parties that petition for such approval shall document all efforts
to rent to income-eligible households and demonstrate to the
satisfaction of COAH that alternatives, such as a reduction in rent, is
not feasible. Parties that petition COAH shall adhere to the procedures
outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:91-12, Subsidy to Ensure Affordability Prior to
Expiration of Controls; Sales Units.
§ 140-286 WALL CODE § 140-288
139:586
§ 140-288. Uniform deed restriction liens and enforcement through
certificates of occupancy or reoccupancy on sales units.
§ 140-289. Option-to-buy sales units.
A. The authority shall issue written determinations for the purpose of
issuing certificates of occupancy for initial occupancy or certificates of
reoccupancy for low- or moderate-income sales units the authority finds
that the unit is to be controlled by a deed restriction and mortgage lien
as adopted by COAH.
B. The authority shall not permit the initial occupancy of a low- or
moderate-income sales unit prior to issuance of a certificate of
occupancy in accordance with Subsection A above.
C. The authority shall issue written determinations for the purpose of
issuing certificates of reoccupancy for low- or moderate-income
housing sales units where the authority finds that the unit is to be
controlled by a deed restriction and mortgage lien as adopted by COAH.
Purchasers of low- and moderate-income housing sales units shall
execute the deed restriction and mortgage lien prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy regardless of whether the sellers had executed
the deed restriction and mortgage lien adopted by COAH upon
acquisition of the property. The authority shall make such
determination within 10 days of receipt of a proposed deed restriction
and mortgage lien.
D. The authority shall issue written determinations for the purpose of
issuing certificates of reoccupancy for low- or moderate-income
housing sales units where the authority finds that the unit is sold and
controls are allowed to expire or in which the repayment option is being
exercised pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4.
E. The mortgage lien and the deed restrictions shall be filed with the Clerk
of Monmouth County. The lien and deed restrictions shall be in the form
adopted by COAH unless amendments have been approved by COAH.
F. The deed restrictions, including the repayment clause, and the
mortgage lien shall have priority over all mortgages on the property
except for a first mortgage placed on the property by the mortgagee
prior to the expiration of resale controls.
A. General regulations. Rights to buy sales units shall be held and
exercised in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) The deed restrictions governing the deeds of low- and moderateincome
units shall include an option permitting purchase of the
affordable housing unit at the maximum allowable restricted sales
price at the time of the first nonexempt sale after controls on
affordability have been in effect on the unit for the period specified
in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4. The option to buy shall be first available to Wall
Township, then the Department of Community Affairs, Housing and
§ 140-288 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-289
139:587
Mortgage Finance Agency, or a qualified nonprofit agency as
determined by COAH.
(2) All deed restrictions governing low- and moderate-income units
shall require the owner to notify the authority and COAH by
certified mail of any intent to sell the unit at least 90 days prior to
entering into an agreement for the first nonexempt sale after
controls have been in effect on the housing unit for the period
specified in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2.
(3) Upon receipt of such notice, the option to buy the unit at the
maximum allowable restricted sales price shall be available for 90
days. The authority shall first notify Wall Township, then the
Department of Community Affairs, Housing and Mortgage Finance
Agency, and COAH that the unit is for sale. If Wall Township
exercises this option, it may enter into a contract of sale. If Wall
Township fails to exercise this option within 90 days, the first of the
other entities giving notice to the seller of its intent to purchase
during the ninety-day period shall be entitled to purchase the unit.
If the option to purchase the unit at the maximum allowable
restricted sales price is not exercised by a written offer to purchase
the housing unit within 90 days of receipt of the intent to sell, the
owner may proceed to sell the housing unit. If the owner does not
sell the unit within one year of the date of the delivery of notice of
intent to sell, the option to buy the unit shall be restored, and the
owner shall be required to submit a new notice of intent to sell at
least 90 days prior to any future proposed date of sale.
(4) Any option to buy a housing unit at the maximum allowable
restricted sales price shall be exercised by certified mail and shall
be deemed exercised upon mailing.
B. Municipal option.
(1) Wall Township may elect to purchase a low- or moderate-income
unit provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4, and may:
(a) Convey or rent the housing unit to a low- or moderate-income
purchaser or tenant at a price or rent not to exceed the
maximum allowable restricted sales price or rental for a period
of up to 30 years, provided the unit is controlled by a deed
restriction in accordance with Technical Appendix E of N.J.A.C.
5:93-1 et seq. or an alternative approved by COAH; or
(b) Convey the unit at fair market value subject to the provisions of
the following Subsection C.
(2) Upon purchase, Wall Township may maintain the unit as an
affordable housing unit or convey it at fair market value in
accordance with the following:
§ 140-289 WALL CODE § 140-289
139:588
(a) Notify COAH of any proposed sale and sales price 90 days
before closing;
(b) Notify COAH of the price differential as defined in COAH
regulations;
(3) Deposit the price differential in the Wall Township Affordable
Housing Trust Fund as set forth in § 140-282, Affordable Housing
Trust Fund.
(4) Money deposited in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund from such
sale may not be expended until the Township submits and COAH or
the Court approves a repayment housing plan. COAH or the Court
may approve the repayment housing plan if it determines that it
provides a realistic opportunity for the creation, rehabilitation or
maintenance of low- and moderate-income housing.
C. State option. When the Department of Community Affairs or Housing
and Mortgage Finance Agency elects to purchase a low- or moderateincome
unit pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4, it may:
(1) Convey or rent the housing unit to a low- or moderate-income
purchaser or tenant at a price or rent not to exceed the allowable
restricted sales price or rental; or
(2) Convey the unit at fair market value and utilize the price
differential to subsidize the construction, rehabilitation or
maintenance of low- and moderate-income housing within the East
Central Housing Region (Monmouth, Ocean and Mercer Counties).
D. Nonprofit option.
(1) Nonprofit agencies may apply to COAH at any time for the right to
purchase low- or moderate-income units subsequent to the period
of controls on affordability, provided the unit remains controlled by
a deed restriction in accordance with Technical Appendix E in
N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq., or an alternative approved by COAH.
(2) Nonprofit agencies that have been designated by COAH shall be
eligible to purchase low- or moderate-income units pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4 for the sole purpose of conveying or renting the
housing unit to a low- or moderate-income purchaser or tenant at a
price or rent not to exceed the allowable restricted sales price or
rental. Low-income units shall be made available to low-income
purchasers or tenants and the housing unit shall be regulated by
the deed restrictions and lien adopted by COAH. The term of the
controls on affordability shall be the same as those required by
N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2.
E. Seller option.
(1) An eligible seller of a low- or moderate-income unit which has been
controlled for the period established in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2, who has
§ 140-289 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-289
139:589
provided notice of an intent to sell may proceed with the sale if
no eligible entity as outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4(c) and N.J.A.C.
5:93-9.7 exercises its option to purchase within 90 days.
(2) Subject to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.9, the seller may elect to:
(a) Sell to a qualified low- and moderate-income household at the
controlled unit sales price in accordance with existing COAH
regulations, providing the unit is regulated by the deed
restrictions and lien adopted by COAH and included in N.J.A.C.
5:93-1, Technical Appendix E, for a period of at least 30 years;
or
(b) Exercise the repayment option and sell to any purchaser at
market price, providing that 95% of the price differential is
paid to the authority, as an instrument of Wall Township, at
closing.
(3) If the sale will be to a qualified low- and moderate-income
household, the authority shall certify the income qualifications of
the purchaser and shall ensure the housing unit is regulated by the
deed restrictions and lien required by COAH and included in
N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 in Technical Appendix E.
(4) The authority shall examine any contract of sale containing a
repayment option to determine if the proposed sales price bears a
reasonable relationship to the housing unit's fair market value. In
making this determination, the authority may rely on comparable
sales data or an appraisal. The authority shall not approve any
contract of sale where there is a determination that the sales price
does not bear a reasonable relationship to fair market value. The
authority shall make a determination within 20 days of receipt of
the contract of sale and shall calculate the repayment option
payment.
(5) The authority shall adopt an appeal procedure by which a seller
may submit written documentation requesting the authority to
recompute the repayment obligation if the seller believes an error
has been made or to reconsider a determination that a sales price
does not bear a reasonable relationship to fair market value. A
repayment obligation determination made as a result of an owner's
appeal shall be a final administrative determination of the
authority.
(6) The repayment shall occur at the date of closing and transfer of
title for the first nonexempt transaction after the expiration of
controls on affordability.
(7) Repayment proceeds shall be deposited in the Wall Township
Affordable Housing Trust Fund. Money deposited in the Wall
Township Affordable Housing Trust Fund trust account from such
sale may not be expended until Wall Township submits and COAH
§ 140-289 WALL CODE § 140-289
139:590
or a Court approves a repayment housing plan. COAH or a Court
may approve the repayment housing plan if it determines that it
provides a realistic opportunity for the creation, rehabilitation or
maintenance of low- and moderate-income housing.
F. Township rejection of repayment option; sales units.
(1) Wall Township shall have the right to determine that the most
desirable means of promoting an adequate supply of low- and
moderate-income housing is to prohibit the exercise of the
repayment option and maintain controls on lower income housing
units sold within the Township beyond the period required by
N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2. Such determination shall be made by resolution
of the Township Committee and shall be effective upon filing with
COAH or a Court and the authority. The resolution shall specify the
time period for which the repayment option shall not be applicable.
During such period, no seller in Wall Township may utilize the
repayment option permitted by N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.8.
(2) If the Township exercises the option outlined in F(1), it shall:
(a) Provide public notice in a newspaper of general circulation;
and
(b) Notify the authority and COAH or a Court of the Township
Committee's action.
(3) The authority shall ensure that the deed restriction on all affected
housing units reflects the extended period of controls.
G. Continued application of options to create, rehabilitate or maintain lowand
moderate-income units. When a housing unit has been maintained
as a low- or moderate-income unit after controls have been in effect for
the period specified in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2, the deed restrictions governing
the housing units shall allow the Township, the state, nonprofit agencies
and sellers of low- and moderate-income units to again exercise all the
same options as provided in this Part 6.
H. Impact of foreclosure on resale while controls are in place; sales units.
A judgment of foreclosure or a deed in lieu of foreclosure to a financial
institution regulated by state and/or federal law or to a lender on the
secondary mortgage market (including, but not limited to, the Federal
National Mortgage Association, the Home Loan Mortgage Corporation,
the Government National Mortgage Association or an entity acting on
their behalf) shall extinguish controls on affordable housing units,
provided there is compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-2.14. Notice of
foreclosure shall allow the authority, the municipality, the Department
of Community Affairs, the Agency or a nonprofit entity to purchase the
affordable housing unit at a negotiated price not to exceed the
maximum permitted sales price and maintain it as an affordable unit for
the balance of the intended period of controls. Failure to purchase the
affordable housing unit shall result in COAH adding that unit to the
§ 140-289 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-289
139:591
§ 140-290. Age restriction.
The sales and rentals of not more than 25% of the affordable housing
units constructed within ML Zoning Districts within the Township may be
age restricted to senior citizens aged 62 or older as defined by and in
accordance with the Federal Fair Housing Act 42 USC 3601 et seq. and
N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.1 and N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.12. A request to age restrict housing
municipal present and prospective fair share obligation. Failure of the
financial institution to provide notice of a foreclosure action to the
authority shall not impair any of the financial institution's rights to
recoup loan proceeds, shall not negate the extinguishment of controls
or the validity of the foreclosure and shall create no cause of action
against the financial institution.
I. Excess proceeds upon foreclosures; sales units. In the event of a
foreclosure sale, the owner of the affordable housing unit shall be
personally obligated to pay to the authority responsible for assuring
affordability, any surplus funds, but only to the extent that such surplus
funds exceed the difference between the sales price at the time of
foreclosure and the amount necessary to redeem the debt to the
financial institution including costs of foreclosure.
J. Length of controls for rehabilitated, conversion and accessory
apartment housing units.
(1) Rehabilitated renter-occupied housing units that are improved to
code standard shall be subject to affordability controls for at least
10 years.
(2) Newly constructed low- and moderate-income rental units shall
remain affordable to low- and moderate-income households for a
period of 30 years. Affordability controls on rental units may
exceed the prescribed ten-year period if the developer agrees to a
longer period.
(3) Housing units created through conversion of a nonresidential
structure shall be considered a new housing unit and shall be
subject to controls on affordability as delineated in Subsection J(1)
and (2) above.
(4) Affordability controls on accessory apartments shall be for a period
of at least 10 years. However, in order to be eligible for a rental
bonus (pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.13.) controls on affordability
shall extend for a period of 30 years.
(5) Alternative living arrangements shall be controlled in a manner,
suitable to COAH, that provides assurances that such a facility will
house low- and moderate-income households for at least 10 years.
However, in order to be eligible for a rental bonus (pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.14(d)), controls on affordability shall extend for a
period of 30 years.
§ 140-289 WALL CODE § 140-290
139:592
units within a ML Zone District may only be granted after the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment has received the consent of the Township
Committee. In designing an age-restricted affordable housing project, the
applicant may propose constructing the senior citizen restricted affordable
units in the same building or buildings in order to maximize the potential of
preserving a more tranquil life-style for the senior citizen residents; and to
the foregoing extent, the requirement of integration of the affordable units
with conventional units is modified.
§ 140-291. Bedroom distribution.
§ 140-292. Location and design.
Low- and moderate-income inclusionary housing shall be designed in
accordance with the following provisions:
A. Inclusionary developments that are not age restricted to senior citizens
shall be structured in conjunction with realistic market demands so
that:
(1) The combination of efficiency and one-bedroom units is at least
10% and no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units;
(2) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units are twobedroom
units; and
(3) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units are threebedroom
units.
B. Low and moderate units restricted to senior citizens may utilize a
modified bedroom distribution in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.3,
Bedroom Distribution.
C. In the event the Rules of the Council on Affordable Housing shall
provide for a bedroom mix different than the foregoing, the
requirements of COAH shall control and the foregoing shall be deemed
modified for all projects which have not received final site plan
approval.
A. The low- and moderate-income housing units shall be sited on the tract
in locations at least as accessible to common open space and
community facilities as market-priced dwelling units. Rental units may
be concentrated for ownership and management reasons.
B. The exterior design of the low- and moderate-income housing units
shall be harmonious in scale, texture, and materials with the marketpriced
units on the tract.
§ 140-290 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-293
139:593
§ 140-293. Affirmative marketing plan.
The authority shall provide for the marketing of all low- and moderateincome
housing units developed pursuant to the provisions of this Part
6 in accordance with the provisions of an Affirmative Marketing Plan as
described below:
A. The Affirmative Marketing Plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all minority and minority
groups, regardless of sex, age or number of children, to housing units
which are being marketed by a developer or sponsor of affordable
housing. It is a continuing program and covers the period of deed
restriction.
B. Information. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall include the
information provided in N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.1(b).
C. Marketing program. The advertising component of the marketing
program shall be designed to reach all segments of the eligible
population within the East Central Housing Region (Monmouth, Ocean,
and Mercer Counties). It shall be used in advertising and publicizing
the availability of housing in accordance with the marketing program
requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.3.
(1) The marketing process for low- and moderate-income units shall
begin at least four months prior to expected occupancy.
(2) In implementing the marketing program, there shall be at least one
paid advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation within the
Housing Region during the first week of the marketing program.
Such advertisement shall include the items specified in N.J.A.C.
5:93-11.3(c).
(3) Applications for low- and moderate-income housing shall be
available in several locations, including, at a minimum, the
municipal administrative building(s), the municipal library and at
the developer's sales office. Applications shall be mailed to
prospective applicants upon request.
(4) If the cost of advertising low- and moderate-income units are to be
a developer's responsibility, the requirement shall be a condition of
the Township Planning Board or Board of Adjustment approval.
D. Marketing for initial sales and/or rental; composition of marketing pool.
(1) Households that apply for low- and moderate-income housing shall
be screened by the authority for preliminary income eligibility by
comparing their total income to the low- and moderate-income
limits adopted by COAH. Applicants shall be notified as to their
eligibility status.
(2) Having screened applicants for preliminary income eligibility, the
authority may analyze the income and household sizes of applicants
§ 140-293 WALL CODE § 140-293
139:594
to determine which applicants have the assets and/or income
necessary to purchase or rent each available low- or moderateincome
unit.
(3) The authority shall interview each applicant and utilize the
procedures outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1 to verify the applicant's
income and household size; determine the applicant's asset
availability; and review the applicant's credit history. Applicants
shall be required to submit income verification for each household
member 18 years or older. This process shall be utilized in
establishing the final certified applicant group.
(4) The process described in Subsection D(1) through (3) above may
begin no sooner than one month after the advertising program
outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.3 begins. Households shall be selected
to proceed through the process described in Subsection D(1)
through (3) above through a method of random selection.
Households shall be certified for low- and moderate-income units
using the procedures outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1. The process
described in Subsection D(1) through (3) shall be continued until
all the low- and moderate-income units are occupied.
E. Continuing marketing activities.
(1) The types of activities to be undertaken after the completion of
initial occupancy of sales and rental units in order to fill vacancies
resulting from normal turnover shall include:
(a) Ensuring a sufficient supply of income-eligible applicants by
continuing to implement the marketing plan throughout the
housing region, as outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.3. At a
minimum, the municipality shall maintain a current pool of at
least five income-eligible applicants for each low- and
moderate-income unit.
(b) Contacting each income-eligible applicant annually to request
updated information regarding income and family size.
(2) As units become available, the authority shall select eligible
applicants for the units, as described in N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.4(b)
through (d), until the units are occupied by low- and moderateincome
households.
F. Monitoring and reporting requirements.
(1) The Township shall collect information on each applicant for lowand
moderate-income housing on forms approved by COAH.
(2) The Township shall evaluate the results of its affirmative marketing
activities and file a report with COAH by August 30 of each year.
Such report shall include:
(a) Monitoring forms approved by COAH;
§ 140-293 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-293
139:595
§ 140-294. Residency preference.
(b) An evaluation of the income and demographic characteristics
of each applicant of low- and moderate-income housing, as well
as the occupants of the units; and
(c) An evaluation of any necessary adjustments in the affirmative
marketing program as a result of the evaluation in (a) above.
(3) COAH or the Court shall review and assess the effectiveness of the
Township affirmative marketing program. If it is deemed that the
affirmative marketing program is not effective, the Township shall
be required to amend the program.
A. Wall Township will provide an occupancy preference for low- and
moderate-income units created within the Township that responds to
the municipal rehabilitation component.
B. Wall Township will provide an occupancy preference to low- and
moderate-income households that reside or work in the East Central
Housing region (Monmouth, Ocean and Mercer Counties). Such a
preference may apply to all low- and moderate-income units created
within the Township.
§ 140-293 WALL CODE § 140-294
139:596
ARTICLE XLIII
Mount Laurel Zones
§ 140-295. Purposes.
A. The purposes of the Mount Laurel Zoning Districts shall be as follows:
(1) In order to satisfy the constitutional obligations of the Township, as
set forth by the New Jersey Supreme Court in its Mount Laurel I
and Mount Laurel II decisions, greater flexibility in design, layout
and construction of residential development must be permitted in
order to encourage developers to participate in the Mount Laurel
compliance process. The regulations established by this article are
intended to promote that purpose and to meet the Township
responsibilities to protect and defend its natural resources,
ecological systems, open spaces, natural beauty and the value of
property within the Township while at the same time providing for
its fair share of the regional need for affordable housing.
(2) The regulations established by this article are also intended to:
(a) Preserve the Township's environmental and natural resources
and avoid potential hazards thereto in anticipation of future
development.
(b) Avoid environmental degradation and its resultant harmful
effects upon the public health, safety and welfare.
(c) Encourage innovations in housing design and land
development techniques and provide for necessary facilities
for such developments.
(d) Promote compatibility with the Township's zoning plan and
pattern of development.
(e) Encourage retention and preservation of woodlands, surface
water, swamps, aquifer recharge areas, poorly drained soils,
floodplains and other open space areas for aesthetic and scenic
beauty, passive recreation, rejuvenation of natural resources
and preservation of the ecological systems of the Township.
(f) Encourage more effective use of land and of public services.
(g) Preserve the residential integrity of the Township.
(h) Ensure compatibility among various land uses.
B. The Planning Board shall be the approving authority for all applications
for development under this Part 6.
C. In every area zoned for Mount Laurel development, property may be
developed in accordance with the provisions of the zoning district
regulations cited in the permitted uses of the applicable district, or a
§ 140-295 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-295
139:597
§ 140-296. Mount Laurel 3 (ML-3) Zone.
developer may elect to participate in the Mount Laurel Compliance
Program. A developer shall be eligible to participate upon satisfaction
of the following conditions:
(1) Proof of ownership or a signed contract of sale of land within
Mount Laurel Zoning Districts.
(2) A developer's agreement with the Township of Wall stipulating the
amount and phasing of the contributions to be made to the Wall
Township Affordability Housing Trust Fund.
A. Permitted principal uses. In the ML-3 Zone, no site shall be used and no
structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for any purpose, except
the following:
(1) Developments not participating in the Mount Laurel ML-3 program
shall conform with the R-30 Zoning District regulations.
(2) For developments participating in the Mount Laurel Compliance
Program, the following uses are permitted:
(a) Single-family detached dwelling units.
(b) Multiple-family dwelling units, including townhouses,
apartments and flats.
(c) Single-family cluster and zero lot line detached dwelling units.
(d) Single-family attached dwelling units.
(e) Public parks, playgrounds, conservation areas and municipal
services and facilities.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Common recreational facilities and structures and common open
space.
(2) Private attached garage with a capacity for garaging not more than
two automobiles per unit.
(3) Storage sheds attached to and incorporated in the design of
individual dwelling units.
(4) Signs identifying the name of a development and not exceeding 24
square feet in area, one of which may be located at each entrance
to a development from an external street.
(5) Fences in perimeter or screening areas or private outdoor areas
between dwelling units.
(6) Freestanding garages for up to four vehicles.
§ 140-295 WALL CODE § 140-296
139:598
(7) Such other customary accessory uses and structures as may be
permitted by the approving authority.
C. Compliance with subdivision and site plan standards. A proposed
development which qualifies for approval under the Mount Laurel Lowand
Moderate-Income Housing Program in the ML-3 Zone shall be
subject to all of the requirements of this chapter (Land Use and
Development Regulations), as amended and supplemented, except as
set forth herein.
D. Density and development regulations. Development in the ML-3 Zone
shall be subject to the following density and development regulations:
(1) Density. Maximum gross density shall not exceed three dwelling
units per acre for the entire tract and shall not exceed the following
lot area and density standards:
(a) Single-family detached dwelling units: minimum lot size of
15,000 square feet per dwelling unit on "developable land" as
defined in Subsection D(1)(e) below.
(b) Multifamily dwelling units: There shall not be more than six
dwelling units constructed for each acre of developable land
within the tract as defined in Subsection D(1)(e) below.
(c) Single-family cluster and zero lot line detached dwelling units.
Density on developable land shall not exceed 4.5 dwelling units
per acre, and no lot shall be less than 5,000 square feet.
(d) Single-family cluster attached dwelling units. Density on
developable land shall not exceed three dwelling units per
acre, and no dwelling shall have less than 2,000 square feet of
dwelling area, excluding common open space areas.
(e) "Developable Land" shall mean contiguous land area(s) within
the tract, excluding existing streams, existing bodies of water,
wetlands, wetland buffers, flood hazard areas within a onehundred-
year floodplain and slopes greater than 15%. No
development of multifamily dwelling units shall be permitted
on slopes in excess of 10% slope unless the developer
demonstrates that he cannot develop the permitted number of
units on slopes of 10% or less. The Planning Board may permit
development of residential structures on slopes of 10% to 15%
where such development: minimizes overall site disturbance;
fosters preservation of existing trees; and/or permits site
design, including parking, internal traffic flow and building
arrangement in accordance with Wall Township design
standards.
(2) Impervious coverage. The maximum total impervious coverage
shall not exceed 40% of the developable land area.
§ 140-296 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-296
139:599
(3) Building coverage. The maximum land coverage by buildings shall
not exceed 20% of the developable land area.
(4) Building height. The maximum building height of a principal
structure shall be 35 feet. The maximum height of a clubhouse shall
be 35 feet and maximum height of all other accessory structures
shall be 16 feet.
(5) Maximum stories. Each building shall be limited to 2 1/2 stories of
habitable space and a basement all or more than 50% below grade.
Basements shall be used only for storage, utilities, garages or
similar nonhabitable uses. Basements shall only be permitted
where the seasonal depth to high-water table is two feet or more
below the basement floor.
E. Regulations for multifamily, single-family cluster detached and singlefamily
cluster attached dwelling unit. Development in the ML-3 Zone
shall be on a minimum of 10 acres of developable land and shall be
subject to the following requirements:
(1) Setbacks.
(a) Seventy-five feet from an existing public street or proposed
street as designated on the Township Master Plan and 100 feet
from an arterial highway (e.g., Routes 18, 138, 35, 70, 71 and
34). Decks and patios are permissible within the setback from
an existing public street or proposed street or arterial
highway; however, in no case shall a patio area encroach
within 50 feet of any such street or highway.
(b) Twenty feet from any internal or private street.
(c) Twenty feet from an internal parking area or driveway.
(d) Forty-five feet from any external tract boundary other than a
public street or arterial highway as specified in E(1)(a) above.
However, decks and patios are permitted up to 25 feet from an
external tract boundary other than a street or highway.
(e) Multifamily, quadplex or cluster single-family attached
dwellings shall be separated a minimum of 35 feet from any
other structure; provided, however, that where structures have
glass-to-glass exposure separation shall be 60 feet unless the
glass planes are at an angle greater than 15º, in which case 35
feet shall be provided. Said glass planes encompassing an
angle greater than 15º, includes angles created by buildings
being offset, as well as angles created by the plans of one
whole building being oblique to the plane of another.
(f) Single-family cluster dwelling units shall be separated by at
least 20 feet, unless attached by a common wall. Single-family
§ 140-296 WALL CODE § 140-296
139:600
dwelling units may be joined, however, by walls or fences
which enclose private yard areas.
(g) Single-family cluster and zero lot line homes shall be reported
by a minimum of 15 feet.
(2) Dwelling unit storage. No dwelling unit shall contain less than 300
cubic feet of storage space, which may be within attics, garages,
basements or cellars, and which shall be in addition to closet space
provided within the unit. If within a garage, a rectangle of not less
than 10 feet by 20 feet shall remain clear for parking vehicles.
(3) Dwelling unit width. No dwelling unit shall be less than 20 feet in
width.
(4) Open space and recreation areas. A recreation area providing for
active recreation facilities such as a pool, court sports, lawn areas,
and recreation building may be provided.
(5) Buffer areas. A landscaped buffer strip at least 20 feet in width
shall be permanently maintained along all exterior/outbound
property lines of the tract in accordance with the regulations of
§ 140-212. The buffer area may include required setback areas.
Fences of up to six feet in height are permitted in buffer areas. No
patio or deck area shall encroach within required buffer areas.
F. Other regulations. Developments in the ML-3 Zone shall be subject to
the following regulations, requirements and standards:
(1) Number of dwellings within buildings. Not more than four dwelling
units shall be contained adjacent to each other on a single plane
and not more than eight dwelling units shall be contained within
any one building.
(2) Front facade. The front facade of any structure containing more
than one dwelling unit shall not continue on the same plane for a
distance of more than the width of four adjacent units. Offsets
between front facade planes shall not be less than four feet.
(3) Underground utilities. All utilities shall be installed underground
within the driveways, roadways or other easement areas wherever
possible.
(4) Public water and sanitary sewers. All dwelling units shall be served
by public water and sanitary sewer systems.
(5) Garbage and recycling facilities. For multifamily dwelling units
where individual unit curbside pickup is not provided, garbage,
refuse and recyclable storage and collection areas suitable for
containerized collection shall be provided in sufficient number and
at locations convenient to all dwelling units. Such collection areas
shall be screened from view and shall be constructed of masonry,
brick or concrete.
§ 140-296 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-296
139:601
(6) Open space ownership. Common open space, recreational and
other facilities shall be owned, operated and maintained by any
recognized legal entity and the maintenance of the facilities shall
be the responsibility of the owner and owners.
(7) Documentation of homeowners' association and other restrictive
documents. All proposed deed restrictions, articles of incorporation
or other documents related to the creation of a homeowners'
association, trust documents or other deeds or documents to
provide for ownership and maintenance of common property and
facilities shall be submitted to the board, and to the Board and
Township Attorneys for review approval prior to the sale of any
home to individual purchasers.
(8) Construction easements. In all cases where the maintenance or
repair of any wall, fence or other improvement by its owner or his
agent would require entering upon an adjacent property, an
appropriate easement or right shall be created in favor of the
subject owner. All such easements shall be detailed and specific as
to required notice and any limitations upon the right of entry and
shall provide a specific means of arbitration in the event of
disputes.
(9) Streets, roads, driveways, parking facilities, walkways streetlights,
fire hydrants, drainage facilities and other improvements required
by Part 5 or appropriate or necessary to the development shall be
installed by and at the expense of the developer, in accordance with
the specifications of Part 5 except as modified herein:
(a) "Rolled" curbs shall be permitted, in accordance with
standards approved by the Township Engineer.
(b) Drainage maintenance (§ 140-245) in privately maintained
streets shall be the responsibility of the developer or
homeowners' association.
(c) Street intersections (§ 140-233B) shall be spaced not less than
600 feet on collector streets and 500 feet on local streets and
250 feet on intersection roads. Intersections between private
streets and those involving driveways or entrances to parking
areas are not subject to these requirements but shall instead
be based upon standard parking lot requirements as
determined by the Township Engineer.
(d) Tangents between reverse curves on local and private streets
(§ 140-233B) shall be a minimum of four feet unless otherwise
provided by the Township Engineer.
(e) The maximum length of permanent dead-end or cul-de-sac
streets (§ 140-233B) shall be 500 feet. Loop roads are not
subject to this requirement.
§ 140-296 WALL CODE § 140-296
139:602
(f) Pedestrian crosswalks (§ 140-236) may be required in blocks
over 1,000 feet in length and may be straight or meandering.
(10) All internal streets, regular roads and drives within the tract shall,
at the option of the Township of Wall, be either private or public
and shall be maintained by the body responsible for common areas
or by the Township.
(a) Internal streets, roads and drives shall have the following
minimum pavement widths:
[1] With no parking: 24 feet (optional to add three for rolled
top curb).
[2] With one-side parking: 33 feet (three feet may be part of
rolled curb).
[3] With two-side parking: 33 feet (three feet may be part of
rolled curb).
(b) The rights-of-way for all internal public roads shall have a
minimum width of 40 feet.
(c) If an internal street, road or drive has perpendicular parking, it
shall be deemed to be a private drive.
(d) The preceding standards for streets, roads and drives do not
apply to driveways leading to single or duplex units which shall
be governed by the standards for driveways and driveway
aprons contained in Part 5, Design Guidelines and
Construction Specifications.
(11) At least two parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling
unit, at least one of which shall be in an enclosed garage, and guest
parking shall be provided at a ratio of one space for every four
units. Required guest parking spaces may be provided on
driveways leading to attached garages, or parallel parking on
internal streets in accordance with Subsection F(10) above or
within collective parking lots or areas. All parking spaces shall be
within 250 feet of the dwelling unit.
(12) All sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet in width.
(13)No driveway shall enter any internal or private street at a point
closer than 20 feet to any internal private street intersection, which
distance shall be measured between the curbline or the pavement
edge or to the intersecting street right-of-way nearest to the
driveway in question. Driveways leading to attached and
freestanding garages shall have a minimum length of 20 feet not
including any part of a pedestrian walkway, common driveway or
interior street.
§ 140-296 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-296
139:603
§ 140-297. Mount Laurel Compliance Residential Adult Community
- 2 (MLC-RAC-2) Zone.
(14) A wall may be erected adjacent to the main entrance of the project,
provided that the wall is setback at least 25 feet from the existing
right-of-way of the public street, provides adequate turning radius
for all emergency vehicles, and does not interfere with sight
triangles. The wall shall not exceed six feet in height.
(15) A gatehouse not to exceed 15 feet in height is permitted, provided
that it is setback at least 25 feet from the existing right-of-way of
the public street, provides adequate turning radius for emergency
vehicles and provided further that the applicant agrees that the
gatehouse will be used for security purposes only and will never be
dedicated to the public.
G. Soil removal. The provisions of § 140-117 pertaining to the removal of
soil shall apply to developments in the ML-3 Zone except as follows:
(1) The provisions of § 140-117A may be modified to allow the
Township Engineer to issue a permit for the removal of subsoil as
may be necessary to construct the structures approved by the
approving authority.
(2) The provisions of § 140-117B may be modified as required by the
Planning Board to issue a temporary soil removal permit for the
removal of soil, sand or gravel as may be necessary to render the
premises suitable for the ML-3 development, for which a site plan
or major subdivision plat has been approved. The developer shall
adhere to and the Planning Board shall apply the standards of
Chapter 188, Soil Removal.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the MLC-RAC-2 Zoning District to provide for
development of a retirement adult community in accordance with
Ordinance 2-1997 as an alternative to the RR Zoning District
regulations as part of the Wall Township Mount Laurel Compliance Plan
process conditioned upon a voluntary contribution of 85,000 per
dwelling unit of senior residential development to the Wall Township
Affordable Housing Trust Fund as provided in § 140-282 and approved
by a Judgment of Repose on September 24, 1990, and an Amended
Consent Order (Docket No. L-027255-87) filed on March 6, 1998, and
the Housing Plan Element of the Township of Wall adopted on March
30, 1998.
B. Approving authority. The Planning Board shall be the approving
authority for all applications for development under this section.
C. Eligibility for participation. In every area zoned for MLC-RAC-2
property may be developed in accordance with the provisions of the
zone district in which the property was located immediately prior to its
inclusion in the Mount Laurel Compliance Plan, or a developer may
§ 140-296 WALL CODE § 140-297
139:604
elect to participate in the Mount Laurel compliance process. A
developer shall be eligible to participate in the Mount Laurel
compliance process upon satisfaction of the following conditions:
(1) Proof of ownership or a signed contract of sale of land within an
area zoned for MLC-RAC-2; and
(2) The execution of a developer's agreement with the Township of
Wall stipulating the amount and phasing of the contributions to be
made to the Wall Township Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
D. Permitted principal uses. In the MLC-RAC-2 Zone no site shall be used
and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for any purpose,
except the following:
(1) Developments not participating in the Mount Laurel Compliance
Program shall conform with the RR Zone District regulations as
may be applicable.
(2) For developments participating in the Mount Laurel Compliance
Program, the following uses are permitted: adult community
projects, as defined in § 140-287, consisting only of single-family
detached units.
E. Definition of adult community project (ACP).
(1) An adult community project (ACP) is a private residential
community comprised of various housing types and accessory uses
intended for, and limited and restricted to, use and occupancy by:
(a) Any person of the age of 55 years or over; or
(b) A husband or wife, regardless of age, residing with his or her
spouse, provided the spouse of such person is of the age of 55
years or over; or
(c) A child or children residing with a permissible occupant,
provided the child or children is or are of the age of 19 years or
older; or
(d) An individual or individuals, regardless of age, residing with
and providing physical or economic support to a permissible
occupant.
(2) The foregoing occupancy restrictions shall not be construed to
prohibit the occupants of any unit in an ACP from entertaining
guests, of any age, in their units, including temporary residency not
to exceed three months, with no financial or other pecuniary
consideration to be paid therefor.
F. Minimum tract size. An ACP may only be developed on one or more
contiguous parcels of land having a total gross area of not less than 50
acres.
§ 140-297 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-297
139:605
G. Permitted principal uses. The principal uses of buildings in an ACP shall
be limited to the following:
(1) Single-family detached units, provided that they comply with the
area and bulk zoning requirements of this section.
(2) Recreation facilities permitted under this section.
(3) Sales and administrative offices required for the construction, sale,
resale and management of the ACP.
H. Permitted accessory uses. The accessory uses of buildings and
structures in an ACP shall be limited to the following:
(1) Master television antenna system and/or cable television antenna/
reception facilities.
(2) Common parking areas for guest parking or dedicated for specific
parking purposes such as recreational vehicle and trailer parking.
(3) Buildings for storage of vehicles, equipment and supplies.
(4) Outbuildings and structures as part of the recreation facilities.
(5) Public and private parks and gardens.
(6) Private greenhouses.
(7) Private swimming pools.
I. Permitted accessory uses for dwelling units. Accessory uses on the
same single-family residential lot and customarily incidental to the
permitted principal use shall be permitted, including:
(1) Private attached garage with a capacity for garaging two vehicles
per unit.
(2) Storage sheds attached to and incorporated in the design of
individual dwelling units.
(3) Fences.
(4) Decks, patios, gazebos and screened porches.
(5) Such other customary accessory uses and structures as may be
permitted by the approving authority.
J. Bulk requirements. The following bulk requirements shall be applicable
to the MLC-RAC-2 Zone:
(1) Open space, coverage, and density requirements. The following
requirements shall apply to any ACP:
(a) Maximum building coverage: 25% of gross area of ACP tract.
§ 140-297 WALL CODE § 140-297
139:606
(b) Maximum building density: 3.6 units per gross acre of ACP
tract; subject, however, to the condition that a maximum of 180
dwelling units shall be permitted in the ACP.
(c) Minimum open space: 30% of gross area of ACP tract. For
purposes of this requirement, "open space" shall mean those
portions of the ACP tract not covered by buildings, structures
of any kind, streets or other surfaces paved with impervious
materials. Open space on individual lots shall be calculated
based on the assumed maximization of impervious and building
coverage permitted on each lot.
(2) Bulk requirements. The following bulk requirements shall apply to
the individual dwelling units in an ACP:
(a) All detached units to be constructed on individual lots in an
ACP shall comply with and conform to the following
requirements:
[1] Minimum lot area:
[a] Corner lot: 6,000 square feet.
[b] Interior lot: 5,000 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot width and frontage:
[a] Corner lot: 70 feet.
[b] Interior lot: 50 feet.
[c] In the case of an irregularly shaped lot, the minimum
lot frontage may be reduced to 60% of the minimum
requirement.
[3] Minimum lot depth: 100 feet, 125 feet along the Garden
State Parkway.
[4] Minimum setbacks:
[a] Front yard measured from lot line: 25 feet. Lot lines
shall be established at points equidistant from the
center line of the paved cartway.
[b] One side yard: 5 feet.
[c] Combined side yards: 15 feet.
[d] Rear yard: 20 feet.
[5] Minimum distance between buildings: 15 feet.
[6] Maximum impervious coverage: 50%.
[7] Maximum building coverage: 41%.
§ 140-297 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-297
139:607
(b) Minimum parking requirements:
[1] Each detached unit shall include one attached garage
space and two off-street parking spaces, for a total of three
spaces.
[2] A private driveway with capacity for off-street parking of
two automobiles shall be deemed to constitute two parking
spaces.
[3] Each two-car garage driveway shall have a curb cut of a
minimum of 18 feet. Each one-car garage driveway shall
have a curb cut of a minimum of 12 feet.
[4] Each driveway shall be set back a minimum of five feet
from side property lines.
(c) Decks, patios, porches: A deck, patio or screened porch shall
be permitted within 10 feet of any rear yard line and five of any
side yard line.
(d) Maximum building height: 35 feet/2 1/2 stories.
(e) Minimum accessory building setbacks and maximum height:
[1] Side yard: 10 feet.
[2] Rear yard: 10 feet.
[3] Maximum height: 16 feet and one story.
K. Utilities. An ACP must be fully serviced by public water service and
sanitary sewerage systems. The developer shall pay the cost of
connection and transmission facilities necessary to connect to the
systems.
L. Required recreation facilities. Any ACP shall contain and provide for the
benefit, use and enjoyment of its residents the following recreation
facilities:
(1) A recreation area containing a recreation building or clubhouse
equal in size to 15 square feet for each dwelling unit in the ACP.
(2) A swimming pool of a minimum size of 30 x 50 feet, with an
adjacent improved sitting area surrounding all sides of the pool
with an aggregate area equal to twice the water surface area of the
pool.
(3) Parking facilities serving the recreation area, with a minimum
number of parking spaces equal to one space for each 50 square
feet of area comprising the recreation building.
(4) Picnic/barbecue areas with a minimum size of 10 square feet for
each dwelling unit in the ACP.
§ 140-297 WALL CODE § 140-297
139:608
(5) One tennis court for each 90 dwelling units in the ACP.
M. Optional recreation facilities. An ACP may contain the following
facilities for the benefit, use and enjoyment of its residents:
(1) Paddle tennis courts.
(2) Jogging trail.
(3) Fitness/exercise courses.
(4) Gardening areas (including greenhouses).
(5) Boccie courts.
(6) Shuffleboard courts.
(7) Such other activities which the Planning Board shall find to be
consistent with the life-style of residents of an ACP and which are
subordinate to the residential character of an ACP.
N. Ownership of recreation facilities. All recreation facilities shall be
owned by a homeowners' association as defined herein.
O. Setback and distance measurements. Building setbacks and minimum
distances between all buildings shall be measured from lot lines (and
not from street lines) to building foundation lines, excluding
foundations for fireplaces, porches and other exterior protrusions of a
building which do not protrude beyond six feet from the building
foundation line.
P. Perimeter boundary setbacks. No buildings or structures, other than
entrance gatehouses, walls or fences, shall be located within the
minimum distances as follows:
(1) Along the Garden State Parkway, a minimum of 40 feet shall be
maintained between the Garden State Parkway right-of-way and
any principal structure as defined above.
(2) Along the border with Howell Township and Brick Township, a
minimum distance of 60 feet between principal dwellings in Howell
Township or Brick Township and principal dwellings in Wall
Township shall be maintained. In all events, the rear yard setback
requirement of this section shall be maintained regardless of the
satisfaction of the minimum distance between principal dwellings.
Q. Homeowners' association; recorded covenants. Any ACP shall be
governed and regulated by on or more recorded declarations of
covenants and restrictions (C&R's) which shall provide for and create
one or more incorporated membership organizations under Title 15 of
the New Jersey Statutes in which all unit owners in the ACP shall be
required to be members of the homeowners' association.
(1) The C&R's shall provide for:
§ 140-297 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-297
139:609
(a) The ownership, maintenance, operation and upkeep of all
recreation facilities, open space, streets and other common
areas within the ACP by the homeowners' association;
(b) The restrictions on unit occupancy set forth in Subsection E;
(c) The procedure for creating, imposing and collecting
assessments from each unit owner to finance the foregoing;
and
(d) The organization, operation and management of the
homeowners' association.
(2) A complete copy of the proposed C&R's and all documents creating
and organizing the homeowners' association shall be submitted to
the Planning Board for review and approval with the first
application for final subdivision and/or site plan approval submitted
for the ACP or the first section thereof.
R. Streets and roads. All streets and roads in an ACP shall conform to the
provisions of Part 5 of this chapter, except as hereinafter specifically
provided, provided that the developer-applicant of an ACP shall
expressly condition the preliminary subdivision and/or site plan
approval of the ACP upon all streets and roads within the ACP being
privately owned and maintained by the homeowners' association in
perpetuity, such streets and roads shall be constructed in accordance
with Part 5, except as follows:
(1) Rolled or Belgian block curbs shall be permitted in accordance with
standards approved by the Township Engineer.
(2) Maintenance or open space areas shall be the responsibility of the
developer or homeowners' association.
(3) Street intersections shall conform with § 140-233B. Intersections
between private streets and those involving driveways or entrances
to parking areas area not subject to these requirements but shall
instead be based upon standard parking lot requirements as
determined by the Township Engineer.
(4) Tangents between reverse curves on local and private streets shall
be a minimum of 40 feet unless otherwise provide for by the
Township Engineer.
(5) The maximum length of permanent dead-end or cul-de-sac streets
shall be 600 feet. Loop roads are not subject to this requirement.
(6) Pedestrian crosswalks may be required in blocks over 1,000 feet in
length and may be straight or meandering.
(7) All streets and roads within the tract shall be private streets and
shall have a minimum pavement width of 36 feet.
§ 140-297 WALL CODE § 140-297
139:610
(8) All sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet in width; provided,
however, that where sidewalks are adjacent to parking lots, the
minimum width shall be five feet six inches.
(9) No driveways shall enter any internal or private streets at a point
closer than 30 to any internal or private street intersection, which
distance shall be measured between the curbline or the pavement
edge of the intersecting street nearest to the driveway in question.
(10) All internal private streets shall have a minimum right-of-way width
of 50 feet.
(11) Sidewalks of four feet in width shall be provided on both sides of all
streets and will be located beginning three feet from the curb face,
with a grass strip between the curbline and the sidewalk.
(12) The minimum center-line radius for streets shall be 100 feet,
provided that no on-street parking shall be permitted on any loop
road around the recreation complex.
S. Drainage. All on-site drainage shall be provided for in accordance with
the Township of Wall storm drainage requirements and applicable
Township ordinances pertaining to subdivision and development of
lands.
T. Driveways, walks and parking areas. There shall be provided a safe and
convenient system of driveways, walks and parking areas. Due
consideration shall be given in planning walks, ramps and driveways to
prevent slipping or stumbling.
U. Look-alike restriction.
(1) Except as hereinafter provided, not more than one building permit
shall be issued for any dwelling to be erected in the ACP if it is
substantially alike in exterior design and appearance with any
neighboring dwelling. A building or structure shall be deemed to be
a neighboring dwelling if it is on the lot which is the first lot next
along any street, and in addition thereto, any lot which is directly
across a street.
(2) Neighboring dwellings, as hereinabove defined, shall be considered
substantially alike in exterior design and appearance if they are not
different in at least three of the following six respects:
(a) The relative location of a garage porch or any other such
structural appurtenance with respect to the facade.
(b) The relative location or type of windows and doors.
(c) The type of roof, with respect to any appurtenances,
configuration, or pitch.
(d) The type or color of siding material.
§ 140-297 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-297
139:611
§ 140-298. MLC-8A Multifamily (eight DU/acre) Zone.
The MLC-8A Zoning District consists of a portion of Lot 8 in Block 263
which was granted use variance approval by the Board of Adjustment on
November 7, 1990, for 104 attached housing units known as "Ashford
Manor (Cove B)" on 26.20 acres yielding a density of eight dwelling units
per acre (eight DU/acre) in accordance with general design standards
contained in Part 5 and conditioned upon a voluntary contribution of
$210,000 ($2,019 per unit) to the Wall Township Affordable Housing Trust
Fund in accordance with Ordinance 26-1985, adopted December 11, 1985,
and Ordinance 13-1986 adopted on July 23, 1986; approved in the Housing
Plan Element and Fair Share Plan of the Township of Wall adopted August
1, 1988, and amended on February 13, 1990, and November 26, 1990; and
approved by a Judgment of Repose on September 24, 1990, and the first
amendment thereto filed on December 11, 1990.
§ 140-299. ML-8B Senior Citizen and Townhouse (eight DU/acre)
Zone.
The ML-8B Zoning District consists of Block 274, Lots 20 and 21, which
was granted use variance approval by the Board of Adjustment for 67 senior
low- and moderate-income senior rental apartment units known as "Allaire
(e) The type of roofing material or the color or the pattern thereof.
(f) Orientation of the building when viewed from a single viewing
point.
V. Procedures for approval of ACP. Any developer applicant proposing to
develop an ACP shall make application to the Planning Board for
approval of a preliminary subdivision or site plan pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
W. No municipal responsibility for operations. Neither the provisions of
this section, nor the granting of subdivision or site plan approval for an
ACP shall be deemed to render the Township liable or responsible for:
(1) The interpretation or enforcement of any agreement between the
applicant, developer, owner or operator of the ACP and any
resident or residents thereof;
(2) The review, supervision or control of the operation of an ACP or any
phase thereof; or
(3) The installation of any services of any kind involving utilities to
serve an ACP; provided, however, that the Township shall retain the
right to enforce the terms and provisions of this chapter and all
other ordinances of the Township of Wall applicable thereto.
X. Other regulations. All other regulations contained in this Chapter 140,
Land Use and Development Regulations, not specifically modified
herein, shall apply to development in the MLC-RAC-2 Zone.
§ 140-297 WALL CODE § 140-299
139:612
Crossing" and 102 single-family attached townhouse units known as "Allaire
Manor" on 24.84 acres yielding a density of eight dwelling units per acre
in accordance with general design standards contained in Part 5, and as
approved in the Housing Plan Element and Fair Share Plan of the Township
of Wall adopted August 1, 1988, and amended on February 13, 1990, and
November 26, 1990, and approved by a Judgment of Repose on September
24, 1990, and amendments thereto.
§ 140-300. MLC-3 Multifamily (three DU/acre) Zone.
The MLC-3 Zoning District consists of Block 801, Lot 2, which was granted
a use variance approval by the Board of Adjustment on December 16, 1987,
for 11 single-family attached housing units known as "Neighbor" on 3.60
acres yielding a density of three dwelling units per acre in accordance with
general design standards contained in Part 5 and conditioned upon the
maintenance of a twenty-percent set-aside or, in the event the Township
adopted a development fee ordinance, the payment of a fee in accordance
with the ordinance. The Township adopted a voluntary development fee
ordinance (Ordinance 34-1987) on December 9, 1987, which permitted
Neighbor and other developers that had obtained a variance on the basis of
Mount Laurel considerations to satisfy their Mount Laurel responsibilities
via the payment of a fee for each such unit constructed in their exclusively
market projects. Ordinance 34-1987 and the variance approval of Neighbor
is included in the Fair Share Plan and contemplated by the Housing Plan
Element approved by the Court on September 24, 1990. The MLC-3
designation memorializes the Board of Adjustment approval.
§ 140-301. MLC-7 Multifamily (seven DU/acre) Zone.
The MLC-7 Zoning District consists of Block 190, Lot 5, which was granted
use variance approval by the Board of Adjustment on October 15, 1986,
for 12 single-family attached housing units known as "Westgate" on 1.13
acres yielding a density of seven dwelling units per acre in accordance
with general design standards contained in Part 5 and conditioned upon
the maintenance of a twenty-percent set-aside or, in the event the Township
adopted a development fee ordinance, the payment of a fee in accordance
with the ordinance. The Township adopted a voluntary development fee
ordinance (Ordinance 34-1987) on December 9, 1987, which permitted
Westgate and other developers that had obtained a variance on the basis of
Mount Laurel considerations to satisfy their Mount Laurel responsibilities
via the payment of a fee for each such unit constructed in their exclusively
market projects. Ordinance 34-1987 and the variance approval of Westgate
is included in the Fair Share Plan and contemplated by the Housing Plan
Element approved by the Court on September 24, 1990. The MLC-7
designation memorializes the Board of Adjustment approval.
§ 140-302. ML-8A Multifamily (eight DU/acre) Zone.
§ 140-299 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-302
139:613
A. Permitted principal uses. In the ML-8A Zone, no premises shall be used
and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for any purposes
except the following:
(1) Any principal use permitted in the prevailing or underlying zone.
(2) Townhouses.
(3) Patio homes.
(4) Quadplexes.
(5) Zero lot line homes.
(6) Multifamily structures of up to an average of six units per building
with a minimum of three and a maximum of eight units per
building, with up to four units on the first floor and up to four units
on the second floor or up to eight units on the ground floor only.
(7) Single-family cluster detached dwelling units.
(8) Single-family cluster attached dwelling units.
(9) Public parks, playgrounds, conservation areas, and municipal
services and facilities.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Common parking areas.
(2) Common recreational facilities and structures and common open
space.
(3) Private attached garage with a capacity for garaging not more than
two automobiles per unit.
(4) Storage sheds attached to and incorporated in the design of
individual dwelling units.
(5) Signs identifying the name of a development and not exceeding 48
square feet in area, one of which may be located at each entrance
to a development from an external street.
(6) Fences in perimeter or screening areas or private outdoor areas
between dwelling units.
(7) Such other customary accessory uses and structures as may be
permitted by the approving authority. All structures accessory to
dwelling units shall be attached to the dwelling unit to which they
are accessory. Any common storage facility shall be attached to a
common building rather than freestanding.
C. Compliance with site plan standards, subdivision standards and zoning
regulations. A development which qualifies for approval under the
Mount Laurel compliance process in the ML-8A Zone shall be subject to
§ 140-302 WALL CODE § 140-302
139:614
all the requirements and development standards of this chapter, except
as those requirements or standards shall be modified by this section,
and except that the following regulations and standards shall not apply
to MLD-8 developments:
(1) Section 140-111, Principal building frontage on public street.
(2) Section 140-121, Housing facade diversity.
(3) Subsection 140-91, pertaining to performance guarantees.
(4) Waiver of improvements in accordance with this chapter.
D. Maximum regulations. Development in the ML-8A Zone shall be subject
to the following maximum regulations:
(1) Density. There shall not be no more than eight dwelling units
constructed upon each acre of developable land within the tract,
excluding streams, bodies of water, wetlands, flood hazard areas
and slopes greater than 15%. The arrangement of dwelling units on
the site shall be such that there is at least a full acre of developable
land which can be assigned exclusively to each eight dwelling units.
Each such acre shall be capable of being defined by a line
subscribed around its eight dwelling units, which line shall close.
(2) Impervious surfaces. The maximum total impervious surface,
including buildings, shall be 50% of the developable area of the
tract.
(3) Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage by building shall be 30%
of the developable area of the tract.
(4) Building height. The mean building height of a principal structure
shall be 35 feet with a maximum height of 40 feet. The mean
building height of accessory structures shall be 16 feet. "Mean"
height shall be defined as the average elevation of all outside
corners of a structure from final grade to the highest point of the
roof.
(5) Maximum stories. Each building shall be limited to two stories plus
an attic above grade and a basement which must be all or partly
below grade. Attics and basements shall be used only for storage,
utilities, garages or similar uses.
E. Minimum regulations. Development in the ML-8A Zone shall be on a
minimum of six acres and shall be subject to the following minimum
regulations:
(1) Setbacks:
(a) Fifty feet from an existing public street or proposed collector
street as designated on the Master Plan.
(b) Twenty feet from any internal street.
§ 140-302 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-302
139:615
(c) Ten feet from an internal collective parking area or driveway.
(d) Thirty-five feet from any internal tract boundary, except where
the boundary borders a single-family lot on which an existing
residential dwelling is located less than 50 feet from the
common external tract boundary, in which case the setback
shall be 50 feet from the external tract boundary.
(e) Seventy-five feet from any other structure;
(f) Single-family dwelling units shall be separated by at least 10
feet, unless attached by a common wall. Single-family dwelling
units may be joined, however, by walls or fences which enclose
private yard areas.
(2) Dwelling unit size. No residential dwelling unit on a single floor
shall contain less than 1,000 square feet of habitable space. No
residential dwelling unit of more than one story shall contain less
than 1,400 square feet of habitable space.
(3) Dwelling unit storage. No dwelling unit shall contain less than 300
cubic feet of storage space, which may be within garages,
basements or cellars, and which shall be in addition to closet space
provided with the unit. If within garages, a rectangle of not less
than 10 feet by 20 feet shall remain clear for parking vehicles.
(4) Dwelling unit width. No dwelling unit shall be less than 20 feet in
width and the average width of all dwelling units within a
development shall not be less than 22 feet. If unit is at least 55 feet
in length, it may be 18 feet in width and the average width of such
units shall be 20 feet.
(5) Dwelling unit characteristics. Each dwelling unit shall contain, at a
minimum, a separate living room, a separate bedroom, a separate
bathroom, and a kitchen which shall be located separate and apart
from other rooms, with the exception of a dining area.
(6) Open space and recreation areas. Active and passive recreational
and open space areas shall be provided and shall include suitable
landscaping and sitting and walking areas.
(7) Buffer areas. A landscaped buffer strip at least 25 feet in width
shall be permanently maintained along all property Lines of the
tract, in accordance with the regulations of § 140-212. The buffer
area may include required setback areas.
F. Other regulations. Developments in the ML-8A Zone shall be subject to
the following regulations, requirements and standards:
(1) Not less than three or more than eight dwelling units with a
average of not more six units shall be contained within any one
building which contains more than one dwelling unit.
§ 140-302 WALL CODE § 140-302
139:616
(2) The front facade of any structure containing more than one
dwelling unit shall not continue on the same plane for a distance of
more than the width of four adjacent units. Offsets between front
facade planes shall not be less than four feet no more than 20 feet.
(3) All utilities shall he installed underground and the charges for all
utilities, including streetlighting, shall be borne by the
homeowners' association.
(4) All dwelling units shall be served by public water and sanitary
sewer systems. The developer shall pay the cost of connection and
transmission facilities necessary to connect to municipal sewer and
water systems.
(5) Garbage and refuse storage and connection area suitable for
containerized collection shall be provided in sufficient number and
at locations convenient to all dwelling units. Such areas shall be
screened from view on three sides by solid fence, walls or other
suitable materials.
(6) Garbage and refuse collection shall be provided and maintained by
the body responsible for internal streets and other common
facilities.
(7) Streets, roads, driveways, parking facilities, walkways, streetlights,
fire hydrants, drainage facilities and other improvements required
by Part 5 or appropriate or necessary to the development shall be
installed by and at the expense of the developer, in accordance with
the specifications of Part 5, except as modified herein:
(a) Rolled curbs shall be permitted, in accordance with standards
approved by the Township Engineer.
(b) If rolled curb is provided concrete gutters (§ 140-233) shall not
be required.
(c) Storm sewer design (§ 140-244) may be in accordance with the
USDA method, subject to the approval of the Township
Engineer.
(d) Storm drain pipes (§ 140-244B) may be installed under curbs in
streets to be privately maintained.
(e) Drainage maintenance (§ 140-245) in privately maintained
streets shall be the responsibility of the developer and his
successors in title.
(f) Street intersections (§ 140-233B) shall be spaced not less than
600 feet on collector streets, 500 feet on local streets and 250
feet on internal roads.
(g) Tangent between reverse curves on local streets (§ 140-233B)
shall be 40 feet.
§ 140-302 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-302
139:617
(h) The maximum length of permanent dead-end streets
(§ 140-233B) shall be 500 feet.
(i) Pedestrian crosswalks (§ 140-236) may be required in blocks
over 1,000 feet long and may be straight or curvilinear.
(j) All streets and roads within the tract shall be private streets
and shall be maintained by the body responsible for common
areas. Rights of access and enforcement shall be formally
granted to the Township.
(k) Internal streets (§ 140-233B) shall have the following minimum
pavement widths:
[1] With one-side parking 33 feet (three feet may be part of
rolled curb).
[2] With two-side parking 36 feet (three feet may be part of
rolled curb).
[3] An additional right-of-way of five feet shall be provided on
both sides of any street, measured from the curb.
(l) At least two parking spaces shall be provided to each dwelling
unit, at least one of which spaces shall be in an attached
garage. In addition, guest parking shall be provided at the ratio
of one space for every four units. Required parking spaces may
be provided in any combination: within attached garages, on
driveways leading to attached garages, parallel parking on
internal streets, or within collective parking lots or areas. At
least one parking space for each dwelling unit shall be within
100 feet of that dwelling unit measured alone the route
reasonably expected to be used to walk from the dwelling unit
to the parking space. Where driveways are utilized to meet
parking requirements, integrity and function of pedestrian
walkways shall be maintained.
(m) Common open space, recreational or other facilities may be
owned, operated and maintained in any recognized legal
capacity and the maintenance of such facilities shall be the
responsibility of the owner or owners.
(n) All dwelling units shall be constructed to be offered for sale on
a fee simple or condominium basis, subject to such restrictions
and covenants as may be required to establish common rights
and responsibilities.
(o) All proposed deed restrictions, articles of incorporation or
other documents related to the creation of a homeowners'
association, trust documents or other deeds or documents or
other deeds or documents to provide for ownership and
maintenance of common property and facilities shall be
§ 140-302 WALL CODE § 140-302
139:618
submitted to the Township for review by the Township Attorney
prior to final approval of any subdivision or site plan.
(p) In all cases where the maintenance or repair of any wall, fence
or other improvement by its owner or his agent would require
entry upon an adjacent property, an appropriate easement or
right-of-way shall be created in favor of the subject owner. All
such easements shall be detailed and specific as to required
notice and any limitations upon the right of entry and shall
provide a specific means of arbitration in the event of disputes.
G. Waivers or modifications of standards and requirements. The approving
authority may grant waivers or modifications of any improvement
requirements or standards of this section or Part 4 if appropriate and
warranted by the facts and circumstances of each particular
development and if recommended by the Township Engineer. The
resolution of approval shall specifically state the reasons for any such
waivers or modifications.
H. Soil removal. The provisions of § 140-117 of this chapter pertaining to
the removal of soil shall apply to developments in the ML-8A Zone as
modified as follows:
(1) The provisions of § 140-117A shall be modified to authorize the
Planning Board to issue a temporary soil removal of subsoil as may
be necessary to construct the structures approved by the approving
authority.
(2) The provisions of § 140-117B shall be modified to authorize the
Planning Board to issue a temporary soil removal permit for the
removal of soil, sand or gravel as may be necessary to render the
premises suitable for the ML-8A development, for which a site plan
or major subdivision plat has been approved. The Planning Board
shall apply the standards of Chapter 188, Soil Removal.
I. Performance guarantee. In the ML-8A Zone, the provisions of § 140-92
with respect to performance guarantees shall apply.
J. Maintenance guarantee. In the ML-8A Zone, the provisions of § 140-93
with respect to the maintenance guarantees shall apply.
K. Improvements required prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy. In
the ML-8A Zone, the provisions of 140-286I shall apply with respect to
the issuance of certificates of occupancy.
(1) No permanent certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any use
or building until all required improvements are installed and
approved by the Township Engineer or other appropriate authority.
(2) No temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any use
or building unless the Township Engineer shall have, where
applicable, certified to the following:
§ 140-302 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-302
139:619
(a) Utilities and drainage: All utilities, including, but not limited to,
water, gas, storm drains, sanitary sewers, electric lines and
telephone lines shall have been properly installed and service
to the lot, building or use from such utilities shall be available.
(b) Street rights-of-way: All street rights-of-way necessary to
provide access to the lot, building or use in question shall have
been completely graded and all slope-retaining devices or
slope planting shall have been installed.
(c) Sidewalks: All sidewalks necessary to provide access to the lot,
building or use in question shall have been properly installed.
(d) Streets: Curbing, and the bituminous base course of
bituminous concrete streets necessary to provide access to the
required number of parking spaces for the building or use in
question shall have been properly installed.
(e) Curbing and parking areas: Curbing and the bituminous base
course of parking areas necessary to provide access to the
required number of parking spaces for the building or use in
question shall have been properly installed.
(f) Obstructions: All exposed obstructions in parking areas, access
drives or streets such as manhole frames, water boxes, gas
boxes and the like shall be protected by building to the top of
such exposures with bituminous concrete as directed by the
Township Engineer.
(g) Screening, fences, and landscaping: All required screening,
fencing and/or landscaping related to the lot, building or use in
question shall have been properly installed, unless the
Township Engineer shall direct the developer to delay the
planting of screening and landscaping until the next planting
season in order to improve the chances of survival of such
plantings.
(h) Site grading: All site grading necessary to permit proper
surface drainage and prevent erosion of soils shall have been
completed in accordance with the approved soil disturbance
plans.
(i) Public water supply: Where the proposed lot, building or use is
served by a public water supply, said supply shall have been
installed and tested and all required fire hydrants or fire
connections shall have been installed and tested and approved.
However, the public water supply shall not be used to supply
outdoor sprinkler systems.
(j) Lighting: All outdoor lighting shall have been installed and
shall be operational.
§ 140-302 WALL CODE § 140-302
139:620
§ 140-303. MLC-8 Multifamily (eight DU/acre) Zone.
The MLC-8 Zoning District consists of Block 352, Lot 3, known as "Govel
(Southport)" which was granted a use variance approval by the Board
of Adjustment in September 1986 for 30 single-family attached housing
units on 3.90 acres yielding a density of eight dwelling units per acre
in accordance with general design standards contained in Part 5 and
conditioned upon the maintenance of a twenty-percent set-aside or, in the
event the Township adopted a development fee ordinance, the payment of
a fee in accordance with the ordinance. The Township adopted a voluntary
development fee ordinance (Ordinance 34-1987) on December 9, 1987,
which permitted Southport and other developers that had obtained a
variance on the basis of Mount Laurel considerations to satisfy their Mount
Laurel responsibilities via the payment of a fee for each such unit
constructed in their exclusively market projects. Ordinance 34-1987 and
(k) Street signs and traffic control devices: All street signs, paint
lining and/or traffic control devices affecting the proposed lot,
building, or use, and required under the terms of approval of a
subdivision or site plan or by federal, county, or municipal
rules, regulations, or laws, shall have been installed.
(l) Performance guarantee: The Engineer shall have received a
statement signed by the developer and any entity providing
any performance guarantee, which contains language identical
or similar to the following: "The issuance of any certificate of
occupancy (temporary or permanent) shall not be a basis for
any claimed reduction in any performance guarantee."
(m) Other: Any other conditions established for issuance of a
certificate of occupancy by the Planning Board as a condition
of final site plan or subdivision approval shall be complied with.
(n) Temporary certificates of occupancy shall be issued for a
specified period of time, not to exceed one year.
L. Inspection fees. The provisions of § 140-60, pertaining to inspection
fees in all developments in the ML-8A Zone.
M. Application fees. An application shall not be deemed complete unless it
is accompanied by an application fee for the entire development in the
amount of $1,000, plus $125 per unit for the first 25 units, plus $35 per
unit for the next 75 units, plus $20 per unit for each unit over 100 units.
N. Revision fees. An additional fee in the amount of 50% of the application
fee up to a maximum of $3,500 shall be paid if revision of the
preliminary plat or site plan requires further consideration at a
Planning Board hearing. If revision of the preliminary plat or site plan
does not require further consideration at a Planning Board hearing, an
additional fee in the amount of 20% of the application fee up to a
maximum of $l,500 shall be paid.
§ 140-302 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-303
139:621
the variance approval of Southport is included in the Fair Share Plan and
contemplated by the Housing Plan Element approved by the Court on
September 24, 1990. The MLC-8 designation memorializes the Board of
Adjustment approval.
§ 140-304. MLC-9 Multifamily (nine DU/acre) Zone.
The MLC-9 Zone consists of Block 273, Lot 9, known as "Old Mill Manor"
which was granted a use variance approval by the Board of Adjustment in
September 1986 for 15 single-family attached housing units on 1.6 acres
yielding a density of 9.2 dwelling units per acre in accordance with Part
5 and conditioned upon the maintenance of a twenty-percent set-aside
or, in the event the Township adopted a development fee ordinance, the
payment of a fee in accordance with the ordinance. The Township adopted
a voluntary development fee ordinance (Ordinance 34-1987) on December
9, 1987, which permitted Old Mill Manor and other developers that had
obtained a variance on the basis of Mount Laurel considerations to satisfy
their Mount Laurel responsibilities via the payment of a fee for each such
unit constructed in their exclusively market projects. Ordinance 34-1987
and the variance approval of Old Mill Manor is included in the Fairs Share
Plan and contemplated by the Housing Plan Element approved by the Court
on September 24, 1990. The MLC-9 designation memorializes the Board of
Adjustment approval.
§ 140-305. MLCC Congregate Care Zone. [Amended 10-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 31-2005]
A. Permitted principal uses. In the MLCC Zone, no premises shall be used
and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for any purposes
except the following:
(1) Developments not participating in the Mount Laurel program shall
conform with the R-10 Residential Zone;
(2) For developments participating in the Wall Township Mount Laurel
Program the following uses are permitted:
(a) Congregate care and assisted living residential facilities
located in multifamily structures containing individual living
units which provide for and comply with the "Standards for
Assisted Living Residences" contained in N.J.A.C. 8:36-3 et seq.
(b) Multifamily structures containing flats or apartment units of up
to 12 units per building; provided, however, that not more than
six units shall be on each floor.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Common parking areas.
(2) Common storage structures and facilities subject to the same
limitations and requirements as the principal structures.
§ 140-303 WALL CODE § 140-305
139:622
(3) Common open space and recreational facilities and structures
subject to the same limitations and requirements as the principal
structures.
(4) Private attached garages with a capacity for garaging nor more
than two automobiles per dwelling unit subject to the same
limitations and requirements as the principal structures.
(5) Signs in accordance with the Wall Township sign regulations
contained in Article XXIX.
(6) Fences in accordance with the Wall Township fence regulations
contained in § 140-206.
(7) Support facilities, functions and services intended for the use and
benefit of congregate care residents and their guests including:
(a) Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities.
(b) Physical therapy facilities.
(c) Entertainment facilities.
(d) Libraries.
(e) Food preparation facilities.
(f) Dining facilities.
(g) Linen service facilities.
(h) Housekeeping service.
(i) Security facilities, administrative offices, storage facilities,
chapels, and facilities for the temporary lodging of guests.
C. Compliance with site plan standards, subdivision standards and
regulations. Unless provided to the contrary herein, applications for
development in the MLCC Zone shall follow and be subject to the
applicable ordinances, procedures, regulations, standards and
guidelines as required for preliminary and final site plan and/or
subdivision review and other applicable ordinances which are
incorporated herein by reference.
D. Maximum regulations. Congregate care and multifamily development
in the MLCC Zone shall be subject to the following maximum
regulations:
(1) Density. The gross density shall be no more than 20 dwelling units
per acre with:
(a) Not more than 45% of the site area developed for congregate
care housing at a net density of no more than 30 dwelling units
per acre; and
§ 140-305 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-305
139:623
(b) Not more than 55% of the site area developed for multifamily
housing at a net density of no more than 12 dwelling units per
acre.
(2) Lot area. The minimum lot area for congregate care or multifamily
development shall be four acres.
(3) Building coverage. The maximum building coverage, including
accessory buildings, shall be:
(a) Fifteen percent for multifamily development; and
(b) Twenty percent for congregate care development.
(4) Impervious surfaces. The maximum total impervious surface,
including pavement and buildings, shall be:
(a) Forty percent for multifamily development; and
(b) Forty-five percent for congregate care development.
(5) Floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio, including principal
and accessory buildings, shall be:
(a) 0.30 for multifamily development; and
(b) 0.35 for congregate care development.
(6) Building height. Building height shall be a maximum of 35 feet as
set forth in § 140-17, Definitions. Buildings within 150 feet of any
single-family residential zoning district shall be limited to two
stories plus a basement and an attic. A basement or an attic may
not be used for habitation and shall be used only for storage,
utilities or similar uses. Congregate care structures and
multifamily dwelling unit buildings more than 150 feet from any
single-family residential zone shall be limited to three stories.
E. Minimum regulations. Congregate care and multifamily development in
the MLCC Zone shall be subject to the following minimum regulations:
(1) Set back requirements for buildings.
(a) From an existing public street: 100 feet.
(b) From an internal road: 25 feet.
(c) From any internal parking access road: 25 feet.
(d) From any internal parking area: 15 feet.
(e) From any residential property line: 65 feet.
(f) From any nonresidential property line: 30 feet.
(g) From any other structure: 25 feet, provided that when
buildings have glass-to-glass proximity, a minimum of 50 feet
§ 140-305 WALL CODE § 140-305
139:624
shall be provided unless the glass planes are at more than a
fifteen-degree angle from one another.
(h) From any wetlands transition area: 15 feet.
(2) Multifamily dwelling unit storage. Multifamily dwelling units
containing two or more bedrooms shall provide for not less than
300 cubic feet of storage space, which space may be in basements
or cellars or in an external storage area attached to the unit and
which shall be in addition to closet space provided within the unit.
(3) Dwelling unit width.
(a) No multifamily dwelling unit shall be less than 20 feet in width.
(b) No congregate care unit shall be less than 12 feet in width.
(4) Multifamily dwelling unit characteristics. Each multifamily
dwelling unit shall contain, at a minimum, a separate bedroom, a
separate bathroom and a kitchen, which shall be located separate
and apart from other rooms, with the exception of a dining area.
The bedroom mix of dwelling units shall be in conformance with
this section or a developer's agreement approved by the Court.
(5) Open space and recreation areas. Active and passive recreational
and open space areas shall be provided and shall include suitable
landscaping, sitting and walking areas, horseshoe and boccie
courts, field areas, swimming pool, a tot-lot, and/or court sport
facilities.
(6) Buffer areas. Landscaped buffer strips shall be permanently
maintained in accordance with the following regulations. The
buffer area may be included in required setback areas and in
required wetland transition areas;
(a) Buffer location and depth. Buffers shall be maintained as
follows:
[1] Where the tract abuts an existing nonresidential use or
zone, a buffer strip at least 25 feet in width; and
[2] Where congregate care or multifamily development abuts
a single-family residential use or zone, a buffer strip at
least 50 feet in width; and
[3] Where congregate care and multifamily development abut,
a buffer strip a least 30 feet in width.
(b) Requirement of buffer area. Where an area required for a
buffer is already wooded, it shall be left in its natural state, and
the existing growth shall be supplemented with additional
plant material where necessary. Buffer areas shall contain a
strip not less than 20 feet in width containing massed
§ 140-305 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-305
139:625
evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs planted in such
a manner that will provide a continuous screen throughout
the entire year within two full growing seasons following the
planting of the buffer. Evergreen trees shall have a minimum
height of five to six feet when planted, deciduous trees shall
be a minimum caliper of 2 1/2 inches, and shrubs shall be of
sizes and planted in accordance with American Association of
Nurserymen's Standards.
(c) Use of buffer areas. Required buffers shall be used for no other
purpose than as a buffer and as part of the required open space
of the tract. The only structures which may be erected with a
buffer area are fences as elsewhere regulated in Part 4,
Zoning, and required utilities and access drives. All nonpaved
areas shall be suitably landscaped with trees, shrubs, grass,
ground covers and other landscaping materials.
F. Other regulations. Congregate care and multifamily developments in
the MLCC Zone shall be subject to the following regulations,
requirements and standards:
(1) The front facade of any structure containing more than one
dwelling unit shall not continue on the same plane for a distance of
more than 50 feet. Offsets between front facade planes shall not be
less than four feet nor more than 20 feet. No facades offset from
and adjoining another facade shall be on planes within four feet of
one another.
(2) All utilities shall be installed underground by the developer.
(3) All dwelling units shall be served by public water and sanitary
sewer systems. The developers shall pay the cost of connection and
transmission facilities necessary to connect to the sewer and water
systems servicing the development.
(4) Garbage, refuge storage and recyclable collection areas suitable
for containerized collection shall be provided in sufficient numbers
and at locations convenient to the dwelling units. Such areas shall
be screened from view by solid masonry walls, or other suitable
materials.
(5) Garbage and refuse collection shall be provided and maintained by
the body responsible for internal private streets and other common
facilities.
(6) Streets, roads, driveways, parking facilities, walkways, streetlights,
fire hydrants, drainage facilities and other improvements required
by this chapter or appropriate or necessary to the development
shall be installed at the expense of the developer in accordance
with the specifications of this section except as modified herein.
§ 140-305 WALL CODE § 140-305
139:626
(a) Drainage maintenance (§ 140-245) in privately maintained
streets shall be the responsibility of the developer and his
successors in title.
(b) Private parking access drives shall intersect the interior
private collector road at not less than one-hundred-foot
intervals in center.
(c) Common private parking ports shall not be classified as
permanent dead-end streets (§ 140-233).
(7) All streets and roads within the tract shall be private streets and
shall be maintained by the body responsible for common areas.
Rights of access and enforcement shall be formally granted to the
Township.
(8) Internal private roads (§ 140-233) shall have the following
pavement widths:
(a) Interior private collector roads shall be 30 feet wide (no
parking provided).
(b) Interior private collector roads shall have a minimum four-foot
wide concrete sidewalk. Where adjacent to overhangs and
parking areas, the minimum width of sidewalks shall be five
feet six inches. This sidewalk may be within a required setback
area.
(c) Private parking access roads shall be a minimum of 25 feet
wide when included within any parking area.
(d) Emergency access roads shall perform to minimum standards
approved by the Township Engineer for emergency access and
fire-fighting equipment.
(9) Parking. Parking stalls shall be a minimum of nine feet by 18 feet.
Handicapped parking stalls shall be 12 feet by 18 feet and serviced
by depressed curbing. Parking shall be provided as follows:
(a) Congregate care dwellings: at least 1/2 parking spaces shall be
provided for each living unit. In addition, guest and employee
parking shall be provided at the ratio of one space for every
five units.
(b) Multifamily dwellings: at least two parking spaces shall be
provided for each dwelling unit. At least one parking space for
each dwelling unit shall be within 100 feet of that dwelling unit
measured along the route reasonably expected to be used to
walk from the dwelling unit to the parking space.
(10)Common open space, recreational or other facilities shall be
owned, operated and maintained as such by the owner, if rental, or
§ 140-305 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-305
139:627
§ 140-306. ML-25 Mount Laurel Compliance Zone.
by an association comprised of all the owners of the individual units
if such units are to be sold by the developer.
(11) All conventional dwelling units shall be constructed to be offered
for sale on a fee simple or condominium basis and shall be subject
to such restrictions and covenants as may be required to establish
common rights and responsibilities.
(12) All proposed deed restrictions, articles of incorporation or other
documents related to the creation of a homeowners' association,
trust documents, sales deeds, or other documents to provide for
ownership, age restrictions for rental units, and maintenance of
common property and facilities shall be submitted to the Township
for review by the Planning Board and Township Attorney prior to
final review of any subdivision or site plan.
(13) In any case where the maintenance or repair of any wall, fence or
other improvement by its owner or his agent would require entry
upon adjacent property, an appropriate easement or right shall be
created in favor of the subject owner. All such easements shall be
detailed as to the required notice and any limitations upon the right
of entry and shall provide a specific means of arbitration in the
event of disputes.
(14) Performance guarantee. In the MLCC Zone, the provisions of
§ 140-92 with respect to performance guarantees shall apply.
(15) Maintenance guarantee. In the MLCC Zone, the provisions of
§ 140-93 with respect to maintenance guarantees shall apply.
(16) Improvements required prior to issuance of certificate of
occupancy. In the MLCC Zone, the provisions of § 140-302K shall
apply with respect to the issuance of certificate of occupancy.
(17) Inspection fees. The provisions of § 140-60 pertaining to the
inspection fees shall be applicable to all development within the
MLCC Zone.
(18) The provisions of this section shall be specifically subject to the
provisions of Article XLI, General Requirements, of this Part 6, and
a developer's agreement with the Township Committee pertaining
to provisions of inclusionary Mount Laurel units.
A. The ML-25 Zoning District consists of Block 811, Lots 23 and 24, known
as "Orchard Crest (Lions Head)" for 206 units on 171.2 acres yielding a
density of 1.2 dwelling units per acre and conditioned upon a voluntary
contribution of $1,030,000 ($10,000 per unit for each unit over 103
units). Such Mount Laurel development is permitted by the Housing
Plan Element of the Wall Township Master Plan as adopted August 1,
1988; the Consent Order Approving Settlement entered March 3, 1989;
§ 140-305 WALL CODE § 140-306
139:628
and the developer's agreement. To the extent of any inconsistency
among these documents, the terms of the consent order of March 3,
1989, shall govern.
B. Permitted principal uses. In the ML-25 Mount Laurel Compliance Zone,
no premises shall be permitted and no structure shall be erected,
altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
(1) Same as permitted in the Rural Residential Zone in conformance
with the R-60 Residential Zoning District requirements.
(2) Mount Laurel development shall be in conformance with the
Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements as follows:
(a) Minimum lot area.
[1] Interior lot: 25,000 square feet.
[2] Corner lot: 25,000 square feet.
(b) Mean width.
[1] Interior lot: 110 feet.
[2] Corner lot: 125 feet.
[3] Frontage: 80 feet.
[4] Depth: 150 feet.
(c) Maximum lot coverage. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No.
29-2006]
[1] Building coverage: 15%.
[2] Impervious coverage: 30%.
(d) Minimum yard depths.
[1] Principal building.
[a] Front yard: 30 feet.
[b] Side yard: 10 feet.
[c] Rear yard: 25 feet.
(e) Maximum building height.66
[1] Principal building: 2 1/2 stories and 35 feet.
[2] Accessory building: one story and 16 feet.
66.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(2)(e), Accessory buildings, was repealed 11-21-2006
by Ord. No. 29-2006 and former Subsection B(2)(f) was renumbered as Subsection
B(2)(e).
§ 140-306 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-307
139:629
§ 140-307. MH Manufactured Housing (seven DU/acre) Zone.
The MH Zoning District consists of Block 72, Lots 31, 32 and 35, and known
as "Bearmore Mobile Homes," which was granted use variance approval by
the Board of Adjustment for 37 mobile home units on 7.75 acres yielding a
density of seven dwelling units per acre in accordance with Chapter 153,
Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks.
§ 140-308. Mount Laurel 7 (ML-7) Zone.
The ML-7 regulations contained in this section may be utilized for a onehundred-
percent set-aside Mount Laurel inclusionary project on a portion
or portions of Lot 17 and 45 in Block 907 as a conditional use within
the GI General Industrial Zone. Development of this site is designed to
implement the Housing Plan Element adopted by the Wall Township
Planning Board on March 30, 1998, provided that not more than 110 units
on not less than 17.5 acres be permitted on the site. The development of the
one-hundred-percent inclusionary residential development in accordance
with this section shall be in accordance with the Judgment of Repose
granted by His Honor Eugene D. Serpentelli, A.J.S.C., on February 17, 1998.
A. Permitted principal uses. In the ML-7 Zone, no premises shall be used
and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for any purposes
except the following:
(1) Townhouses, provided that not more than 12 units shall be
attached.
(2) Quadplexes.
(3) Multifamily structures containing flats or apartment units of up to
16 units per building; provided, however, that not more than eight
units shall be on each floor.
(4) Public parks, playgrounds and conservation areas.
(5) Municipal services and facilities.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Common parking areas.
(2) Common private recreational facilities and structures, and open
space.
(3) Private attached garages with a capacity for garaging not more
than two automobiles per dwelling unit.
(4) Storage sheds attached to individual dwelling units and/or
structures containing dwelling units.
(5) Signs in accordance with the Wall Township sign regulations
contained in Article XXIX.
§ 140-307 WALL CODE § 140-308
139:630
(6) Fences in accordance with the Wall Township fence regulations
contained in § 140-206.
(7) Such other customary accessory uses and structures as may be
permitted by the approving authority. All structures accessory to
dwelling units shall be attached to the dwelling unit to which they
are accessory. Any common storage facility shall be attached to a
common building rather than freestanding.
C. Compliance with site plan standards, subdivision standards and
regulations. Unless provided to the contrary herein, applications for
development in the ML-7 Zone shall follow and be subject to the
applicable ordinances, procedures, regulations, standards and
guidelines as required for preliminary and final site plan and/or
subdivision review and other applicable ordinances which are
incorporated herein by reference.
D. Maximum regulations. Development in the ML-7 Zone shall be subject
to the following maximum regulations:
(1) Density. The net density shall not be more than seven dwelling
units per acre of upland area including upland areas dedicated
even as conservation area; provided, however, that rental
apartment development may be developed at a net density of not
more than eight dwelling units per acre.
(2) Impervious surfaces. The maximum total impervious surface,
including buildings, shall be 40% of the developable area of the
tract.
(3) Building height. Building height shall be a maximum of 35 feet as
set forth in § 140-17, Definitions. Each building shall be limited to
two stories plus an attic and a basement which shall be all or partly
below grade. Attics and basements shall be used only for storage,
utilities or similar uses. The Planning Board may permit three-story
structures on sloped areas of 5% to 15% where buildings would be
"shelved" into the slope.
(4) Development on slopes. No development of any building shall be
permitted on slopes which exceed 15%. Roads and utilities may be
developed on slopes which exceed 15% if the Planning Board finds
that:
(a) Such development is necessary to the development of the site
in accordance with principles of good planning; and
(b) That the developer will achieve such development with the
minimum of disturbance to the slope and existing vegetation
and that any disturbance shall be remediated to the maximum
extent possible.
§ 140-308 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-308
139:631
E. Minimum regulations. Development in the ML-7 Zone shall be subject
to the following minimum regulations:
(1) Setback requirements.
(a) from an existing public street: 65 feet.
(b) From an internal road: 25 feet.
(c) From any internal parking access road: 20 feet.
(d) From any internal parking area: 15 feet.
(e) From any external tract boundary: 65 feet.
(f) From any other structure: 25 feet, provided that when
buildings have glass to glass proximity, a minimum of 35 feet
shall be provided unless the glass planes are at more than a
fifteen-degree angle from one another.
(g) From any wetlands transition area: 20 feet.
(2) Dwelling unit storage. No dwelling unit shall contain less than 300
cubic feet of storage space, which space may be in attics,
basements or cellars or may be in an external storage area
attached to the unit and which shall be in addition to closed space
provided within the unit.
(3) Dwelling unit width. No multifamily dwelling unit shall be less than
16 feet in width.
(4) Dwelling unit characteristics. Each dwelling unit shall contain, at a
minimum, a separate bedroom, a separate bathroom and an
kitchen which shall be located separate and apart from other
rooms, with the exception of a dining area. The mix of dwelling
units shall be in conformance with this chapter.
(5) Open space and recreation areas. Active and passive recreational
and open space areas shall be provided. There shall be a minimum
of one acre of active recreation area for each 100 dwelling units or
fractions thereof. Recreation shall include a softball field, picnic
areas tot-lots (one per 100 dwellings), and basketball courts (one
per 100 dwellings). A swimming pool is optional by the developer.
Common open space, recreational or other facilities shall be
owned, operated and maintained as such by an association
comprised of all the owners of the individual units.
(6) Buffer areas. A landscaped buffer strip of at least 35 feet in width
shall be permanently maintained in accordance with the following
regulations. The buffer area may be included in required setback
areas and in regulated wetland transition areas.
(a) Buffer location. Where the tract abuts an existing residential
use and where any nonresidential use abuts a residential use
§ 140-308 WALL CODE § 140-308
139:632
within the zone, a landscaped buffer strip at least 35 feet
in width shall be permanently maintained along the property
line abutting the existing residential use. Existing vegetation
shall be maintained to the greatest extent possible and
supplemented if necessary to form a continuous planted buffer
area.
(b) Requirements of buffer area. Buffer areas shall contain massed
evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs planted in such a
manner that will provide a continuous screen throughout the
entire year within two full growing seasons following the
planting of the buffer. Evergreen trees shall have a minimum
height of five to six feet when planted, deciduous trees shall be
a minimum caliper of two inches and shrubs shall be of sizes
and planted in accordance with American Association of
Nurserymen's Standards.
(c) Use of buffer areas. Required buffers shall be used for no other
purpose than as a buffer and as part of the required open space
of the tract. The only structures which may be erected within a
buffer area other than wetland transition area are fences as
elsewhere regulated in this chapter. All nonpaved areas shall
be suitably landscaped with trees, shrubs, grass, ground
covers and other landscaping materials.
(d) Wooded areas. Where an area required for a buffer is already
wooded, it shall be left in its natural state, and the existing
growth shall be supplemented with additional plant material
where necessary to bring the buffer area up to the minimum
requirements of this chapter.
(7) Signs. A maximum of two permanent entry identification sign not to
exceed 100 square feet in aggregate area shall be permitted. Said
entry signs shall not be more than 10 feet in height.
F. Other regulations. Developments in the ML-7 Zone shall be subject to
the following regulations, requirements and standards:
(1) The front facade of any structure containing more than one
dwelling unit shall not continue on the same plane for a distance of
more than the width of six adjacent units. Offsets between front
facade planes shall not be less than four feet nor more than 20 feet.
(2) All utilities shall be installed underground by the developer.
(3) All dwelling units shall be served by public water and sanitary
sewer systems. The developer shall pay the cost of connection and
transmission facilities necessary to connect to the sewer and water
systems servicing the development.
(4) Garbage, refuge storage and recyclable collection areas suitable
for containerized collection shall be provided in sufficient numbers
§ 140-308 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-308
139:633
and at locations convenient to the dwelling units. Such areas shall
be screened from view by solid masonry walls, or other suitable
materials.
(5) Garbage and refuse collection shall be provided and maintained by
the body responsible for internal private streets and other common
facilities.
(6) Streets, roads, driveways, parking facilities, walkways, streetlights,
fire hydrants, drainage facilities and other improvements required
by this chapter or appropriate or necessary to the development
shall be installed at the expense of the developer in accordance
with the specifications of this chapter except as modified herein.
(a) Drainage maintenance (§ 140-245) in privately maintained
streets shall be the responsibility of the developer and his
successor in title.
(b) Private parking access drives shall intersect the interior
private collector road at not less than one-hundred-foot
intervals on center.
(c) Common private parking ports shall not be classified as
permanent dead-end streets (§ 140-233).
(7) All streets and roads within the tract shall be private streets and
shall be maintained by the body responsible for common areas.
Rights of access and enforcement shall be formally granted to the
Township.
(8) Internal private roads (§ 140-233) shall have the following
pavement widths.
(a) Interior private access roads shall be a minimum of 30 feet
wide with no parking provided, and 36 feet if parking is
provided on one side. Access roads connecting to Township
streets shall conform to Township street standards.
(b) Interior private collector roads shall have a minimum four-foot
wide concrete sidewalk. Where adjacent to overhang and
parking areas, the minimum width of sidewalks shall be four
feet, with a minimum grass strip between the sidewalk and
curb of two feet. This sidewalk may be within a required
setback area.
(c) Private parking access roads shall be a minimum of 25 feet
wide when included within any parking area.
(9) At least two parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling
unit. In addition, guest parking shall be provided at the ratio of one
space for every four units. At least one parking space for each
dwelling unit shall be within 100 feet of that dwelling unit
measured along the route reasonably expected to be used to walk
§ 140-308 WALL CODE § 140-308
139:634
§ 140-309. Mount Laurel Compliance Residential Adult Community
MLC-RAC Zone.
from the dwelling unit to the parking space. Parking stalls shall be
a minimum of nine feet by 18 feet. Handicapped parking stalls shall
be twelve feet by 18 feet and serviced by depressed curbing.
(10) Development within the ML-7 Zone shall provide 20% inclusionary
low- and moderate-income dwelling units in accordance with
Article XLII, low- and moderate-income housing regulations for
inclusionary housing developments. All conventional dwelling units
may be constructed on a rental basis or may be offered for sale on a
fee simple or condominium basis, subject to such restrictions and
covenants as may be required to establish common rights and
responsibilities. All low- and moderate-income units shall be rental
units only.
(11) All proposed restrictive covenant, articles of incorporation or other
documents related to the creation of a homeowners' association,
trust documents or other deeds or documents to provide for
ownership and maintenance of common property and facilities shall
be submitted to the Township for review by the Planning Board and
Township Attorney prior to final review of any subdivision or site
plan.
(12) In any case where the maintenance or repair of any wall, fence or
other improvements by its owner or his agent would require entry
upon the adjacent property, an appropriate easement or right shall
be created in favor of the subject owner. All such easements shall
be detailed in specifications as to the required notice and any
limitations upon the right of entry and shall provide a specific
means of arbitration in the event of disputes.
(a) Performance guarantee. In the ML-7 Zone, the provisions of
§ 140-92 with respect to performance guarantees shall apply.
(b) Maintenance guarantee. In the ML-7 Zone, the provisions of
§ 140-93 with respect to maintenance guarantees shall apply.
(c) Improvements required prior to issuance of certificate of
occupancy. In the ML-7 Zone, the provisions of § 140-286I shall
apply with respect to the issuance of certificates of occupancy.
(d) Inspection fees. The provisions of § 140-60 of this chapter
pertaining to inspection fees shall be applicable to all
development within the ML-7 Zone.
(e) The provisions of this section shall be specifically subject to the
provisions of Article XLII, low- and moderate-income housing
regulations for inclusionary housing development.
§ 140-308 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-309
139:635
A. Purposes. The MLC-RAC, MLC-3.4 and MLC-HB-200 Zoning Districts
consist of Block 874, Lots 2 and 3, and Block 893, Lots 19, 24, 26, 47,
48, 50 and 51, which was zoned for retirement community, townhouse
and highway business in accordance with Ordinance 4-94 and
conditioned upon a voluntary contribution of $5,000 per unit of
residential development to the Wall Township Affordable Housing Trust
Fund as provided in § 140-282 and approved by a Judgment of Repose
on September 24, 1990, and the fifth amendment thereto filed on
December 15, 1994, and the Housing Plan Element and Fair Share Plan
of the Township of Wall adopted September 16,1990.
B. Approving authority. The Planning Board shall be the approving
authority for all applications for development under this section.
C. Eligibility for participation. In every area zoned for MLC-RAC, property
may be developed in accordance with the provisions of the zone district
in which the property was located immediately prior to its inclusion in
the MLC-RAC Zone, or a developer may elect to participate in the
Mount Laurel compliance process. A developer shall be eligible to
participate upon satisfaction of the following conditions:
(1) Proof of ownership or a signed contract of sale of land within an
area zoned for MLC-RAC; and
(2) The execution of a developer's agreement with the Township of
Wall stipulating the amount and phasing of the contributions to be
made to the Wall Township Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
D. Permitted principal uses. In the MLC-RAC Zone, no site shall be used
and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for any purpose,
except the following:
(1) Developments not participating in the Mount Laurel Compliance
Program shall conform with the R-60 or OP-10 Zone District
regulations as may be applicable.
(2) For developments participating in the Mount Laurel Compliance
Program, the following uses are permitted: adult community
projects, as defined in § 140-281, consisting only of single-family
detached units.
E. Definition of "adult community project" (ACP).
(1) An "adult community project" is a private residential community
comprised of various housing types and accessory uses intended
for, and limited and restricted to, use and occupancy by:
(a) Any person of the age of 55 years or over; or
(b) A husband or wife, regardless of age, residing with his or her
spouse, provided the spouse of such person is of the age of 55
years or over; or
§ 140-309 WALL CODE § 140-309
139:636
(c) A child or children residing with a permissible occupant,
provided the child or children is or are of the age of 19 years or
older; or
(d) An individual or individuals, regardless of age, residing with
and providing physical or economic support to a permissible
occupant.
(2) The foregoing occupancy restrictions shall not be construed to
prohibit the occupants of any unit in an ACP from entertaining
guests, of any age, in their units, including temporary residency not
to exceed three months, with no financial or other pecuniary
consideration to be paid therefor.
F. Minimum tract size. An ACP may only be developed on one or more
contiguous parcels of land having a total gross area of not less than 50
acres.
G. Permitted principal uses. The principal uses of buildings in an ACP shall
be limited to the following:
(1) Single-family detached units, provided that they comply with the
area and bulk zoning requirements of this section.
(2) Recreation facilities permitted under this section.
(3) Sales and administrative offices required for the construction, sale,
resale and management of the ACP.
(4) Maintenance buildings.
H. Permitted accessory uses. The accessory uses of buildings and
structures in an ACP shall be limited to the following:
(1) Master television antenna system and/or cable television antenna/
reception facilities.
(2) Common parking areas for guest parking or dedicated for specific
parking purposes such as recreational vehicle and trailer parking.
(3) Buildings for storage of vehicles, equipment and supplies.
(4) Outbuildings and structures as part of the recreation facilities.
(5) Public and private parks and gardens.
(6) Private greenhouses.
(7) Private swimming pools.
I. Permitted accessory uses for dwelling units. Accessory uses on the
same single-family residential lot and customarily incidental to the
permitted principal use shall be permitted, including:
§ 140-309 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-309
139:637
(1) Private attached garage with a capacity for garaging two vehicles
per unit.
(2) Storage sheds attached to and incorporated in the design of
individual dwelling units.
(3) Fences.
(4) Decks, patios, gazebos and screened porches.
(5) Such other customary accessory uses and structures as may be
permitted by the approving authority.
J. Bulk requirements. The following bulk requirements shall be applicable
to the MLC-RAC Zone:
(1) Open space/coverage/density requirements. The following
requirements shall apply to any ACP:
(a) Maximum building coverage: 25% of gross area of ACP tract.
(b) Maximum building density: 2.2 units per gross acre of ACP
tract; subject, however, to the condition that a maximum of 400
dwelling units shall be permitted in the ACP.
(c) Minimum open space: 30% of gross area of ACP tract. For
purposes of this requirement, "open space" shall mean those
portions of the ACP tract not covered by buildings, structures
of any kind, streets or other surfaces paved with impervious
materials.
K. Bulk requirements. The following bulk requirements shall apply to the
individual dwelling in an ACP.
(1) All detached units to be constructed on individual lots in an ACP
shall comply with and conform to the following requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area:
[1] Corner lot: 7,000 square feet.
[2] Interior lot: 5,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width and frontage:
[1] Corner lot: 70 feet.
[2] Interior lot: 50 feet.
[3] In the case of an irregularly shaped lot, the frontage may
be reduced to 60% of the minimum requirement.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(d) Minimum setbacks:
§ 140-309 WALL CODE § 140-309
139:638
[1] Front yard measured from lot line (exclusive of attached
side entry garage units which shall have a minimum front
yard setback of 10 feet): 20 feet.
[2] One side yard: 5 feet.
[3] Combined side yards: 15 feet.
[4] Rear yard: 20 feet.
(e) Minimum distance between buildings: 15 feet.
(2) Minimum parking requirements:
(a) Each detached unit shall include two attached garage spaces
and two off-street parking spaces, for a total of four spaces.
(b) A private driveway with capacity for off-street parking of two
automobiles shall be deemed to constitute two parking spaces.
(3) Decks, etc.: A deck, patio or screened porch shall be permitted
within 10 feet of any rear yard line and five of any side yard line.
(4) Maximum building height: 35 feet or 2 1/2 stories, provided that no
more than 20% of all units shall be greater than one story in height.
(5) Minimum accessory building setbacks:
(a) Side yard: 10 feet.
(b) Rear yard: 10 feet.
L. Utilities. An ACP must be fully serviced by public water service and
sanitary sewerage systems. The developer shall pay the cost of
connection and transmission facilities necessary to connect to the
systems.
M. Required recreation facilities. Any ACP shall contain and provide for the
benefit, use and enjoyment of its residents, the following recreation
facilities:
(1) A recreation area containing a recreation building or clubhouse
equal in size to 10 square feet for each dwelling unit in the ACP.
(2) A swimming pool of a minimum size of 30 feet by 50 feet, with an
adjacent improved sitting area surrounding all sides of the pool
with an aggregate area equal to twice the water surface area of the
pool.
(3) Parking facilities serving the recreation area, with a minimum
number of parking spaces equal to one space for each 50 square
feet of area comprising the recreation building.
(4) Picnic/barbecue areas with a minimum size of 10 square feet for
each dwelling unit in the ACP.
§ 140-309 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-309
139:639
(5) One tennis court for each 200 dwelling units in the ACP.
(6) Boccie courts.
(7) Shuffleboard courts.
N. Optional recreation facilities. An ACP may contain the following
facilities for the benefit, use and enjoyment of its residents:
(1) Paddle tennis courts.
(2) Jogging trail.
(3) Fitness/exercise courses.
(4) Gardening areas (including greenhouses).
(5) Such other activities which the Planning Board shall find to be
consistent with the life-style of residents of an ACP and which are
subordinate to the residential character of an ACP.
O. Ownership of recreation facilities. All recreation facilities shall be
owned by a homeowners' association as defined herein.
P. Setback and distance measurements. Building setbacks and minimum
distances between all buildings shall be measured from lot lines (and
not from street lines) to building foundation lines, excluding
foundations for fireplaces, porches and other exterior protrusions of a
building which do not protrude beyond six feet from the building
foundation line.
Q. Perimeter boundary setbacks. No buildings or structures, other than
entrance gatehouses, walls or fences, shall be located within 50 feet of
any exterior boundary line of the ACP tract.
R. Homeowners' association; recorded covenants.
(1) Any ACP shall be governed and regulated by on or more recorded
declarations of covenants and restrictions (C&R's) which shall
provide for and create one or more incorporated membership
organizations under Title 15 of the New Jersey Statutes in which all
unit owners in the ACP shall be required to be members (the
"homeowners' association"). The C&R's shall provide for:
(a) The ownership, maintenance, operation and upkeep of all
recreation facilities, open space, streets and other common
areas within the ACP by the homeowners' association;
(b) The restrictions on unit occupancy set forth in Subsection E;
(c) The procedure for creating, imposing and collecting
assessments from each unit owner to finance the foregoing;
and
§ 140-309 WALL CODE § 140-309
139:640
(d) The organization, operation and management of the
homeowners' association.
(2) A complete copy of the proposed C&R's and all documents creating
and organizing the homeowners' association shall be submitted to
the Planning Board for review and approval with the first
application for final subdivision and/or site plan approval submitted
for the ACP or the first section thereof.
S. Streets and roads. All streets and roads in an ACP shall conform to the
provisions of Part 5 of this Chapter 140, Land Use and Development
Regulations, except as hereinafter specifically provided.
(1) The developer-applicant of an ACP shall expressly condition the
preliminary subdivision and/or site plan approval of the ACP upon
all streets and roads within the ACP being privately owned and
maintained by the homeowners' association in perpetuity. Such
streets and roads shall be constructed in accordance with Part 5,
except as follows:
(a) Minor streets (i.e. streets of not more than 1,200 feet in length
which shall be through streets or terminate in a cul-de-sac) and
minor collector streets shall have an overall paved roadway
width of 32 feet.
(b) Major collector streets shall have a paved roadway width of 40
feet.
(c) All ACP streets shall be constructed with a six-inch road gravel
base conforming to the New Jersey Highway Specifications
Grade A or B, with a CABC-1 of 1 1/2 inches in thickness of
bituminous concrete binder course and a one-inch bituminous
concrete surface course. If roll curbing is utilized, the
measurement of the paved roadway width shall include roll
curb, along any street, and in addition thereto, any lot which is
directly across a street.
(2) Neighboring dwellings, as hereinabove defined, shall be considered
substantially alike in exterior design and appearance if they are not
different in at least three of the following six respects:
(a) The relative location of a garage porch or any other such
structural appurtenance with respect to the facade.
(b) The relative location or type of windows and doors.
(c) The type of roof, with respect to any appurtenances,
configuration, or pitch.
(d) The type or color of siding material.
(e) The type of roofing material or the color or the pattern thereof.
§ 140-309 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-309
139:641
§ 140-310. Mount Laurel Compliance 3.4 (MLC-3.4) Zone.
(f) Orientation of the building when viewed from a single viewing
point.
T. Procedures for approval of ACP. Any developer applicant proposing to
develop an ACP shall make application to the Planning Board for
approval of a preliminary subdivision or site plan pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
U. No municipal responsibility for operations. Neither the provisions of
this section, nor the granting of subdivision or site plan approval for an
ACP shall be deemed to render the Township liable or responsible for:
(1) The interpretation or enforcement of any agreement between the
applicant, developer, owner or operator of the ACP and any
resident or residents thereof;
(2) The review, supervision or control of the operation of an ACP or any
phase thereof; or
(3) The installation of any services of any kind involving utilities to
serve an ACP; provided, however, that the Township shall retain the
right to enforce the terms and provisions of this chapter and all
other ordinances of the Township of Wall applicable thereto.
V. Other regulations. All other regulations contained in this Chapter 140,
Land Use and Development Regulations, not specifically modified
herein, shall apply to development in the MLC-RAC Zone.
A. Purpose. The purposes of the MLC-3.4 Mount Laurel Compliance
District shall be as set forth in § 140-309A herein. The regulations
established by the section are also intended to accomplish the purposes
set forth in § 140-309A herein.
B. Approving authority. The Planning Board shall be the approving for all
applications for development under this section.
C. Eligibility for participation. In every area zoned for MLC-3.4, property
may be developed in accordance with the provisions of the zone district
in which the property was located immediately prior to its inclusion in
the MLC-3.4 Zone, or a developer may elect to participate in the Mount
Laurel compliance process. A developer shall be eligible to participate
upon satisfaction of the following conditions:
(1) Proof of ownership or a signed contract of sale of land within an
area zoned for MLC-3.4;
(2) The execution of a developer's agreement with the Township of
Wall stipulating the amount and phasing of the contributions to be
made to the Wall Township Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
§ 140-309 WALL CODE § 140-310
139:642
D. Permitted principal uses. In the MLC-3.4 Zone, no site shall be used and
no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for any purpose,
except the following:
(1) Developments not participating in the Mount Laurel Program shall
conform with the OP-10 Zone District regulations.
(2) For developments participating in the Mount Laurel Compliance
Program, the following uses are permitted: attached townhome
developments, with a maximum of 52 dwelling units, with no more
than eight dwelling units to a building.
E. Permitted accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses in the MLC-3.4
Zone shall be as follows:
(1) Common parking areas.
(2) Common storage structures and facilities subject to the same
limitations and requirements as the principal structures.
(3) Common open space and recreational facilities and structures
subject to the same limitations and requirements as the principal
structures.
(4) Private attached garages with a capacity for garaging not more
than two automobiles per unit subject to the same limitations and
requirements as the principal structures.
(5) Signs in accordance with Wall Township sign regulations.67
(6) Fences in accordance with Wall Township fence regulations.68
(7) Support facilities, functions and services intended for the use and
benefit of the occupants and owners of the units.
F. Maximum regulations. Developments in the MLC-3.4 Zone shall be
subject to the following maximum regulations:
(1) Density. The gross density shall be no more than 3.4 units per acre,
subject to Subsection F(2) hereof.
(2) Number of units. No more than 52 townhouse units shall be
constructed.
(3) Lot area. The lot area of the tract to be developed shall be no less
than 15 acres.
(4) Building coverage. The maximum building coverage shall be no
more than 15%.
67.Editor's Note: See Art. XXIX of this chapter.
68.Editor's Note: See § 140-206 of this chapter.
§ 140-310 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-310
139:643
(5) Impervious coverage. The impervious coverage shall be no more
than 40%.
(6) Height. The maximum building height shall be no more than 2 1/2
stories/35 feet.
G. Minimum regulations. Developments in the MLC-3.4 Zone shall be
subject to the following minimum regulations:
(1) Minimum open space. Thirty percent of the gross area of the tract
to be developed in the MLC-3.4 Zone shall be open space. For
purposes of this requirement, "open space" shall mean those
portions of the tract not covered by buildings, structures of any
kind, streets or other surfaces paved with impervious materials.
(2) Minimum setback requirements:
(a) From an existing public road: 60 feet.
(b) From an internal road: 25 feet.
(c) From any other building 30 feet, provided a minimum of 50
feet from glass-to-glass proximity is maintained.
(d) From on street internal parking areas: 15 feet.
(3) Dwelling unit width. No unit such be less than 20 feet wide.
(4) Storage. Each unit with two or more bedrooms shall provide, in
addition to closets within the unit, not less than 300 cubic feet of
storage located in a basement, cellar, or external area.
(5) Unit characteristics. Units shall contain, at a minimum, a separate
bedroom, a separate bathroom, and a kitchen which shall be
located separate and apart from other rooms, with the exception of
a dining area.
(6) Open space. Open space shall be provided and shall be suitably
landscaped. Open space may include active or passive recreational
areas such as sitting and walking areas, tot-lots, court sport
facilities, field areas and swimming pools.
(7) Internal cartways.
(a) Minimum cartway width shall be 36 feet.
(b) Where only one building or no building fronts on an internal
road at any location the minimum cartway shall be 32 feet.
(8) Buffer areas. Landscaped buffer strips shall be permanently
maintained in accordance with the following regulations. The
buffer area may be included in required setback areas and in
required wetlands or wetland transition areas:
(a) Buffer location and depth.
§ 140-310 WALL CODE § 140-310
139:644
[1] Where the tract abuts an existing nonresidential use or
zone, a buffer strip at least 25 feet in width; and
[2] Where the tract abuts a single-family residential use or
zone, a buffer strip at least 50 feet in width.
(b) Requirement of buffer area. Where an area required for a
buffer is already wooded, it shall be left in its natural state, and
the existing growth shall be supplemented with additional
plant material where necessary. Buffer areas shall contain a
strip not less than 20 feet in width containing massed
evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs planted in such a
manner that will provide a continuous screen throughout the
entire year within two full growing seasons following the
planting of the buffer. Evergreen trees shall have a minimum
height of five to six feet when planted, deciduous trees shalt be
a minimum caliper of 2 1/2 inches, and shrubs shall be of sizes
and planted in accordance with American Association of
Nurserymen's Standards.
(c) Use of buffer areas. Required buffers shall be used for no
purpose other than as a buffer and as part of the required open
space of the tract. The only structures which may be erected
within a buffer area are fences as elsewhere regulated in this
chapter and required utilities and access drives. All nonpaved
areas shall be suitably landscaped with trees, shrubs, grass,
ground covers and other landscaping materials.
H. Other regulations. Developments in the MLC-3.4 Zone shall be subject
to the following regulations, requirements and standards:
(1) The front facade of any structure containing more than one
dwelling unit shall not continue on the same plane for a distance of
more than 50 feet. Offsets between front facade planes shall not be
less than four feet nor more than 20 feet. No facade offset from and
adjoining another facade shall be on planes within four feet of one
another.
(2) All utilities shall be installed underground by the developer.
(3) All dwelling units shall be served by public water and sanitary
sewer systems. The developer shall pay the cost of connection and
transmission facilities necessary to connect to the systems.
(4) Streets, roads, driveways, parking facilities, walkways, streetlights,
fire hydrants, drainage facilities and other improvements required
by the Township's regulations or appropriate or necessary to the
development shall be installed at the expense of the developer in
accordance with the specifications of this chapter except as
modified herein.
§ 140-310 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-310
139:645
(a) Drainage maintenance in privately maintained streets shall be
the responsibility of the developer and his successors in title.
(b) Private parking access drives shall intersect the interior
private collector road at not less than one-hundred-foot
intervals on center.
(5) All streets and roads within the tract shall be private streets and
shall be maintained by the body responsible for common areas.
Rights of access and enforcement shall be formally granted to the
Township.
(6) Parking on street. Parking stalls shall be a minimum of nine feet by
18 feet. Handicapped parking stalls shall be 12 feet by 19 feet and
be serviced by decreased curbing.
(7) Common open space, recreational or other facilities shall be
owned, operated and maintained as such by the owner, if rental, or
by an association composed of all the owners of the individual
units, if such units are to be sold by the developer.
(8) All conventional dwelling units constructed to be offered on a fee
simple or condominium basis shall be subject to such restrictions
and covenants as may be required to establish common rights and
responsibilities.
(9) All proposed restrictive covenants, articles of incorporation or
other documents related to the creation of a homeowners'
association, trust documents, deeds or other documents to provide
for ownership, age restrictions for sales or rental units, and
maintenance of common property and facilities shall be submitted
to the Township for review by the Planning Board and Township
Attorney prior to final review of any subdivision or site plan.
(10) In any case where the maintenance or repair of any wall, fence or
other improvement by its owner or his agent would require entry
upon adjacent property, an appropriate easement or right shall be
created in favor of the subject owner. All such easements shall be
detailed as to the required notice and any limitations upon the right
of entry and shall provide a specific means of arbitration in the
event of disputes.
(11) Performance guarantees, improvements and inspection fees.
(a) Guarantees. In the MLC-3.4 Zone, the provisions of this
Chapter 140, Land Use and Development Regulations, with
respect to performance and maintenance guarantees shall
apply.69
69.Editor's Note: See §§ 140-92 and 140-93 of this chapter.
§ 140-310 WALL CODE § 140-310
139:646
§ 140-311. Mount Laurel Highway Business 200 (MLC-HB-200)
Zone.
(b) Improvements required prior to issuance of certificate of
occupancy. In the MLC-3.4 Zone, the provisions of this Chapter
140, Land Use and Development Regulations, shall apply with
respect to the issuance of certificates of occupancy.70
(c) Inspection fees. The provisions of this Chapter 140, Land Use
and Development Regulations, pertaining to inspection fees
shall be applicable to all development within the MLC-3.4
Zone.71
(d) Other regulations. All of the regulations contained in the Land
Use and Development Regulations of the Township, not
specifically modified herein, shall apply to development in the
MLC-3.4 Zone.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the MLC-HB-200 Mount Laurel Compliance
District is to permit certain flexibility in the development of commercial
property associated with a residential development which participates
in the Township's Mount Laurel Compliance Program.
B. Approving authority. The Planning Board shall be the approving
authority for all applications for development under this section.
C. Eligibility for participation. In every area zoned for MLC-HB-200,
property may be developed in accordance with the provisions of the
zone district in which the property was located immediately prior to its
inclusion in the MLC-HB- 200 Zone, or a developer may elect to
participate in the Mount Laurel compliance process. A developer shall
be eligible to participate upon satisfaction of the following conditions:
(1) Proof of ownership or a signed contract of sale of land within an
area zoned for MLC-HB-200; and
(2) The execution of a developer's agreement with the Township of
Wall stipulating the amount and phasing of the contributions to be
made to the Wall Township Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
D. Permitted principal uses. In the MLC-HB-200 Zone, no site shall be
used and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for any
purpose, except the following:
(1) Developments not participating in the Mount Laurel Compliance
Program shall conform with the OP-10 Zone District regulations.
(2) For developments participating in the Mount Laurel Compliance
Program, the following uses are permitted:
70.Editor's Note: See § 140-286I of this chapter.
71.Editor's Note: See § 140-60 of this chapter.
§ 140-310 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-311
139:647
§ 140-312. ML-12A Mount Laurel Zone.
(a) All permitted, accessory and conditional uses in the HB-200
Zone District, with the exception of the following uses:
NAICS Code Use
255 Special trade contractors
4411 Motor vehicle dealers
4471 Gasoline service stations
441222 Boat dealers
44121 Recreational vehicle dealers
441221 Motorcycle dealers
8122 Funeral services
5321 Automobile rental and leasing
8111 Automobile repair shops
811192 Car washes
(3) Eating places, with and without liquor licenses (NAICS codes
722and 72241) shall be permitted uses; provided, however, that no
drive-through window at any eating establishment shall be
permitted, and, provided further that no freestanding eating
establishment of the type commonly referred to as a "fast-food
establishment" shall be permitted in the zone.
E. Bulk requirements and other regulations. All bulk zoning requirements
and other regulations of this Chapter 140, Land Use and Development
Regulations, applicable to the HB-200 Zone District shall be applicable
to the MLC-HB-200 Zone District, except as follows:
(1) The maximum building coverage in the MLC-HB-200 Zone shall be
100,000 square feet.
(2) The maximum impervious coverage in the MLC-HB-200 Zone shall
be 65%.
A. Age restriction. In the ML-12A Zone, a request for age-restricted
housing units may only be granted after the Wall Township Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment has received the consent of the Township
Committee. The consent of the Township Committee shall consist of the
authorization and execution of a developer's agreement between the
Township and the owner or developer of property located in the ML-12A
Zone. The developer's agreement shall govern the nature of the area
restricted multifamily project to be constructed by the developer, and
shall provide for the payment of a monetary contribution to the
Township's Affordable Housing Trust Fund by the developer. The
Planning Board shall make compliance with such developer's
agreement a condition of any approval it may grant for a development
in the ML-12A Zone.
§ 140-311 WALL CODE § 140-312
139:648
B. Permitted principal uses. In the ML-12A Zone, no premises shall be
used and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for any
purposes except the following:
(1) Townhouses, provided that not more than eight units shall be
attached.
(2) Quadplexes.
(3) Multifamily structures containing flats or apartment units.
(4) Municipal services and facilities.
(5) Conditional commercial uses in compliance with the HB-120 Zone.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Enumeration of permitted accessory uses.
(a) Common parking areas.
(b) Common private recreational facilities and structures and
open space.
(c) Private attached garages with a capacity for garaging not more
than two automobiles per dwelling unit.
(d) Storage sheds attached to individual dwelling units and/or
structures containing dwelling units not to exceed 20 square
feet per shed.
(e) Signs in accordance with the Wall Township sign regulations
contained in Article XXIX.
(f) Fences in accordance with the Wall Township fence regulations
contained in § 140-206.
(g) Such other customary accessory uses and structures as may be
permitted by the approving authority.
(2) All structures accessory to dwelling units shall be attached to the
dwelling unit to which they are accessory.
(3) Any common storage facility shall be attached to a common
building, rather than freestanding.
D. Compliance with site plan standards, subdivision standards and
regulations. Unless provided to the contrary herein, applications for
developments in the ML-12A Zone shall follow and be subject to the
applicable procedures, regulations, standards and guidelines as
required for preliminary and final site plan and/or subdivision review of
this chapter and other applicable ordinances which are incorporated
herein by reference.
§ 140-312 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-312
139:649
E. Maximum regulations. Development in the ML-12A Zone shall be
subject to the following maximum regulations:
(1) Density. The gross density shall be no more than 23 dwelling units
per acre.
(2) Impervious surfaces. The maximum total impervious surface,
including buildings, shall be 60% of the developable area of the
tract for residential units.
(3) Building height. Each building shall be limited to four stories and
an optional basement, either of which may be partly below grade.
Dwelling units may be located on any of the four stories. Basements
shall be used only for a rental/management office, storage utilities
common community facilities and amenities or similar uses.
Building height shall be a maximum of 40 feet as set forth in
§ 140-17, Definitions, of this chapter. Each building shall be limited
to three stories and a basement which shall be partly below grade.
Basements shall be used only for a rental/management office,
storage, utilities or similar uses.
(4) Bedroom distribution. All units shall have either one or two
bedrooms.
F. Minimum regulations. Developments in the ML-12A Zone shall be
subject to the following minimum regulations:
(1) Building setback requirements.
(a) From an existing public street: 65 feet.
(b) From an internal road: 15 feet.
(c) From any internal parking access road: 15 feet.
(d) From any internal parking area: 15 feet.
(e) From any external tract boundary: 25 feet.
(f) From any other structure: 20 feet, provided that when
buildings have glass to glass proximity, minimum of 25 feet
shall be provided unless the glass planes are at more than
fifteen-degree angle.
(2) Dwelling unit width. No dwelling shall be less than 19 feet six
inches in width.
(3) Dwelling unit characteristics. Each dwelling unit shall contain, at a
minimum, a separate bedroom, a separate bathroom and a kitchen
which shall be located separate and apart from other rooms, with
the exception of a dining area. The mix of dwelling units shall be in
conformance with this chapter.
(4) Buffer areas.
§ 140-312 WALL CODE § 140-312
139:650
(a) Buffer location. Where the tract abuts an existing residential
use and where any nonresidential use abuts residential use
within the zone, a landscaped buffer strip at least 20 feet in
width shall be permanently maintained along the property line
abutting the existing residential use. Existing vegetation shall
be maintained to the greatest extent possible.
(b) Requirement of buffer area. Buffer areas shall contain massed
evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs planted in such a
manner that will provide a continuous screen throughout the
entire year within two full growing seasons following the
planting of the buffer. Evergreen trees shall have a minimum
height of five to six feet when planted, deciduous trees shall be
a minimum caliper of 1 1/2 inches and shrubs shall be of sizes
and planted in accordance with the American Association of
Nurserymen's Standards.
(c) Use of buffer, areas. Required buffers shall be used for no other
purpose than as a buffer and as part of the required open space
of the tract. The only structures which may be erected within a
buffer area are fences as elsewhere regulated in Part 4,
Zoning, of this chapter, sidewalks, trails retaining walls, drive
openings, and necessary internal driveways. All nonpaved
areas shall be suitably landscaped with trees, shrubs, grass,
ground covers, and other landscaping materials. Retaining
areas shall be permitted in steep-slope areas.
(d) Wooded areas. Where an area required for a buffer is already
wooded, it shall be left in its natural state to the maximum
extent feasible, and the existing growth shall be supplemented
with additional plant material where necessary to bring the
buffer area up to the minimum requirements of Part 4, Zoning,
of this chapter.
(e) Landscaping. On any lot or property proposed for residential
development of two or more lots or two or more residential
units which abut a property used for commercial, recreational,
office, industrial, medical, manufacturing, or airport purposes
or a lot or property zoned for commercial, recreational, office,
industrial or airport use, a landscape buffer strip of at least 20
feet in width shall be permanently maintained along the
property line abutting such use or zone.
G. Other regulations. Developments in the ML-12A Zone shall be subject
to the following regulations, requirements and standards:
(1) All utilities shall be installed underground by the developer.
(2) All dwelling units shall be served by public water and sanitary
sewer systems. The developer shall pay the cost of connection and
transmission facilities necessary to connect to the sewer and water
systems servicing the development.
§ 140-312 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-312
139:651
(3) Garbage, refuge storage and recyclable collection areas suitable
for containerized collection shall be provided in two areas. Such
areas shall be screened from view by fencing or other suitable
materials.
(4) Garbage and refuse collection shall be provided and maintained by
the body responsible for internal private streets and other common
facilities.
(5) Streets, roads, driveways, parking facilities, walkways, streetlights,
fire hydrants, drainage facilities and other improvements required
by this chapter or appropriate or necessary to the development
shall be installed at the expense of the developer in accordance
with the specifications of this chapter except as modified herein:
(a) Drainage maintenance (§ 140-245) in privately maintained
streets shall be the responsibility of the developer and his
successors in title.
(b) Common private parking ports shall not be classified as
permanent dead-end streets (§ 140-233).
(6) All streets and roads within the tract shall be private streets and
shall be maintained by the body responsible for common areas.
Rights of access and enforcement shall be formally granted to the
Township.
(7) Internal private roads (§ 140-233) shall have the following
pavement widths:
(a) Interior loop aisles shall be 18 feet wide (no parking provided).
(b) Parking access/aisles should be 25 feet wide.
(c) The entrance roadway shall be 30 feet wide.
(d) Interior private collector roads shall be 25 feet wide (no
parking provided).
(e) Interior private collector roads shall have a minimum four-foot
wide sidewalk. Where adjacent to overhangs and parking
areas, the minimum width of sidewalk shall be five feet six
inches. This sidewalk may be within a required setback area. If
the sidewalks are within an island separating parking stalls,
the sidewalks may be from curb to curb but no less than four
feet in width.
(8) Parking.
(a) Parking shall be provided as follows:
§ 140-312 WALL CODE § 140-312
139:652
Number of Parking Spaces
Per Unit Number of Bedrooms
1 0.75
2 1.00
(b) Parking stalls shall be a minimum of nine feet by 18 feet,
including overhang areas. Handicapped parking stalls shall be
eight feet wide with a five-foot aisle by 18 feet long and
serviced by depressed curbing.
(c) A minimum of 130 parking spaces shall be provided.
(d) A minimum of 10% of the parking spaces shall be provided.
(e) Each parking space shall consist of a suitably graded, drained
and unobstructed area in the plane of which no straight line
shall have a grade in excess of 7% or less than 0.5%.
(f) Curb return radii on safety islands adjacent to traffic flow shall
be a minimum of two feet.
(g) All parking spaces shall be of sufficient size to allow parking in
one maneuver. Parking spaces, ramps, etc., shall be provided
for the physically handicapped, in accordance with the
Americans with Disabilities Act.
(h) Backup areas with a minimum depth of five feet shall be
provided in all parking lots where there are dead-ends.
(9) Common open space, recreational or other facilities shall be
owned, operated and maintained as such by an association
comprised of all the owners of the individual units.
(10) All detention basins and facilities located within the ML-12A Zone
shall comply with all applicable regulations under the Flood Hazard
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq. and the New Jersey
Stormwater Management Act, N.J.S.A. 7:8 et seq. If any wetlands
areas are utilized for stormwater management, the regulations of
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection shall
apply and any inconsistent provisions of the applicable Wall
Township ordinances may be waived. Trees, shrubs and other
vegetation may be planted on the slopes or banks of detention
basins or facilities constructed in fill, provided the landscaping is
attractively maintained. All detention and retention basins with
permanent dry-weather pools of water shall have a water depth to
minimize propagation of mosquitoes and provided with mechanical
aeration for water quality.
(11) All proposed restrictive covenants, articles of incorporation or
other documents related to the creation of a homeowners'
association, trust documents or other deed or documents to provide
§ 140-312 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-312
139:653
§ 140-313. ML-13-SC Mount Laurel Zone.
ML-13-SC Multifamily Senior Citizen (13 DU/acre) Zone. The ML-12-SC
Zoning District consists of Block 240, Lot 54, which was granted use
variance approval by the Board of Adjustment on December 18, 1991, for
26 age-restricted senior citizen rental apartment units known as "Colfax
Senior Apartments" on 1.90 acres yielding a density of 13.68 dwelling units
per acre in accordance with general design standards contained in Part 5
and conditioned upon the a deed restriction for 100% of the units limiting
the initial rent in 1992 to be $400 per unit plus utilities with an annual
increase in the rental rate not to exceed the annual cost of living index.
The Township has determined that the rental rate established at the time
of the approval qualified the 22 one-bedroom and two two-bedroom units
as moderate-income units in accordance with the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing 1992 affordable income limits and thus are qualified
for ownership, age restrictions for rental units, and maintenance of
common property and facilities shall be submitted to the Township
for review by the Planning Board and Township Attorney prior to
final review of any subdivision or site plan.
(12) In any case where the maintenance or repair of any wall, fence or
other improvement by its owner or his or her agent would require
entry upon the adjacent property, an appropriate easement or right
shall be created in favor of the subject owner. All such easements
shall be detailed in specifications as to the required notice and any
limitations upon the right of entry shall provide a specific means of
arbitration in the event of disputes.
(13) Performance guarantee. In the ML-12A Zone, the provisions of
§ 140-92 with respect to performance guarantees shall apply.
(14) Maintenance guarantee. In the ML-12A Zone, the provisions of
§ 140-93 with respect to maintenance guarantees shall apply.
(15) Improvements required prior to issuance of certificate of
occupancy. In the ML-12A Zone, the provisions of § 140-286I shall
apply with respect to the issuance of certificates of occupancy.
(16) Inspection fees. The provisions of § 140-60 of this chapter
pertaining to inspection fees shall be applicable to all development
within the ML-12A Zone.
H. Design requirements. Developments in the ML-12A Zone shall be
subject to the following standards:
(1) The site plan shall be required to depict and delineate the edge of
all woodlands, but shall not be required to map or survey all trees
on site.
(2) All improvements within 50 feet of the boundary of the site shall be
shown on the site plan.
§ 140-312 WALL CODE § 140-313
139:654
for credit in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq. The ML-13-SC zoning
district designation memorializes the Board of Adjustment approval and
conditions made a part thereof.
§ 140-314. MLCC Congregate Care Zone. [Added 11-21-2006 by
Ord. No. 23-2006]
A. Permitted principal uses. In the MLCC (30 dwelling units per acre)
Zone, no premises shall be used and no structure shall be erected,
altered or occupied for any purposes except the following:
(1) Developments not participating in the Mount Laurel program shall
conform with all regulations of this chapter pertaining to the RR-6
Residential Zone;
(2) For developments participating in the Wall Township Mount Laurel
Program, the following uses are permitted; all such uses
hereinafter collectively referred to as "congregate care":
(a) Congregate care and assisted living residential facilities
located in multifamily structures containing individual living
units which provide for and comply with the Standards for
Assisted Living Residents contained in N.J.A.C. 8:36-3 et seq.
(b) Ambulatory care facilities.
(c) Nursing homes.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Common parking areas.
(2) Common storage structures and facilities subject to the same
limitations and requirements as the principal structures.
(3) Common open space and recreational facilities and structures
subject to the same limitations and requirements as the principal
structures.
(4) Signs in accordance with the Wall Township sign regulations
contained in Article XXIX.
(5) Fences in accordance with the Wall Township fence regulations
contained in § 140-206.
(6) Support facilities, functions and services intended for the use and
benefit of congregate care residents and their guests, including:
(a) Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities.
(b) Physical therapy facilities.
(c) Entertainment and personal care facilities.
(d) Libraries.
§ 140-313 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-314
139:655
(e) Food preparation facilities.
(f) Dining facilities.
(g) Linen service facilities.
(h) Housekeeping services.
(i) Secure facilities, administrative offices, storage facilities,
chapels, and facilities for the temporary lodging of guests.
C. Compliance with site plan standards, subdivision standards and
regulations. Unless provided to the contrary herein, applications for
development in the MLCC Zone shall follow and be subject to the
applicable ordinances, procedures, regulations, standards and
guidelines as required for preliminary and final site plan and/or
subdivision review and other applicable ordinances which are
incorporated herein by reference.
D. Maximum regulations. Development in the MLCC Zone shall be subject
to the following maximum regulations: [Amended 3-14-2007 by Ord.
No. 5-2007]
(1) Density. The gross density shall be no more than 30 dwelling units
per acre.
(2) Lot area. The minimum lot area for congregate care or multifamily
development shall be four acres.
(3) Building coverage. The maximum building coverage, including
accessory buildings, shall be 20%.
(4) Impervious surfaces. The maximum total impervious surface,
including pavement and buildings, shall be 40%.
(5) Building height. Building height shall be a maximum of 35 feet as
set forth in § 140-17, Definitions. A basement or an attic may not be
used for habitation and shall be used only for storage, utilities or
similar uses. Congregate care structures shall be limited to three
stories.
E. Minimum regulations. Congregate care and multifamily development in
the MLCC Zone shall be subject to the following minimum regulations:
(1) Setback requirements for buildings.
(a) From an existing public street: 100 feet.
(b) From an internal road: 15 feet.
(c) From any internal parking access road: 15 feet.
(d) From any internal parking area: 15 feet.
(e) From any residential property line: 65 feet.
§ 140-314 WALL CODE § 140-314
139:656
(f) From any nonresidential property line: 30 feet.
(2) Open space and recreation areas. Active and passive recreational
and open space areas shall be provided and shall include suitable
landscaping, sitting and walking areas, and such other recreational
facilities as may be appropriate for the use.
(3) Buffer areas. Landscaped buffer strips shall be permanently
maintained in accordance with the following regulations. The
buffer area may be included in required setback areas and in
required wetland transition areas.
(a) Buffer location and depth. Buffers shall be maintained as
follows:
[1] Where the tract abuts an existing nonresidential use or
zone, a buffer strip at least 20 feet in width; and
[2] Where congregate care development abuts a single-family
residential use or zone, a buffer strip at least 50 feet in
width; and
[3] Where the tract abuts public open space, no buffer shall be
required.
(b) Requirements of buffer area. Where an area required for a
buffer is already wooded, it shall be left in its natural state, and
the existing growth shall be supplemented with additional
plant materials where necessary. Buffer areas shall contain a
strip not less than 20 feet in width containing massed
evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs planted in such a
manner that will provide a continuous screen throughout the
entire year within two full growing seasons following the
planting of the buffer. Evergreen trees shall have a minimum
height of five to six feet when planted, deciduous trees shall be
a minimum caliper of 2 1/2 inches, and shrubs shall be of sizes
and planted in accordance with American Association of
Nurserymen's standards.
(c) Use of buffer areas. Required buffers shall be used for no other
purpose than as a buffer and as part of the required open space
of the tract. The only structures which may be erected with a
buffer area are fences as elsewhere regulated in the chapter,
and required utilities and access drives. All nonpaved areas
shall be suitably landscaped with trees, shrubs, grass, ground
covers and other landscaping materials.
F. Other regulations. Congregate care developments in the MCC Zone
shall be subject to the following regulations, requirements and
standards:
(1) All utilities shall be installed underground by the developer.
§ 140-314 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-314
139:657
(2) All developments shall be served by public water and sanitary
sewer systems. The developer shall pay the cost of connection and
transmission facilities necessary to connect to the sewer and water
systems servicing the development.
(3) Garbage, refuse storage and recyclable collection areas suitable for
containerized collection shall be provided in sufficient numbers and
locations. Such areas shall be screened from view by solid masonry
walls, or other suitable materials.
(4) Garbage and refuse collection shall be provided and maintained by
the body responsible for internal private streets and other common
facilities.
(5) Streets, roads, driveways, parking facilities, walkways, streetlights,
fire hydrants, drainage facilities and other improvements required
by this chapter or appropriate or necessary to the development
shall be installed at the expense of the developer in accordance
with the specifications of this section except as modified herein.
(a) Drainage maintenance (§ 140-245) in privately maintained
streets shall be the responsibility of the developer and his
successors in title.
(b) Private parking access drives shall intersect the interior
private collector road at not less than one-hundred-foot
intervals in center.
(c) Common private parking ports shall not be classified as
permanent dead-end streets (§ 140-233).
(6) All streets and roads within the tract shall be private streets and
shall be maintained by the body responsible for common areas.
Rights of access and enforcement shall be formally granted to the
Township.
(7) Internal private roads (§ 140-233) shall have the following
pavement widths:
(a) Interior private collector roads shall be 30 feet wide (no
parking provided).
(b) Interior private collector roads shall have a minimum four-footwide
concrete sidewalk. Where adjacent to overhangs and
parking areas, the minimum width of sidewalks shall be five
feet six inches. This sidewalk may be within a required setback
area.
(c) Private parking access roads shall be a minimum of 25 feet
wide when included within any parking area.
§ 140-314 WALL CODE § 140-314
139:658
§ 140-315. ML-10 Mount Laurel Zone. [Added 8-22-2018 by Ord.
No. 10-2018]
(d) Emergency access roads shall perform to minimum standards
approved by the Township Engineer for emergency access and
fire-fighting equipment.
(8) Parking. Parking stalls shall be a minimum of nine feet by 18 feet.
Handicapped parking stalls shall be 12 feet by 18 feet and serviced
by depressed curbing. Parking shall be provided as follows:
(a) Congregate care dwellings: at least 1/2 parking space shall be
provided for each dwelling unit. In addition, guest and
employee parking shall be provided at the ratio of one space
for every five units.
(9) Common open space, recreational or other facilities shall be
owned, operated and maintained as such by the owner.
(10) In any case where the maintenance or repair of any wall, fence or
other improvement by its owner of his agent would require entry
upon adjacent property, an appropriate easement or right shall be
created in favor of the subject owner. All such easements shall be
detailed as to the required notice and any limitations upon the right
of entry and shall provide a specific means of arbitration in the
event of disputes.
(11) Performance guarantee. In the MLCC Zone, the provisions of
§ 140-92 with respect to performance guarantees shall apply.
(12) Maintenance guarantee. In the MLCC Zone, the provisions of
§ 140-93 with respect to maintenance guarantees shall apply.
(13) Improvements required prior to issuance of certificate of
occupancy. In the MLCC Zone, the provisions of § 140-302K shall
apply with respect to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(14) Inspection fees. The provisions of § 140-60 pertaining to inspection
fees shall be applicable to all development within the MLCC Zone.
(15) The provisions of this section shall be specifically subject to the
provisions of Article XLI, General Requirements, of this Part 6, and
a developer's agreement with the Township Committee pertaining
to provisions of inclusionary Mount Laurel units.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to allow for a multifamily project of
mixed residential uses that partially addresses the Township's
affordable housing obligation. The developer's agreement shall govern
the nature of the restricted multifamily project to be constructed by the
developer, and require a 20% set-aside for affordable housing with the
option of a payment in lieu of construction if permitted in the
developers agreement. The Planning Board shall make compliance with
§ 140-314 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-315
139:659
such developer's agreement a condition of any approval it may grant
for a development in the ML-10 Zone. Development not part of the
Mount Laurel compliance program shall conform to underlining zoning
requirements.
B. Relationship between the overall tract and subdivided parcels. This
zone has been adopted to include one overall tract, containing the
entirety of the multifamily and townhouse developments along with all
ancillary components; separate tracts for the multifamily and
townhouse developments; and the fee simple parcels within the
townhouse tract. This zone operates under a technical subdivision
provision pursuant to § 140-81 of the Wall Township Ordinance, which
allows a developer to comply with the bulk and area requirements of
the overall tract instead of the post-subdivision lots, as applicable.
Cross-access, utility, and other easements shall be applicable to the
overall tract.
C. Permitted principal uses. In the ML-10 Zone, no premises shall be used
and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for any purposes
except the following:
(1) Attached dwellings.
(a) Townhouses, provided that not more than six units shall be
attached.
(2) Multifamily.
D. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Enumeration of permitted accessory uses and structures.
(a) Common parking areas.
(b) Common private recreational facilities and structures and
open space, including but not limited to a clubhouse and
swimming pool.
(c) Private attached garages for not more than two vehicles.
(d) Common maintenance and trash facilities.
(e) All provisions of the Wall Township sign regulations contained
in Article XXIX shall apply with the exception of the following:
[1] Maximum number of monument signs, inclusive of a
double-sided sign constituting one sign: one plus two
directional signs which shall also be monument signs;
[2] Maximum height: eight feet;
[3] Maximum area per side of each sign: 80 square feet for
monument sign and 20 square feet for related directional
sign;
§ 140-315 WALL CODE § 140-315
139:660
[4] Minimum sign setback from the property line: 10 feet;
[5] Minimum distance between signs: 40 feet.
(f) Up to but not exceeding one caretaker unit.
(g) Such other uses and structures that are customary and
incidental to the principal use as may be permitted by the
approving authority. All structures accessory to individual
dwelling units shall be attached to the dwelling unit to which
they are accessory.
(h) Detached/freestanding storage units, which shall be used only
for the personal storage of residents residing on site, or
equipment to maintain the facility.
E. Compliance with site plan standards, subdivision standards and
regulations. Unless provided to the contrary herein, applications for
developments in the ML-10 Zone shall follow and be subject to the
applicable procedures, regulations, standards and guidelines as
required for preliminary and final site plan and/or subdivision review of
this chapter and other applicable ordinances which are incorporated
herein by reference.
F. Maximum regulations. Development in the ML-10 Zone shall be subject
to the following maximum regulations:
(1) Density. The gross density of the overall tract shall be no more than
10 dwelling units per acre, prior to any dedications of land to public
entities.
(2) Impervious surfaces. The maximum total impervious surface shall
not exceed 60%, of the developable area of the tract.
(3) The maximum total lot coverage by buildings shall be 30% of the
developable area of the tract.
(4) Residential units per building. The maximum residential units per
building in multifamily buildings shall be 30. The maximum
residential units per building in townhouses shall be six.
(5) Principal building length. The maximum principal building length
for both multifamily and townhouse buildings shall be 200 feet.
(6) Building height.
(a) Each townhouse shall be limited to 2.5 stories and 35 feet and
shall include the option of a basement, provided that the
basement is not a story above grade.
(b) Each multifamily building shall be a maximum of three stories
and 45 feet.
§ 140-315 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-315
139:661
(c) Accessory clubhouse and maintenance buildings shall be
limited to one story and 20 feet in height.
(d) Building height shall be measured as set forth in § 140-17,
Definitions, of this chapter, except that height in this zone shall
be measured from the average proposed finished grade to the
midpoint of the roof.
(7) Bedroom distribution. Multifamily units shall have either one-, two-
, or three-bedroom units. Townhouses shall have either two- or
three-bedroom units.
G. Minimum regulations. Developments in the ML-10 Zone shall be subject
to the following minimum regulations:
(1) Overall tract requirements, including parcels for both multifamily
and townhouses developments:
(a) Minimum lot area: 18 acres.
(b) Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
(c) Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet.
(d) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(e) Minimum building setback from internal lot lines: zero feet.
(f) Minimum principal building setback from external tract line:
50 feet.
(g) Minimum accessory building setback from external tract
boundary: 15 feet.
(h) Minimum distance between structures: 35 feet.
(i) Minimum principal building setback from internal roads: 15
feet.
(j) Minimum principal building setback from internal parking
access roads: 15 feet.
(k) Minimum principal building setback from internal parking
area: 15 feet.
(l) Accessory structures shall be permitted in the front yard area
if adequately screened and buffered from view from all public
streets.
(2) Parcel requirements for individual townhouse lots:
(a) Minimum lot area: 0.04 acre.
(b) Minimum lot width: 20 feet.
(c) Minimum lot frontage: 20 feet.
§ 140-315 WALL CODE § 140-315
139:662
(d) Minimum lot depth: 90 feet.
(e) Minimum setbacks, principal:
[1] Front yard setback: 15 feet.
[2] Side yard setback: zero feet.
[3] Rear yard setback: five feet (to deck), 15 feet to building.
(3) Dwelling unit width. No multifamily dwelling shall be less than 15
feet in width. No townhouse dwelling shall be less than 20 feet in
width.
(4) Dwelling unit characteristics. Each dwelling unit shall contain, at a
minimum, a separate bedroom, a separate bathroom and a kitchen
which shall be located separate and apart from other rooms except
for the living area. The mix of dwelling units shall be in
conformance with this chapter.
(5) Dwelling unit size.
(a) Multifamily dwelling units shall have a minimum of 750 square
feet of habitable area.
(b) Townhouse dwelling units shall have a minimum dwelling unit
size of 1,400 square feet.
(6) Dwelling unit storage. No dwelling unit shall contain less than 250
cubic feet of storage space, which may be within garages,
basements, cellars or separate storage buildings, and which shall
be in addition to bedroom closet space provided with the unit. If
within garages, a rectangle of not less than nine feet by 18 feet
shall remain clear for parking vehicles.
(7) Open space and recreation areas. The applicant shall provide
recreational amenities for townhouse and multifamily residents,
including:
(a) A recreation building or clubhouse with a minimum size of 25
square feet for each dwelling unit in the development.
(b) Open lawn play area(s) with a minimum combined square
footage of 1,000 square feet.
(c) Picnic/barbecue area(s).
(d) Bicycle parking.
(e) Three or more of the following facilities: a swimming pool of a
minimum size of 800 square feet, boccie court, pickleball
court, tot lot/play area, tennis court, basketball court,
community garden, exercise area, off-leash dog area, and other
related recreational amenities as approved by the Board. For
§ 140-315 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-315
139:663
the purposes of this subsection, a swimming pool shall count
as two facilities.
(8) Buffer and landscape areas.
(a) Buffer location. Except as otherwise permitted by the
approving authority, where the overall tract abuts an existing
residential zone, use, or use permitted in a residential zone, a
landscaped buffer strip at least 35 feet in width shall be
permanently maintained along the property line abutting such
zone or use. Where the overall tract abuts a nonresidential
zone or use not permitted in a residential zone, a landscaped
buffer strip at least 25 feet in width shall be established and
permanently maintained along the property line abutting such
zone or use. Existing vegetation shall be maintained to the
greatest extent possible.
(b) Buffer areas shall consist of lawn area and massed evergreen
and deciduous trees and shrubs planted in such a manner that
will provide a continuous visual screen throughout the entire
year within a period of two full growing seasons following the
planting of the buffer. Evergreen coniferous trees shall have a
minimum height of six feet when planted. Deciduous trees shall
have a minimum caliper of 2 1/2 inches when planted. All plant
material shall conform to the current American Standard for
Nursery Stock sponsored by the American Association of
Nurseryman, Inc.
(c) Use of buffer, areas. Required buffers shall be used for no other
purpose than as a buffer and as part of the required open space
of the tract. The only structures which may be erected within a
buffer area are fences as elsewhere regulated in Part 4 of the
Land Use and Development Regulations and retaining walls,
drive openings, and necessary internal driveways, for the first
400 feet of driveway entrance to the site unless otherwise
permitted by the approving authority.
(d) Wooded areas. Where an area required for a buffer is already
wooded, it shall be left in its natural state to the maximum
extent feasible, and the existing growth shall be supplemented
with additional plant material where necessary as required by
the approving authority.
(e) The proposed tree clearing grading and landscape plan shall
respect and complement the existing topographic features of
the site where practical.
(f) All mechanical equipment, trash enclosures, and related
accessory structures shall be screened from view.
H. Other regulations. Developments in the ML-10 Zone shall be subject to
the following regulations, requirements and standards:
§ 140-315 WALL CODE § 140-315
139:664
(1) All utilities shall be installed underground by the developer.
(2) All dwelling units shall be served by public water and sanitary
sewer systems. The developer shall pay the cost of connection and
transmission facilities necessary to connect to the sewer and water
systems servicing the development.
(3) Garbage, refuse storage and recyclable collection areas suitable for
containerized collection shall be provided. Such areas shall be
screened from view and shall otherwise comply with Article XXXV
of the Land Use and Development Regulations.
(4) Garbage and refuse collection shall be provided and maintained by
the body responsible for internal private streets and other common
facilities.
(5) Streets, roads, driveways, parking facilities, walkways, streetlights,
fire hydrants, drainage facilities and other improvements required
by this chapter or appropriate or necessary to the development
shall be installed at the expense of the developer in accordance
with the specifications of this chapter except as modified herein:
(a) Drainage maintenance (§ 140-245) in privately maintained
streets shall be the responsibility of the developer and his
successors in title.
(6) All streets and roads within the tract shall be private streets and
shall be maintained by the body responsible for common areas.
Rights of access and enforcement shall be formally granted to the
Township.
(7) The New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C.
5:21 shall govern the pavement width of internal private roads.
(8) Parking. The New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards
at N.J.A.C. 5:21 shall govern the parking requirements.
(a) Parking shall be allowed in the front yard of each individual
tract.
(b) The minimum parking setback from the external overall tract
boundary shall be 10 feet. Parking shall not be permitted in
required buffer areas.
(9) Common open space, recreational or other facilities shall be
owned, operated and maintained as such by an association
comprised of all the owners of the individual units and/or a
property management company for the apartment buildings.
(10) All detention basins and facilities located within the ML-9 Zone
shall comply with all applicable regulations under the Flood Hazard
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq., and the New Jersey
Stormwater Management Act, N.J.S.A. 7:8 et seq. If any wetlands
§ 140-315 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-315
139:665
areas are utilized for stormwater management, the regulations
of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection shall
apply and any inconsistent provisions of the applicable Wall
Township ordinances may be waived. Trees, shrubs and other
vegetation may be planted on the slopes or banks of detention
basins or facilities constructed in fill, provided the landscaping
is attractively maintained. All detention and retention basins with
permanent dry-weather pools of water shall have a water depth to
minimize propagation of mosquitoes and provided with mechanical
aeration for water quality.
(11) All proposed restrictive covenants, articles of incorporation or
other documents related to the creation of a homeowners'
association, trust documents or other deed or documents to provide
for ownership, age restrictions for rental units, and maintenance of
common property and facilities shall be submitted to the Township
for review by the Planning Board and Township Attorney prior to
final review of any subdivision or site plan.
(12) In any case where the maintenance or repair of any wall, fence or
other improvement by its owner or his or her agent would require
entry upon the adjacent property, an appropriate easement or
right-of-way shall be created in favor of the subject owner. All such
easements shall be detailed in specifications as to the required
notice and any limitations upon the right of entry shall provide a
specific means of arbitration in the event of disputes.
(13) Soil removal. The provisions of § 140-117 of this chapter pertaining
to the removal of soil shall apply to developments in the ML-8A
Zone as modified as follows:
(a) The provisions of § 140-117A shall be modified to authorize the
Planning Board to issue a temporary soil removal of subsoil as
may be necessary to construct the structures approved by the
approving authority.
(b) The provisions of § 140-117B shall be modified to authorize the
Planning Board to issue a temporary soil removal permit for
the removal of soil, sand or gravel as may be necessary to
render the premises suitable for the ML-8A development, for
which a site plan or major subdivision plat has been approved.
The Planning Board shall apply the standards of Chapter 188,
Soil Removal.
(14) Performance guarantee. In the ML-10 Zone, the provisions of
§ 140-92 with respect to performance guarantees shall apply.
Performance guarantees shall be permitted separately for the
multifamily and townhouses phases.
(15) Maintenance guarantee. In the ML-10 Zone, the provisions of
§ 140-93 with respect to maintenance guarantees shall apply.
§ 140-315 WALL CODE § 140-315
139:666
Maintenance guarantees shall be permitted separately for the
multifamily and townhouses phases.
(16) Improvements required prior to issuance of certificate of
occupancy. In the ML-10 Zone, the provisions of § 140-286I shall
apply with respect to the issuance of certificates of occupancy.
(a) No permanent certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any
use or building until all required improvements are installed
and approved by the Township Engineer or other appropriate
authority.
(b) No temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any
use or building unless the Township Engineer shall have,
where applicable, certified to the following:
[1] Utilities and drainage. All utilities, including, but not
limited to, water, gas, storm drains, sanitary sewers,
electric lines and telephone lines shall have been properly
installed, and service to the lot, building or use from such
utilities shall be available.
[2] Street rights-of-way. All street rights-of-way necessary to
provide access to the lot, building or use in question shall
have been completely graded and all slope-retaining
devices or slope planting shall have been installed.
[3] Sidewalks. All sidewalks necessary to provide access to
the lot, building or use in question shall have been
properly installed.
[4] Streets. Curbing and the bituminous base course of
bituminous concrete streets necessary to provide access to
the required number of parking spaces for the building or
use in question shall have been properly installed.
[5] Curbing and parking areas. Curbing and the bituminous
base course of parking areas necessary to provide access
to the required number of parking spaces for the building
or use in question shall have been properly installed.
[6] Obstructions. All exposed obstructions in parking areas,
access drives or streets such as manhole frames, water
boxes, gas boxes and the like shall be protected by
building to the top of such exposures with bituminous
concrete as directed by the Township Engineer.
[7] Screening, fences, and landscaping. All required
screening, fencing and/or landscaping related to the lot,
building or use in question shall have been properly
installed, unless the Township Engineer shall direct the
developer to delay the planting of screening and
§ 140-315 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-315
139:667
landscaping until the next planting season in order to
improve the chances of survival of such plantings.
[8] Site grading. All site grading necessary to permit proper
surface drainage and prevent erosion of soils shall have
been completed in accordance with the approved soil
disturbance plans.
[9] Public water supply. Where the proposed lot, building or
use is served by a public water supply, said supply shall
have been installed and tested and all required fire
hydrants or fire connections shall have been installed and
tested and approved. However, the public water supply
shall not be used to supply outdoor sprinkler systems.
[10] Lighting. The lighting plan shall comply with all applicable
ordinance requirements, as well as the following
standards:
[a] All outdoor lighting shall be aimed, located, designed,
fitted and maintained so as not to present a disabling
glare hazard to drivers or a nuisance to neighboring
properties. Glare shall be controlled through the use
of full cutoff fixtures, the appropriate application of
mounting height, wattage, aiming, fixture placement,
and fixture design, etc. and the addition of shields and
baffles as necessary.
[b] Applicants shall use fixtures to complement the
building architecture. Pole-mounted lights shall be a
maximum of 20 feet tall. Floodlights and spotlights
shall not be permitted.
[c] Lighting shall be controlled by automatic switching
devices, such as timers, motion detectors, and/or
photocells, to extinguish potentially offending,
nonessential light sources overnight, to minimize
glare and sky-lighting consequences.
[d] Freestanding signs shall not be internally illuminated.
[11] Street signs and traffic control devices. All street signs,
paint lining and/or traffic control devices affecting the
proposed lot, building, or use, and required under the
terms of approval of a subdivision or site plan or by
federal, county, or municipal rules, regulations, or laws,
shall have been installed.
[12] Performance guarantee. The Engineer shall have received
a statement signed by the developer and any entity
providing any performance guarantee, which contains
language identical or similar to the following: "The
§ 140-315 WALL CODE § 140-315
139:668
issuance of any certificate of occupancy (temporary or
permanent) shall not be a basis for any claimed reduction
in any performance guarantee."
[13] Other. Any other conditions established for issuance of a
certificate of occupancy by the Planning Board as a
condition of final site plan or subdivision approval shall be
complied with.
[14] Temporary certificates of occupancy shall be issued for a
specified period of time, not to exceed one year.
(17) Inspection fees. The provisions of § 140-60 of this chapter
pertaining to inspection fees shall be applicable to all development
within the ML-10 Zone.
I. Affordable housing requirements. The restrictions and standards
applicable to inclusionary housing of low- and moderate-income
persons and families are set forth in Article XLII of the Land Use and
Development Regulations. The affordable housing set-aside
requirement for multifamily rental units shall be 20%. There is no
required affordable housing set-aside for townhouse units. However,
the townhouse developer shall make a payment in lieu of construction
in an amount to be negotiated with the Township governing body as set
forth in a developer's agreement.
J. Design requirements. Development in the ML-10 Zone shall conform to
the design guidelines in Part 5 of the Land Use and Development
Regulations in addition to the following supplemental guidelines:
(1) The site plan shall be required to depict and delineate the edge of
all woodlands, and shall be required to map or survey only the trees
on site that are greater than 12 inches in diameter.
(2) The minimum open space shall be 40%.
(3) The front facade of any structure shall not continue on the same
plane for a distance of more than the width of two horizontally
adjacent units. Offsets between front facade planes shall not be less
than two feet for no more than 20 feet.
(4) Building architecture. Development shall comply with the Building
Design Standards of § 140-252, as well as the following additional
standards:
(a) Primary elements of traditional architectural styles with
pitched roofs with a minimum slope of 5/12.
[1] When buildings are greater than 9,000 square feet, and
where a fully pitched roof throughout would not be
practical, a sloped perimeter roof with a slope of 5/12 or
greater shall be permitted in coordination with a flat roof,
provided that the appearance is that of a full roof. The
§ 140-315 LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT § 140-315
139:669
primary roofing materials shall be standing seam metal or
dimensional shingles.
(b) All buildings shall provide architectural elements such as wall
articulations and roofline variations. Box-like building shapes
that offer minimal articulation of the walls and roofline shall be
prohibited.
(c) All facades facing driveways, parking areas, or public rights-ofway
shall be architecturally treated as front facades.
(d) All accessory buildings and structures shall be treated
architecturally to complement the residential buildings.
K. Waivers or modifications of standards and requirements. The approving
authority may grant waivers or modifications of any improvement
requirements or standards of this section or Part 4 of the Land Use and
Development Regulations if appropriate and warranted by the facts and
circumstances of each particular development, including but not
limited to whether what is proposed conforms to RSIS. The resolution of
approval shall specifically state the reasons for any such waivers or
modifications.
§ 140-315 WALL CODE § 140-315
139:670
Chapter 141
WEST BELMAR GATEWAY AREA REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
§ 141-1. Purpose.
Pursuant to the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1,
et seq., the Planning Board has previously determined that the West Belmar
Gateway Area is an area in need of redevelopment and the Township
Committee has previously determined the West Belmar Gateway Area to
be a redevelopment area. The purpose of this chapter is to adopt the West
Belmar Gateway Area Redevelopment Plan to provide for the planning,
redevelopment and rehabilitation of the West Belmar Gateway Area of the
Township.
§ 141-2. Adoption of redevelopment plan.
The West Belmar Gateway Area Redevelopment Plan, prepared by Schoor
DePalma, Inc., and dated December, 2003, be and the same is hereby
adopted as the redevelopment plan for the West Belmar Gateway Area,
as that area is defined therein. The entire contents of the West Belmar
Gateway Area Redevelopment Plan shall be incorporated as an appendix to
the Code of the Township.
§ 141-3. Redevelopment plan to supersede land use.
The West Belmar Gateway Area Redevelopment Plan shall supersede any
provision of Chapter 140, Land Use and Development Regulations, of the
Code of the Township of Wall inconsistent with the provisions of the
redevelopment plan.
§ 141-4. Amendment to Zoning Map.
The Zoning Map of the Township of Wall dated July 12, 2000, be and the
same is hereby amended to incorporate all of the lots and blocks set forth
in the West Belmar Gateway Area Redevelopment Plan into a Zoning Map
district entitled, “West Belmar Gateway Area,” and all such properties shall
be removed from any prior Zoning Map designation.
§ 141-5. Amendments to redevelopment plan.
The West Belmar Gateway Area Redevelopment Plan may be amended
from time to time by the Township Committee pursuant to the applicable
provisions of the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law.
§ 141-6. Designation of redevelopment entity.
For all purposes under the West Belmar Gateway Area Redevelopment Plan
and the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, the redevelopment agency
for the West Belmar Gateway Redevelopment Area shall be the Township
Committee of the Township of Wall.
§ 140-315 WEST BELMAR GATEWAY AREA § 141-6
141:671
Chapter 150
MINING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 140.
Soil removal — See Ch. 188.
§ 150-1. Purposes.
It is the intent of this chapter to license and regulate the business of mining
of land and to provide for the protection of persons and property and for the
preservation of public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the
Township of Wall and to insure that mining operations shall be conducted
in such a manner as to create a minimum of annoyance from noise and
dust to nearby owners or occupants of property, provide for the safety of
persons, and further to insure that the mined area shall be suitably and
reasonably rehabilitated after mining operations have been completed or
otherwise terminated.
§ 150-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words as used herein shall be
defined as follows:
MINING — An extraction process involving the excavation of soil, sand,
gravel, stone, clay, topsoil, humus, peat or other natural mineral deposits
and the removing of it from the mined premises.
PERSON — Includes any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or any other legal entity.
PREMISES — The land which a person has a right to mine as permitted by
Chapter 140, Land Use and Development Regulations, or by variance or by
virtue of a valid nonconforming use.
§ 150-3. License required.
No mining or excavating shall be conducted within the Township of Wall
unless a license shall have been obtained under the provisions of this
chapter and unless the right to mine is permitted by Chapter 140, Land Use
and Development Regulations, or has been granted by variance or has been
established as a valid nonconforming use. No license shall be issued to any
person who is not the owner of the premises.
§ 150-4. License application.
Application for a license required by this chapter shall be made upon
forms provided by the Township Clerk. An application shall be submitted by
each current property owner covering all lots on which a mining operation
§ 141-6 WALL CODE § 150-4
150:672
is proposed to be conducted, and the application shall be signed by the
applicant and shall be submitted to the Township Clerk on or before
November 1 of every other year, for the renewal of a license for the
following two-year period. All licenses shall be issued for periods of two
years. The applications for licenses shall contain the following information:
A. The name and address of the applicant, if an individual; the name,
residence and business address of each partner, if a partnership; the
name and principal place of business if a corporation; and if a foreign
corporation, whether the same is authorized to do business in the State
of New Jersey.
B. The street address and the block and lot numbers of the premises on
which the mining operation is proposed to be conducted.
C. Five copies of the current plan submitted to the Freehold Soil
Conservation District of the premises where the business is to be
conducted, prepared by a licensed engineer and land surveyor, showing
the entire tract involved, all roads or buildings within 250 feet thereof,
the existing elevations of all buildings and structures on the premises,
existing and proposed final contours of the premises and adjoining
lands, all brooks, streams or bodies of water on the premises or within
250 feet thereof, all existing surface and subsurface water drainage
conditions and provisions therefor, all wooded areas, the quantity in
cubic yards of the material to be mined, the grades of all abutting
streets and lands, and all entrances or exits to the premises, together
with fences or gates erected or to be erected. Any requirements hereof
which are not shown in the Freehold Soil Conservation District plan
may be shown by an overlay.
D. The hours during which the mining or excavating will be conducted.
E. The location and description of permanent monuments for property
corners and benchmarks at the limits of excavation sites.
F. A statement describing all equipment to be used directly or indirectly in
the mining operation and whether or not the said mining operation is
conducted above or below groundwater level.
G. Routes to be utilized in transporting materials within the Township of
Wall.
H. Proof of certification of a Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan
by the Freehold Soil Conservation District.
I. A test boring report providing the elevation of the seasonal high water
table in each five-acre section to be excavated, uniformly located on the
property.
J. A plan for rehabilitation of the site.
§ 150-4 MINING § 150-5
150:673
§ 150-5. License fees.
Each application for the issuance, renewal or transfer of any license shall be
accompanied by a fee of $1,500 to defray the Township's costs in connection
with the application.
§ 150-6. Issuance of license.
All license applications shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer who
shall certify as to whether or not they comply with the requirements of
this chapter, and, if so certified, the Township Committee shall approve
the issuance of a license. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of the
second year for which they are issued, and may be renewed pursuant to the
requirements hereof for the issuance of licenses. A license shall be obtained
for all premises on which the owner has a nonconforming right to conduct
mining operations.
§ 150-7. Performance bond.
No license shall be issued until the applicant shall have posted with the
Township Clerk a performance bond in the form and with a surety
acceptable to the Township Committee in the amount of $50,000 to insure
the faithful performance of the work for which the license is to be granted in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including all work required
for the rehabilitation of the premises.
§ 150-8. Regulation of operation.
A. Mining or excavating may be conducted and vehicles and equipment
may be operated on the premises only from Monday through Saturday
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., prevailing time.
Construction equipment may be operated during the said hours on
Sunday, provided that such equipment is operated no nearer than 1,500
feet from existing residential structures, and further provided that no
mining or excavating is conducted.
B. The removal of any topsoil is hereby expressly prohibited. All topsoil on
premises being mined or excavated shall be temporarily stored on the
premises no closer than 150 feet from any lot line of the premises. After
operations have been completed or terminated, the topsoil shall be
respread over each section pursuant to levels and contour lines
approved by the Township Engineer and seeded with permanent rye
grass or other appropriate cover crop.
C. Operations shall be conducted so that not more than a total of 25 acres
shall be mined or excavated at one time. Areas on which mining is
completed shall be properly leveled, cleared of debris and graded to
conform with the contour lines and grades approved by the Township
Engineer. Rehabilitation of each such area shall be performed in
accordance with the approved rehabilitation plan and within the time
provided in § 150-9C hereof.
§ 150-5 WALL CODE § 150-8
150:674
D. No mining or excavating shall be permitted at any point nearer than
150 feet from any public street and no nearer than 50 feet from any lot
line of the premises, and no excavating shall be permitted up to such
point below a slope of three feet horizontal to one foot vertical. The
fifty-foot limitation herein may be waived by the Township Engineer, if
necessary, to conform to the elevation of the adjoining lot.
E. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection D above, the area within
150 feet of a street right-of-way may be excavated to an elevation no
lower than the elevation of the road measured at right angles or radially
to the street right-of-way line.
F. The licensee shall not cause soil erosion, drainage or sewerage
problems or other conditions detrimental to the public health, safety or
welfare.
G. Transportation of all materials off premises shall be conducted in such a
manner as to prevent the blowing of dust or the spilling of gravel, soil or
any other material from the vehicles.
H. There shall be erected a snow fence or equal, at least four feet high
around any open excavation the slopes of which are steeper than a ratio
of three feet horizontal to one foot vertical.
I. No excavation shall be permitted to within eight feet of the avenge high
water table. However, excavation may be conducted at lower levels for
the purpose of creating a pond, provided that the pond is part of a
rehabilitation plan approved by the Township Committee and the
Freehold Soil Conservation District.
J. Appropriate measures shall be employed so as to prevent the
dissemination of dust into the atmosphere or beyond the perimeter of
the property.
K. No graded or backfilled area shall be permitted to collect stagnant
water.
L. All natural vegetation within 150 feet of public street and 50 feet of all
property lines shall not be removed.
M. Noise shall be controlled in accordance with the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 7:29-1 et seq.
N. All explosives used in connection with any mining operations shall be
handled in accordance with the New Jersey Explosives Act (N.J.S.A.
21:1A-128 et seq.) and regulations promulgated thereunder.
O. No material mined or excavated shall be stockpiled at any point nearer
than 150 feet to the lot line of the premises.
P. No excavation shall be located nearer than 200 feet to any school,
church, recreational facility or other public building or private or public
hospital or nursing home. No excavation shall be located nearer than
§ 150-8 MINING § 150-8
150:675
§ 150-9. Rehabilitation of site.
§ 150-10. Suspension or revocation of license.
After 10 day's notice and an opportunity to be heard, the Township
Committee may suspend or revoke any license issued under the chapter if
it finds a pattern of repeated violations or that the licensee is in violation
of any material term or provisions hereof or any applicable statute or
regulation of the State of New Jersey in such a manner as to result in
substantial detriment to the health, safety or welfare of the inhabitants of
the Township of Wall.
200 feet to any residential building existing at the time of adoption
of this chapter, or nearer than 100 feet to any residential, public or
private budding constructed hereafter. All such measurements shall be
made by a straight line between such buildings and the nearest point of
excavation.
Q. Every licensee shall maintain appropriate public liability insurance
against liability arising from any such operations or activities incidental
thereto during the period of said operations.
R. No nonconforming mining use shall resume if it has been abandoned. If
the Code Enforcement Officer or the Township Committee determines
that there has been an abandonment, the owner may apply to the Board
of Adjustment for a determination as to whether or not there has been
an abandonment of the mining use with respect to a particular lot. If an
owner obtains a mining license for a particular lot on a continual basis,
the nonconforming mining use shall not be deemed to have been
abandoned, despite the fact that active mining operations may not have
taken place on the lot.
S. No new building shall be constructed within 50 feet of a lot line which
adjoins a lot for which a mining license has been issued.
A. Prior to the approval of any application for the issuance, renewal or
transfer of any mining license, a plan for rehabilitation shall be
submitted and approved for each current or proposed section to be
excavated. The plan shall show both existing and proposed final
contours.
B. Each section shall be rehabilitated as specified in § 150-8B and C
hereof.
C. The rehabilitation of each section shall be commenced within 60 days
and completed within 360 days after the excavation within the section
has been completed. Excavation at a second section may be commenced
during the rehabilitation of a section; provided, however, that no
excavation shall be commenced on a third section until all rehabilitation
is completed and approved on the first section to be excavated.
§ 150-8 WALL CODE § 150-11
150:676
§ 150-11. Renewals and transfers.
§ 150-12. Enforcement.
A. Application forms for renewal or transfer of licenses shall be obtained
from the Township Clerk. All applications for renewal or transfer of
licenses shall conform to the requirements of § 150-4 hereof for the
issuance of licenses.
B. Completed applications shall be personally delivered, or delivered by
registered or certified mail to the Township Clerk, and shall be
accompanied by a fee of $1,500 at least 60 days prior to the date
requested for renewal or transfer. Transfers of licenses shall be
prohibited except to subsequent purchasers of the premises.
C. No renewal or transfer of a license shall be approved until any and all
unpaid taxes, assessments or other municipal charges or liens are paid
in full.
D. No renewal or transfer of any license shall be approved if, upon
inspection of the subject property by the Township Engineer and the
Code Enforcement Officer, violations of this chapter are found to exist.
E. After receipt of the written application for transfer or renewal from the
Township Clerk, together with the site inspection report of the
Township Engineer and Code Enforcement Officer, the Township
Committee may, by resolution, authorize the renewal or transfer of the
mining license, deny the renewal or transfer of the mining license as
the result of violations of this chapter, or, authorize the renewal or
transfer of the license subject to the correction of any such violations.
F. Subsequent to the adoption of a resolution approving the transfer of
any mining license, the license shall be presented by the holder or
transferee thereof to the Township Clerk for proper endorsement.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Township Engineer or Code
Enforcement Officer, who shall investigate any violation of this chapter
coming to their attention, whether by complaint or arising from their
own personal knowledge.
B. If a violation is found to exist, the Code Enforcement Officer shall serve
a written notice by certified mail or personal service upon the owner or
other party in charge of the licensed premises, which notice shall
require said violation to be abated within 30 days from the date of
service thereof, or within such lesser period of time as the Township
Engineer shall deem reasonable in cases where the damage to the
public health, safety and welfare requires more immediate abatement.
C. If the violation is not abated within the time specified, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall issue a summons in Municipal Court for said
violation and notify the Township Committee thereof.
§ 150-11 MINING § 150-13
150:677
§ 150-13. Expenses to become lien.
Any expenses incurred by the Township in enforcement of this chapter shall
become a lien on the property if not paid within the calendar year in which
incurred.
§ 150-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who otherwise fails
to fully comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall for each
such violation or offense be subject to a fine as stated in Chapter 1, Article
I. Each day that a violation or offense continues shall constitute a separate
violation hereof.
§ 150-15. Payment of taxes.
No mining license shall be issued under this chapter for any property
until the Township Clerk receives a certification from the Tax Collector
that all real property taxes and assessments pertaining to the property or
properties for which the mining license is to be issued are current and that
no such taxes or assessments are then due and owing.
Chapter 153
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 90.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 113.
Housing standards — See Ch. 132.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 171.
Solid waste — See Ch. 191.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 222.
§ 150-13 WALL CODE § 150-15
150:678
ARTICLE I
Licensing of Mobile Home Parks
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Secs. 8-1 and 8-2 of the Revised General
Ordinances; amended in its entirety 12-22-2009]
§ 153-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOBILE HOME — See definition of "manufactured home" in Chapter 140,
Land Use and Development Regulations.
§ 153-2. License required.
No person shall operate or conduct a mobile home park within the
territorial limits of the Township, except in conformity with this article and
without first obtaining a license therefor, as hereinafter provided.
§ 153-3. Application for license.
Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate or conduct a mobile
home park shall make application therefor to the Township Clerk, which
application shall be accompanied by a plan or map of the land and premises
intended to be used as a mobile home, which such map shall set forth in
detail the proposed trailer sites, the location and size of the utility building
and the location and size of the septic tank or tanks.
§ 153-4. Mobile home park license fee.
The application shall also be accompanied by a fee of $750, which shall be
the yearly fee commencing with January 1 of each year.
§ 153-5. Mobile home space fee.
In addition to the license fee of $750 paid upon issuing of the license, the
licensee shall pay the sum of $5 per month for each mobile home space
occupied by any mobile home.
§ 153-6. Quarterly report; payment of fees.
On or before the 10th day of January, April, July and October of each year,
the licensee shall file with the Township Clerk, on a form furnished by
the Clerk, a return under oath stating the number of mobile home spaces
occupied by the mobile homes in his mobile home park during each of the
preceding three calendar months, and state or territory which issued the
license plates for each mobile home, and accompanying mobile home and
the license number thereof, and the name and address of each mobile home
owner. At the time of the filing of said return, the licensee shall pay to the
Township Clerk $5 for each month for each mobile home space which is
shown by the report or occupied by a mobile home.
§ 153-1 MINING § 153-7
150:679
§ 153-7. Failure to report or pay fees.
If on January 10 of any year the return is not made for the preceding
calendar months, which would be the last three months of the previous year,
and the payment required thereunder is not paid, then failure to make the
report or to pay such monies shall constitute a violation of the then existing
license the same as though the license fee so required to be paid were a
part of the year for which the license is issued.
§ 153-8. Revocation of license.
The established fee paid for each mobile home space occupied for the
time aforesaid shall be a part of the license fee to be paid by the licensee
operating the mobile home park, and failure to make the return and failure
to pay such additional part of the license fee shall constitute a violation of
this article, and, in addition to the penalties imposed herein, the license may
be revoked by the Mayor and Township Committee.
§ 153-9. Issuance of licenses.
Upon receipt of the application, plan and license fee, the Clerk shall issue
a license permitting the operation of a mobile home park on the premises
shown on such plan, provided that same conforms to the provisions of this
article.
§ 153-10. Expiration of license.
All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall expire on December 31
succeeding its issuance.
§ 153-11. Transfer fee for mobile home park license.
The fee for transfer of mobile home park licenses shall be $25.
§ 153-12. Exception.
This article is not intended to nor shall apply to any trailer not used as a
dwelling, sleeping place or living or business quarters.
§ 153-13. Mobile home park register.
It shall be the duty of the licensee to keep a register containing a record of
all mobile home owners and occupants located within the park. The register
shall contain the following information:
A. Name and address of each occupant.
B. The make, model and year of all automobiles and mobile homes.
C. The site assigned to such trailer.
§ 153-7 WALL CODE § 153-14
150:680
§ 153-14. Inspection of register.
The licensee shall keep the register available at the licensed premises for
inspection at all times by law enforcement officers, public health officials
and other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information
contained in the register. The register records shall not be destroyed for a
period of three years following the date of registration.
§ 153-15. Parking of mobile homes outside of parks prohibited.
No person shall park any mobile home at any licensed mobile home park
except on a mobile home site as shown upon the plan filed with the
application, and no person who operates a mobile home park shall permit,
suffer or allow to be parked at his mobile home park any mobile home
except on a mobile home site as shown on the plan, and no person shall park
any mobile home in the Township except upon premises which conform to
the provisions of this article.
§ 153-16. Water supply.
Each mobile home park shall be equipped with its own supply of running
water, and, where the mobile home park is within an area of the Township
in which water service is available, the same shall be connected to a public
water main. If water for use of occupants of trailers is secured from a well,
a water storage tank of at least 25 gallons capacity for each mobile home
site, maintaining a pressure of at least 20 pounds for each outlet, shall be
installed.
§ 153-17. Septic tanks.
Each mobile home shall be required to connect to sewer service where
available. Where sewer service is not available, each mobile home park shall
be equipped with a septic tank having a capacity equal to 50 cubic feet
per trailer site, which shall be maintained on the licensed premises and be
constructed in conformity with the regulations of the Township Board of
Health. This requirement shall be in addition to the septic tank required for
public toilet and laundry facilities.
§ 153-18. (Reserved)
§ 153-19. Driveway required.
Each row of mobile homes shall be separated by a driveway having a width
of 30 feet or more.
§ 153-20. Garbage pickup.
The mobile home park owner shall be responsible for garbage and trash
collection and removal from the premises not less than twice a week.72
72.Editor's Note: See Ch. 191, Solid Waste.
§ 153-14 MINING § 153-21
150:681
§ 153-21. Payment of taxes.
No license for a mobile home park shall be issued until such time as
the Township Clerk receives a certification from the Tax Collector that all
real property taxes and assessments pertaining to the property on which
the mobile home park is located are current and that no such taxes or
assessments are then due and owing.
§ 153-22. Snow removal.
§ 153-23. Street maintenance.
The mobile home park owner shall be responsible for maintaining all streets
and roadways within the mobile home park.
§ 153-24. Street lighting.
The mobile home park owner shall be responsible for providing street
lighting within the mobile home park during the period commencing 1/2
hour before sunset and ending 1/2 hour after sunrise. Illumination times
shall be adjusted within one week of daylight saving time/standard time
adjustment. Street lighting in new communities shall comply with all
Township ordinances.
A. The mobile home park owner shall be responsible for clearing snow
from all streets within 24 hours after the end of the snowstorm.
B. In the event that it becomes necessary for the Township Committee to
authorize the plowing of streets within a mobile home park, the same
shall be done under the direction of the Department of Public Works,
which will certify the cost thereof to the Township Committee, which
shall examine the certificate and, if found correct, shall cause the cost
as shown thereon to be charged against the lands. The amount so
charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall be
added to and become and form a part of the taxes next to be assessed
and levied upon such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate
as other taxes and to be collected and enforced by the same officers and
in the same manner as taxes.
C. A copy of a signed contract between the mobile home park owner and a
firm with at least three years experience in snow removal shall be
provided to the Township prior to the renewal of any annual mobile
home park license. The term of the contract shall cover at least the
license term and shall require snow removal within 24 hours of a
storm's end when a snowfall of at least three inches occurs.
D. In addition to the foregoing, any person convicted of violating this
section shall be subject to a fine up to $1,000.
§ 153-21 WALL CODE § 153-25
150:682
§ 153-25. Landscaping.
The mobile home park owner shall be responsible for all trees, plants,
shrubbery or landscaping beyond a ten-foot perimeter of any individual
mobile home except where the trees, plants, shrubbery and landscaping
were added to the mobile home site by the individual mobile home
residents. Mobile home owners shall care for and maintain landscaping
within a ten-foot perimeter around his or her mobile home.
§ 153-26. Water, electrical and sanitary sewer service. [Amended
11-22-2011 by Ord. No. 27-2011]
A. The mobile home park owner shall be responsible for the installation
and maintenance of water mains up to the individual water meter
servicing each individual mobile home. The mobile home owner shall be
responsible for maintenance of the water main from the water meter to
the mobile home.
B. The mobile home park owner shall be responsible for the installation
and maintenance of electric service up to the point where the electrical
service enters the individual mobile home. The mobile home owner
shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair and replacement of the
mobile home's electrical service from the service point of entry into the
mobile home. The mobile home park owner shall be responsible for the
maintenance, repair or replacement of the underground conduit and
wiring servicing the mobile home park. This shall include the
stabilization, backfilling and resurfacing of areas disturbed by said
service repairs.
C. The mobile home park owner shall be responsible for the installation
and maintenance of sanitary sewer service up to six inches above
finished grade servicing each individual mobile home. The mobile home
owner shall be responsible for maintenance of the sanitary sewer
service from that point to the mobile home connection.
§ 153-25 MINING § 153-26
150:683

ARTICLE II
Rent Stabilization
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 8-3 of the Revised General Ordinances;
amended in its entirety 12-22-2009 by Ord. No. 34-2009]
§ 153-27. Title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "Mobile Home Park Rent
Stabilization Ordinance of the Township of Wall."
§ 153-28. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this article:
AVAILABLE FOR RENT TO TENANTS — Fit for habitation as defined by the
Code, ordinances and regulations in the Township of Wall and occupied or
unoccupied and offered for rent.
CONSUMER PRICE INDEX — Consumer price index, published periodically
by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, United States Department of Labor.
LANDLORD — The mobile home park operator, owner or other person
leasing a mobile home space to a tenant.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Includes any lot or parcel of land and premises
where the owner, lessee, or other person having control thereof shall offer
sites for trailer or mobile homes or similar-type vehicles on a rental or lease
or other basis.
MOBILE HOME SPACE — Includes that portion of a mobile home park
rented, or offered for rent, for the purpose of parking or positioning a trailer
or mobile home for living and dwelling purposes, to one or more individuals
or family units together with all the privileges, services, equipment,
facilities and improvements connected with the use or occupancy of such
portion of the property. Mobile home spaces which are newly constructed
and rented for the first time are exempted from the provisions of this
article, and the initial rent therefor may be determined by the owner. All
subsequent rents will be subject to the provisions of this article. Any mobile
home space occupied by a tenant who is an employee of the landlord and the
rental of which unit is customarily restricted to employees of the landlord
is exempted from the provisions of this article. Where a mobile home space
has been vacant for a period in excess of 12 months, the rent therefor may
be determined by the landlord, and all subsequent rents will be subjected
to the provisions of this article.
PERSON — Any natural person, or any partnership, limited partnership,
joint venture, association or corporation or other entity.
RENT — When used as a noun herein, shall mean the amount of valuable
consideration payable by the tenant to the landlord for the use or occupancy
of a mobile home space, whether or not commonly known as rent, but does
not include those several items set forth more particularly in the definition
of "rental income" hereof.
§ 153-27 MINING § 153-28
150:685
RENTAL INCOME — The payable rent charged and received for the mobile
home space over the previous twelve-month period exclusive of any of the
following: all real property taxes, space fees or license fee charged by the
Township of Wall pursuant to any duly adopted ordinance of the Township
of Wall and any cost of utilities (but only if the same are provided by the
landlord, and then only in an amount equal to the minimum charge(s) for
such service) and all increases for major capital improvements then being
paid by the tenant affected.
UTILITIES — The rate charged for the sewerage or water service.
§ 153-29. Determination of rents.
§ 153-30. Certificates for increase.
A. Establishment of rents between a landlord and a tenant to whom this
article is applicable shall hereafter be determined by the following
provisions: At the expiration of the tenancy for a mobile home space, no
landlord may request or receive any increase in the rental income and
additional charges for that mobile home space from any continuing
tenant, which is greater than a combination of the following:
(1) Any increased cost to the landlord for utilities;
(2) Any increased cost to the landlord in mobile home space fees or
license fee (prorated among all of the tenants residing in the mobile
home park concerned) charged by the Township of Wall pursuant to
any duly adopted ordinance; and
(3) Any amount equal to 8% of the previous twelve-month rental
income for the mobile home space or the percentage increase in
the annual average for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) in the New
York/New Jersey/Connecticut Pennsylvania region for the year
ending December prior to the date of the application for rent
increase, whichever amount shall be less. Any continuing tenant at
the termination of a tenancy shall not suffer or be caused to pay any
rent increase for the mobile home space in any twelve-month
period which exceeds the above permitted increase.
B. This section does not apply to new tenants entering the park for the
first time. Rental rates for new tenants will be established and noted in
the annual application for rent increase. Those new rental rates to be
applied to a new tenant will be the rental rates used by the landlord
until the next application filed with the Rent Board.
C. Replacement of an existing mobile home unit by the existing
homeowner will not cause the rent to increase. The size, type and style
of the mobile home unit must be approved by the landlord. N.J.S.A.
46:8C-2 precludes the landlord from requiring the use of any one
particular manufacturer.
§ 153-28 WALL CODE § 153-30
150:686
A. Rent increases, as authorized by this article, may be allowed only if the
mobile home park substantially complies with the Code of the Township
of Wall pertaining to mobile home and trailer parks and other Township
ordinances. As part of his application for any increase, the landlord
shall submit to the Board written certification that he complies with the
terms and provisions of the aforementioned Township ordinances.
B. Provide to the Board:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of landlord and of his legal
counsel, if any.
(2) Name, address and telephone number of managing agent and
superintendent.
(3) Address of mobile home or trailer units and tenants affected.
(4) Base twelve-month rental figure with reference to which increase
shall be computed.
(5) Calculations of the increases in rent expressed both in terms of
dollars and cents and in terms of percentage increase.
(6) A certification that a copy of the aforesaid notice has been served
upon each tenant named in said notice along with a statement that
the tenant may make application to the Board to review the
proposed rental increase. At the same time that the Board is thus
notified, a copy of said notice shall be mailed by the landlord by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to any tenant who may be
affected by the increase applied for. Adequate proof of said service,
which shall be in affidavit form, shall be filed by the landlord with
the Secretary for the Board.
C. The landlord shall indicate and certify with each application for rent
increase the monthly rent to be charged to any new tenant for the next
year. The Board shall review the application for rent increase for the
rent to be charged to the new tenant and approve or adjust the rate of
that rent. This applies only to new tenants and existing units for their
first 12 months of occupancy. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained herein, a park operator or owner shall, on or before January
31 of each year, provide to the Board written notice of the amount
charged during the preceding twelve-month period to any new tenants
that occupy space in that park. This provision is intended to provide
notice to the Board of new rentals and the rents established for those
new occupants.
D. A tenant may be notified by other than certified mail, only if the
landlord or his representative shall serve the tenant personally with the
notice provided for herein, and certify by affidavit the fact of such
service and retain such affidavit in his records to be produced upon
request of the Board. Upon receipt of said notice and where the
increase sought is based upon either § 153-29A(1) or (3), or both as
§ 153-30 MINING § 153-30
150:687
contained hereinbefore in § 153-29, the Board shall schedule a hearing
on said increase, and the landlord shall post in a conspicuous place
in or about the mobile home or trailer park a notice of said hearing
date at least five days prior to the proposed date of hearing. Where the
increase sought is based upon only provision § 153-29A(2) herein, no
hearing shall be scheduled and the increase shall become effective on
the date specified in said notice if all other applicable provisions of this
article are complied with.
E. In order for a landlord to qualify for the vacancy decontrol rent increase
which is permitted under § 153-29B herein, the landlord shall first be
required to file with the Board a written statement signed by the
vacating tenant together with an affidavit signed by the landlord
certifying to the Board that the landlord has not in any way harassed or
pressured the tenant into vacating the mobile home space and that the
vacation of such space was a voluntary act of the tenant. For the
purposes of this article, a vacation caused or necessitated by
substandard, unsafe or unsanitary conditions on the rental premises
shall not be deemed a voluntary vacation. Such noncoercion
certification signed by the tenant shall not be required in order for a
landlord to qualify for the vacancy decontrol rent increase if:
(1) The increase to an incoming tenant does not exceed the total of all
permissible increases authorized by any other provision of this
article; or
(2) The landlord files an affidavit with the Board certifying that the
tenant has moved from the unit without notification to the landlord,
and the landlord has made a good faith effort to obtain a
noncoercion certification from the tenant; or
(3) The landlord files an affidavit that the tenant has vacated the unit
pursuant to a judicially mandated eviction; or
(4) The tenant has refused to sign said certification and, upon appeal
by the landlord, the Board has found that such refusal was
unwarranted and that there was, in fact, no coercion exerted upon
the tenant. A hearing pursuant to this subsection shall be held
before the Board upon the landlord giving at least 15 days' notice to
the vacating tenant by either personal service or by certified mail.
F. Should the Board determine, on the basis of a complaint or information
it has received, and following an investigation or review, that there is
probable cause to conclude that a vacancy resulting in a rental
adjustment or adjustments was obtained on the basis of coercion or
other misconduct by the landlord, the Board shall schedule a hearing on
15 days' written notice to the landlord, in order to consider whether the
adjustment or adjustments should be rolled back as the evidence,
including sworn testimony, shall warrant. If the Board concludes that
the vacancy has resulted from the misconduct of the landlord, the
§ 153-30 WALL CODE § 153-30
150:688
§ 153-31. Timing of increase; excess increase.
Any rental income or additional charge increase at a time other than at
the expiration of a tenancy or termination of a periodic tenancy shall
be void, except where approved by the Board in accordance with the
provisions of this article. Any rental income or additional charge increase
in excess of that authorized by the provisions of this article shall be void.
Periodic tenancy, for the purposes of this section, shall mean a tenancy that
continues from month to month or other recurring period until terminated
by landlord or tenant as provided by law.
§ 153-32. Rent reduction procedure.
A tenant shall be entitled to a rent reduction from a landlord because of
a decrease in real property taxes or utilities or any decrease in the trailer
fees or license fees charged by the Township of Wall. The reduction shall
not exceed that amount authorized by the following provisions:
Board shall void all adjustments and rental charges made under the
provisions of this section retroactive to the date they were imposed.
G. Where the mobile home park or the operator of the mobile home park
fails to substantially comply with this article, any tenant may apply to
the Board for a reasonable reduction in rent, commensurate with any
such noncompliance by the landlord, whereupon the Board shall duly
notify the landlord and schedule the matter for a public hearing and,
the landlord shall effect service of notice of said meeting in accordance
with the provisions of the preceding subsection. If, as a result of such a
hearing, a reasonable reduction in rent is granted, it shall remain in
effect until the landlord proves that the noncompliance determined by
the Board to exist has been corrected. If the Board determines that the
noncompliance affects a majority of the home sites, the rent reduction
may be extended to include all of the tenants in the mobile home park.
A. Where the decrease consists of a decrease in the municipal property tax
due to aid received from the state aid for schools fund and where said
decrease is subject to the provisions of Chapter 63, P.L. 1976 (N.J.S.A.
54:4-6.2 et seq.), as may be amended from time to time, the landlord
shall make such rebate and upon such terms as Chapter 63, P.L. 1976,
provides.
B. Where the decrease consists of a decrease in the real property taxes
other than that decrease provided for in Subsection A above, the
landlord shall divide the decrease in the present tax over the tax for the
previous year by the total number of occupied mobile home spaces in
the mobile home park. The decrease each tenant is entitled to shall be a
credit to rent in 12 monthly installments commencing from July 1 of
each year. Any tenant entitled to a rent decrease hereunder shall be
notified by the landlord by certified mail of the calculations involved in
computing such reduction and the effective date of such reduction.
§ 153-30 MINING § 153-32
150:689
§ 153-33. Tax surcharge.
A landlord shall be entitled to a rent surcharge for any increase in real
property taxes. Any landlord seeking a surcharge for real property taxes
shall notify the tenants by certified mail at least 30 days prior to the date of
which said increase is to be effective of the calculations involved, including
the property tax for the mobile home park for the previous year, and the
increase in the present tax over the tax for the previous year divided by
the total number of occupied mobile home spaces in the mobile home park.
The tax surcharge each tenant is liable for shall be paid in 12 monthly
installments commencing July 1 of each year.
§ 153-34. Tax appeals.
§ 153-35. Additional rent increases.
C. Where the decrease consists of a decrease in utilities, trailer fees or
license fees, the landlord shall divide the decrease in the present
utilities, trailer fees or license fees over the utilities, trailer or license
fees of the previous year by the total number of occupied mobile home
spaces in the mobile home park to obtain the decrease per space. The
decrease each tenant is entitled to shall be a credit to rent on 12
monthly installments commencing from the effective date of said
reduction. Any tenant entitled to a rent decrease hereunder shall be
notified by the landlord by certified mail of the calculations involved in
computing such reduction and the effective date of such reduction.
A. In the event a real property tax appeal is taken by the landlord and the
landlord is successful in said appeal and the taxes reduced, the tenants
involved shall, for the tax year concerned, receive 25% of said reduction
after the landlord's costs of securing said tax reduction have been
deducted. The landlord shall receive the remaining benefit of the
reduced taxes. Thereafter, in succeeding years, the benefit of such
successful tax appeal shall be divided evenly between the tenants and
the landlord.
B. Any such successful landlord shall notify the tenants by certified mail
within 30 days after the receipt of the final judgment of the calculations
involved, including an itemization of the costs of securing said
reduction and the reduction each tenant is entitled to, which reduction
shall be determined by multiplying .25 times the difference between the
amount of said reduction and the landlord's costs of securing said
reduction and dividing the amount thus obtained by the total number of
occupied mobile home spaces in the mobile home park.
A. Hardship.
(1) A landlord who finds that present rental income and additional
charges from the mobile home park on which he seeks relief
hereunder are insufficient to cover the cost of payments on a first
mortgage and any subsequent mortgages directly used to improve
§ 153-32 WALL CODE § 153-35
150:690
and upgrade the mobile home park and/or payments for
maintenance and/or all operating costs and/or provide said
landlord with a just and reasonable return on his investment, may
apply to the Board for an increase in rental income. Said
application shall separately set forth the amount of mortgage
payments, taxes, insurance, routine maintenance costs, other fixed
expenses associated with the operations of the mobile home park,
the rent being charged for each mobile home space located in
the park, the deficiency allocable to each mobile home space, a
factual computation of the just and reasonable return desired by
the landlord, together with such other information as the landlord
believes will support his application. Following a hearing, the
Board may grant the landlord a hardship rent increase to meet
these needs after considering the proofs presented by the landlord,
the condition of the mobile home park and the degree of hardship
to the landlord.
(2) Prior to any such application to the Board, a landlord must post in a
conspicuous place in and about the mobile home park a notice of
said application setting forth the basis for said application; each
tenant to be affected must, at the same time, receive a copy of the
application by certified mail or by personal service. The landlord
must thereafter notify each affected tenant of the appeal hearing
date by certified mail or by personal service and in addition
thereto, post a notice in a conspicuous place at the mobile home
park for at least five days prior to the application hearing date.
B. Major capital improvements. A landlord may seek an additional charge
for major capital improvements. Capital improvements shall be an item
considered as such under federal Internal Revenue code enactments
and regulations. Prior to filing an application with the Board, the
landlord must notify by certified mail or by personal service each tenant
residing in the mobile home park affected of the total cost of the
completed capital improvement, the number of years of useful life of the
improvement as claimed by the landlord for purposes of depreciation
for income tax purposes, the average cost, including debt service, of the
improvement (calculated by dividing the cost of the major improvement
by the total number of mobile home spaces in the mobile home park),
and the capital improvement surcharge he is seeking from each tenant.
The landlord seeking a capital improvement surcharge shall apply to
the Board for said surcharge. The Board shall determine, after the
landlord has provided notice to the affected tenants by certified mail or
by personal service of said hearing at least five days prior thereto, if
said improvement is a major capital improvement. If the Board
determines that said improvement is a major capital improvement, the
Board shall permit such increase to take place and indicate any
conditions to be attached thereto. In any event, no increase granted by
authority of this subsection shall exceed 15% of the annual rental
income paid by each tenant, unless said increase or capital
improvement is mandated by law. Any tenant of a mobile home park
§ 153-35 MINING § 153-35
150:691
§ 153-36. Mobile Home Rent Stabilization and Control Board.
may determine to pay the capital improvement surcharge in one lump
sum, provided that the landlord agrees to waive recovery of all
financing charges associated with the capital improvement surcharge
on such tenant's rental space. For purposes of this subsection, the
pumping of a septic tank or the performance of any maintenance
function with respect to a septic tank, or the topping or trimming of
trees shall not be considered a major capital improvement. However,
on notice to all affected tenants and after a public hearing, the Board
may approve a surcharge for the cost of pumping of a septic system
servicing a mobile home park upon all affected tenants of that park;
provided, however, that evidence is furnished to the Board's satisfaction
that the septic system has been inspected and approved for continued
use by the Monmouth County Board of Health, said inspection to be
completed within 60 days of the date of pumping of the septic tank
affected.
C. Recycling costs. A landlord may seek an additional charge for the cost
of recycling. Recycling costs shall mean an additional charge that the
landlord must pay beside the current charge for trash disposal, less any
credit or refund for recycling such materials. Any application for an
increase under this section must comply with Subsection A of this
section.73
A. Board created. There is hereby created a Mobile Home Rent
Stabilization and Control Board within the Township of Wall. The Board
shall consist of five regular members all of whom shall be residents of
the Township of Wall. All members shall be appointed by the Township
Committee and shall serve, commencing with their initial appointment,
terms of one year, two years, three years, four years, and five years,
respectively, and thereafter terms of five years or until prior expiration
of this article, whichever event shall first occur. Each of the said terms
shall be deemed to commence on the first day of January of the year of
their respective appointments. There shall be two alternates appointed
annually by the Township Committee to serve in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member of the Board. Vacancies shall be
filled for the balance of the unexpired term. Members shall not hold any
other elective office or position in the Township. The members of the
Board shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for
reasonable and necessary expenses. The Board shall have available to it
such clerical assistance and legal counsel as is budgeted annually by
the Township Committee. No member shall vote upon or enter into
discussions as to any matter in which he or she has a direct or indirect
interest, financial or otherwise.
B. A member of the Board may be removed for cause, upon written
charges brought before the Township Committee and served upon said
73.Editor's Note: See Ch. 191, Solid Waste.
§ 153-35 WALL CODE § 153-36
150:692
§ 153-37. Appeals.
member and only after a public hearing has been held and the member
concerned afforded an opportunity to be heard.
C. Powers and duties. The Mobile Home Rent Stabilization and Control
Board is hereby granted and shall have the exercise, in addition to other
powers herein granted, of all powers necessary and appropriate to
carry out and execute the purposes of this article, including but not
limited to the following:
(1) To elect a Chairman, a Vice Chairman and a Secretary.
(2) To adopt such rules and regulations, including bylaws, as it deems
necessary for its own government not inconsistent with this article
or with law.
(3) To issue and adopt such rules and regulations as it deems
necessary to implement the specific provisions of this article, said
rules and regulations to become effective only upon formal
approval by resolution of the Township Committee.
(4) To supply information and assistance to landlords and tenants for
the purpose of assisting them in complying with the provisions of
this article.
(5) To hold hearings and adjudicate applications from landlords for
additional rental income or charges as hereinbefore provided.
(6) To hold hearings and adjudicate applications from tenants for
reduced rental income or charges as herein provided.
(7) To administer oaths, examine witnesses and by subpoena compel
the attendance and the testimony of witnesses and the production
of books, papers, documents or tangible things, pursuant to the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.).
D. Said Board shall give both the landlord and tenant reasonable
opportunity to be heard before making any determination and shall
base its determination on the reasonable, credible evidence before it,
although the strict rules of evidence shall not apply. Any decision or
order made by the Board shall be in the form of a resolution, shall be in
writing and shall state the reasons underlying the decision or order.
E. The Board shall maintain minutes of its hearings and/or meetings.
A. Both a landlord and tenant may appeal in writing, the decision or
findings of the Board to a court of competent jurisdiction within the
time provided by court rule for the taking of such appeals.
§ 153-36 MINING § 153-37
150:693
§ 153-38. Standards.
§ 153-39. Waiver of provisions prohibited.
No arrangement between a landlord and a tenant purporting to waive
any provision of this article shall be of any force and effect and all such
arrangements are hereby declared to be against public policy and are void
ab initio.
§ 153-40. Violations and penalties.
A willful violation of any provision of this article or of any final decision or
order to the Board shall be punishable by a penalty as set forth in Chapter
1, Article I. A violation affecting more than one mobile home space shall be
considered a separate violation as to each such mobile home space.
§ 153-41. When effective.
This article shall remain in full force and effect until such time as an
amendment providing for its repeal is introduced and adopted by the
Township Committee.
§ 153-42. Payment of taxes.
No application for a rent increase shall be granted by the Mobile Home Rent
Stabilization and Control Board until such time as the Board is in receipt
of a certification from the Tax Collector that all real property taxes and
assessments pertaining to the property on which the trailer park is located
are current and that no such taxes or assessments are then due and owing.
B. Any tenant may appeal to the Board any calculation made by the
landlord, or failure to make a calculation, pursuant to the provisions of
this article.
A. During the term of this article, the landlord shall maintain the same
standards of service, maintenance, and equipment in the mobile home
park or mobile home spaces as he provided or was required to do by law
or lease, written or oral, as of the date the tenancy was entered into.
B. Where the landlord fails to maintain such standards any tenant may
appeal to the Board for a reasonable reduction in rent, commensurate
with such failure by the landlord, whereupon the Board shall duly notify
the landlord and schedule the matter for a hearing. If, as a result of
such a hearing, a reasonable reduction in rent is granted, it shall
remain in effect until the landlord proves the standards are being
maintained.
§ 153-37 WALL CODE § 153-43
150:694
§ 153-43. Severability.
Any part of this article found by any court to be in violation of any set
standard or law shall not affect the use and enforcement of the balance of
this article.
§ 153-43 MINING § 153-43
150:695
Chapter 161
PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Drug-free zones near public parks — See Ch.
98.
§ 153-43 WALL CODE § 153-43
150:696
ARTICLE I
Hours
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 3-3 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 161-1. Hours stated; occupation after hours prohibited.
§ 161-2. Exception for recognized organizations; permit.
A. The parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, and bicycle paths controlled,
operated and maintained by the Township shall be open to the public
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and one hour after sunset. [Amended
12-15-2010 by Ord. No. 24-2010]
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons other than Township
personnel in the course of their duties, or organizations as provided in
§ 161-2 to enter upon, use or in any way occupy or be present upon the
aforesaid parks, playgrounds, recreation areas and bicycle paths during
any hours in which the park is not open to the public.
A. Recognized organizations may use appropriate parks, playgrounds or
other recreation areas within the Township between one hour after
sunset and 7:00 a.m. for purposes such as camping or meetings, but
only after issuance of a permit therefor from the Township Police
Department. [Amended 12-15-2010 by Ord. No. 24-2010]
B. Such permits shall not be issued unless it appears that the function or
activity shall be conducted in an orderly manner, will not cause damage
to any part of the premises or facilities thereon, will not violate any
Township ordinance or laws of the State of New Jersey, will not interfere
with the peaceful enjoyment of other properties in the area and not be
detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare.
C. All permits issued hereunder shall be nontransferable and shall bear
upon their face the name of the holder, and date or dates and the hours
for which they have been validated, and the specific recreational
purposes for which they were obtained.
§ 161-1 MINING § 161-2
150:697

ARTICLE II
Use of Municipal Facilities
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 3-21 of the Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 161-3. Intent.
The Township desires to establish procedures for the use of public meeting
rooms and other recreational facilities in order to provide for the
appropriate use of such facilities; to ensure that the citizens of the Township
are not unfairly assessed the costs pertaining to extraordinary requests
for the use of such Township facilities; to establish reasonable charges
to reimburse the Township for expenses incurred in connection with the
use of such facilities; and to ensure that such facilities are available for
Township sponsored recreation activities, meetings of Township boards and
committees and other groups and organizations.
§ 161-4. Rules and regulations.
The Township Administrator is hereby authorized to establish and
promulgate rules and regulations governing the use of municipal meeting
rooms and other facilities, such rules to be subject to review and approval
by the Township Committee. Such rules and regulations may establish
reasonable and appropriate fees for the use of various municipal facilities,
which fees shall be designed to reimburse the Township for costs for
security, cleanup and other expenses resulting from the use of the facilities.
§ 161-3 MINING § 161-4
150:699
Chapter 164
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Penalties for false alarms caused by alarm
systems — See Ch. 59, Art. I.
Sale of alcohol to intoxicated persons — See
Ch. 62, § 62-12.
Curfew — See Ch. 93.
Drug-free zones — See Ch. 98.
§ 164-1. Offenses enumerated.
It shall be unlawful for any person:
A. To encumber any street or other place by loafing, lounging, loitering,
sleeping in or about the same to the annoyance of passersby.
B. To be under the influence of intoxicating liquor, or in an intoxicated
condition, and loiter or be upon the streets, highways or other public
places, or on property not his own.
C. To indulge in and utter loud, common, offensive, indecent or profane
language in any public place, quasi-public place or upon private
property not his own.
D. To indulge in and utter loud, common, offensive, indecent or profane
language upon his own property if the same is audible to persons on
other property or upon the public street or other public place.
E. To address or make audible any offensive remarks or comments upon or
to any person passing along or being on any highway or other public
place.
F. To annoy, obstruct or interfere with any person or persons lawfully
being on any highway or other public place or conveyance.
G. To go about from door to door or accost or annoy any other person in
any public place by begging or soliciting alms or wander abroad and
lodge in uninhabited buildings, taverns, outhouses, barns, the open air
or other places and not give a good account of himself.
H. To revel, quarrel, brawl or otherwise misbehave in a disorderly manner
to disturb the public peace and quiet.
I. To willfully disquiet or disturb any lawful meeting or assembly for
religious worship, either by making loud noises or rude or indecent
behavior or profane talk whether in the meeting or in the immediate
vicinity of the same.
§ 161-4 WALL CODE § 164-1
150:700
J. To place or exhibit in any manner any indecent, immodest, obscene or
vulgar thing where it may be exposed to public view.
K. To appear in any street or other public place or in the open air in the
Township in a state of nudity or in any indecent or lewd dress or make
any indecent or lewd exposure of themselves or act in an immodest,
indecent or lewd manner.
L. To keep, manage, maintain, reside in, frequent or be an inmate of a
disorderly house or house of ill fame, or permit, suffer or allow his or
her house or other building or place to be used, frequented, occupied by
or resorted to by riotous or disorderly persons, prostitutes, gamblers or
vagrants.
M. To set up, maintain, or permit, suffer or allow to be set up, kept or
maintained in any house or other premises or place any device or game
of chance for the purpose of gaming, or engage in any game of chance
either as banker, player, dealer or otherwise for the purpose of gaming,
except those bona fide qualified organizations which, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq. (Bingo Licensing Law) and N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq.
(Raffles Licensing Law), may conduct games of chance on any day,
including Sunday, upon application to and approval by the Township
Clerk pursuant to the rules and regulations of the New Jersey Legalized
Games of Chance Control Commission. In the event that the Township
Clerk is unavailable or unable to review the application, the Chief of
Police shall approve or disapprove of the application pursuant to the
rules and regulations of the New Jersey Legalized Games of Chance
Control Commission. [Amended 4-23-2014 by Ord. No. 6-2014]
N. To make, or cause to be made, or permit, suffer or allow to be made in
his house or other premises any loud or unseemly noises to the serious
inconvenience or discomfort of the peaceful inhabitants of the
neighborhood between 11:00 p.m. Friday night and 7:00 a.m. Saturday
morning, and between the hours of 11:00 p.m. Saturday night and 7:00
a.m. Sunday morning. On all other days those same acts shall be
prohibited from 10:00 p.m. at night until 7:00 a.m. the following
morning. For days preceding legal holidays and for legal holidays the
hours applicable to Fridays and Saturdays listed in this subsection shall
apply (11:00 p.m. at night until 7:00 a.m. the next morning). [Amended
8-24-2016 by Ord. No. 11-2016]
O. To possess, set or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn any
fireworks or explosives of flammable materials, or discharge them or
throw them into any such areas from lands or highways adjacent
thereto. This prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture,
or compound that would be dangerous from any of the foregoing
standards. Residents seeking to use fireworks must first obtain a permit
and approval from appropriate Township officials, including but not
limited to, fire officials. [Amended 11-25-2014 by Ord. No. 23-2014]
§ 164-1 MINING § 164-1
150:701
§ 164-2. Noise control. [Added 10-22-2014 by Ord. No. 22-2014]
P. To use or pretend to use or have any skill in physiognomy, palmistry,
phrenology or like crafty science, or shall pretend to tell destinies,
fortunes or future occurrences.
Q. To by word, sign, act, or otherwise, invite or solicit unlawful sexual
intercourse or any other unlawful, indecent, lewd or lascivious act.
R. To maliciously destroy, damage or injure any property of another.
S. To enter any building or go upon any lands used or occupied for school
purposes by a public school and therein disturb the exercises of the
school or molest or give annoyance to the children or teacher attending
said school.
T. To willfully or maliciously ring or cause to be rung any bell, siren or
alarm of any fire company in this municipality and thereby give or cause
to be given a false alarm of fire.
U. To willfully, maliciously or recklessly beat, torment, kick, strike,
mutilate, torture, injure, disable, kill or otherwise mistreat any dog
used by the Police Department in the performance of the functions or
duties of the Department, or to interfere with any such dog while the
same is being used in the performance of any of the functions or duties
of the Police Department.
A. Declaration of findings and policy. Whereas, excessive noise is a serious
hazard to the public health and welfare and the quality of life; and a
substantial body of science and technology exists by which excessive
noise may be substantially abated; and the people have a right to, and
should be ensured, an environment free of noise that may jeopardize
their health or welfare or degrade the quality of life; and the necessity
in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter
contained and enacted is declared as a matter of legislative
determination and public policy and the provisions and prohibitions
hereinafter contained and enacted are in pursuance of and for the
purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort,
convenience, safety, welfare, and the peace and quiet of the inhabitants
of the Township of Wall.
B. Enforcement and authority. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the
Police Department of the Township of Wall to enforce all of the
provisions of this section with the exception of those set forth under
Subsection D entitled "Specific acts deemed to be violations." Said
Subsection D may be enforced by the Police Department and by the
Code Enforcement Department and its agents and employees.
(1) Method of enforcement. Violation of this section shall be cause for
summons and complaint to be issued forthwith; provided, however,
that if the noise source is not a motor vehicle moving on a public
right-of-way, in lieu of a summons and complaint, enforcement
§ 164-1 WALL CODE § 164-2
150:702
personnel may issue a twenty-four-hour notice, in writing, which
may be served personally or by certified mail to the last known
address of the person or persons in charge of or in control of the
device, building or premises to abate said violation of this section.
Failure to comply with the order issued and served shall constitute
a violation of this section. Enforcement personnel are not required
to serve warnings prior to the issuance of any summons.
C. Loud sounds and noises prohibited. No person shall cause or cause to
be made any loud, raucous, annoying sounds, noise or disturbances so
as to disturb the comfort, peace, quiet and tranquility of the residents of
the neighborhood or of the community.
D. Specific acts deemed to be violations. The doing of any of the following
acts as outlined in Subsection D(1) and (2) below so as to cause any
particularly or unnecessarily loud or disturbing noise is deemed to be a
detriment to the health and welfare of residents and shall be deemed to
be a violation of this section. The enumeration of these acts shall not be
deemed to be an exclusive list of violations of this section.
(1) Any unreasonably loud and disturbing sounds such as, but not
limited to, the playing of music or amplified sound of any type,
crowd noise or loud conversations or celebrations which transmit
beyond the bounds of the property from which they emanate shall
be prohibited when carried on between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
Friday night and 7:00 a.m. Saturday morning and, between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. Saturday night and 7:00 a.m. Sunday morning.
On all other days those same acts shall be prohibited from 10:00
p.m. at night until 7:00 a.m. the following morning. For days
proceeding legal holidays and for legal holidays the hours
applicable to Fridays and Saturdays listed in this subsection shall
apply (11:00 p.m. at night until 7:00 a.m. the next morning).
(2) The following acts shall be prohibited when carried on between the
hours of 7:00 p.m. in the evening and 7:00 a.m. the following day on
any weekday and after 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays and at any time on
Sundays and legal holidays, except as described in Subsection E(3).
(a) Operating or causing to be operated any equipment, hand-held
or otherwise, operated by commercial contractors or entities in
commercial or residential construction, repair, alteration,
excavation, demolition, and other commercial activities
generating noise comparable to the activities listed herein, on
buildings, structures, streets, alleys or appurtenances thereto,
in residential or commercial land use categories, including, but
not limited to, cranes, bulldozers, backhoes, front-end loaders,
trucks, dump trucks, commercial saws, jackhammers, nail
guns and other similar construction equipment. Operating or
causing to operate any equipment used by commercial
landscapers or commercial entities in the course of lawn care
and property maintenance including lawn mowers and leaf
§ 164-2 MINING § 164-2
150:703
blowers. The prohibitions enumerated in this section shall not
be in effect when the Township of Wall has determined that
exceptional circumstances justify suspension of these
restrictions. Exceptional circumstances shall include but will
not be limited to: weather emergencies; and emergencies
impacting on individual property owners (see Subsection E(3)
for more details).
(b) The use of any sound truck, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or
other such instrument for any commercial use.
(c) The loading or unloading, or the pickup or delivery of material
of any nature to any commercial or residential property
including boxes, crates, containers and dumpsters, lumber and
similar materials, including garbage cans or other similar
objects, which may include the operation of a forklift, hydraulic
lift or similar device that causes unreasonably loud and
disturbing noise, other than delivery of consumer items to a
commercial or residential property such as newspapers,
delivery food service, milk deliveries, UPS and Federal Express
deliveries, pharmaceutical deliveries and other such similar
deliveries that do not involve forklifts, hydraulic lifts and other
similar devices that may cause excessive noise.
(d) The running, operating, or permitting the operation of any
motor vehicle which creates a disturbing noise.
(e) The operating or permitting the operation of the motor or any
attached auxiliary equipment of any motor vehicle whose
manufacturer's gross weight is in excess of 10,000 pounds for
a period longer than three minutes in any hour while such
vehicle is stationary on a public right-of-way in a residential
district or in any designated quiet zone, or is on private
property in a residential or commercial zone and is not within a
completely enclosed structure.
(f) Private and commercial garbage collection before 7:00 a.m. on
any day.
E. Exceptions.
(1) Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply to church
bells or chimes, or to sounds typically generated by vehicles
engaged in the residential sale of ice cream.
(2) The playing by a musician, band or orchestra in a hall, building,
public place of entertainment, or in the open air shall be
permissible by special permit to be granted by the Township
Committee. Such permit shall be issued for a period of time, but not
to exceed one year at no cost to the applicant.
§ 164-2 WALL CODE § 164-2
150:704
§ 164-3. Adoption of Public Health Nuisance Code. [Added
11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 20-2018]
(3) Residential property owners may themselves operate lawn
maintenance equipment, home repair equipment and home
improvement equipment on their own property on weekdays,
Sundays and legal holidays between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m. Residential property owners, pursuant to Subsection
D(2)(a), are restricted as to when they may hire commercial
contractors to undertake these activities.
(4) The operation of any sporting stadiums and/or venues and the
events they host which were in existence prior to the adoption of
this section shall be permissible. Such sporting stadiums and/or
venues will be held to the preexisting Township noise standard
whereby it is not permissible to make or cause to be made, or
permit or suffer or allow to be made, any loud or unseemly noises to
the serious inconvenience or discomfort to the residents between
the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m.
(5) Emergencies. Noise caused in the performance of emergency work
for the immediate safety, health or welfare of the community or
individuals of the community, or to restore property to a safe
condition following a public calamity shall not be subject to the
provisions of this section. Nothing in this section shall be construed
to permit law enforcement, ambulance, fire, or other emergency
personnel to make excessive noise in the performance of their
duties when such noise is clearly unnecessary. The use of stationary
emergency signaling devices shall be for emergency use only.
F. Penalties.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation who shall be found guilty of
violating any provision of this section shall, for each offense, be
fined a sum of not less than $200 nor more than an amount indexed
to the maximum allowable fine under New Jersey state statutes and
a jail term not to exceed 90 days. Each day of such violation's
continuance shall be considered as a separate offense and shall be
separately punishable.
(2) Any person, firm or corporation who shall be found guilty of
violating any provision of this section for a second time within a sixmonth
period shall, for each offense, be fined a sum of not less than
$500 nor more than an amount indexed to the maximum allowable
fine under New Jersey state statutes and a jail term not to exceed
90 days. Each day of such violation's continuance shall be
considered as a separate offense and shall be separately
punishable.
A. Adoption of standards.
§ 164-2 MINING § 164-3
150:705
Chapter 167
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Fingerprint inquiries — See Ch. 36, § 36-5.
Sale of goods from vehicles — See Ch. 140,
§ 140-118E.
Peace and good order --- See Ch. 164.
(1) A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions
or acts and each of them as a nuisance, prohibiting certain noises
or sounds, requiring the proper heating of apartments, prohibiting
lease or rental of certain buildings, prohibiting spitting in or upon
public buildings, conveyances or sidewalks, authorizing the
inspection of premises by an enforcing official, providing for the
removal or abatement of certain nuisances and recovery of
expenses incurred by the Board of Health in removing or abating
such nuisances and prescribing penalties for violations is hereby
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq. A copy of the code
is annexed to this section and made a part of it without the
inclusion of the text.
(2) Whenever the noise standards included in this section are in
conflict with Wall Township Code § 164-2, Noise Control, the
standards of § 164-2 shall control.
B. Title of code. The code established and adopted by this section is
described and commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of
New Jersey (1953)."
C. Public record. Three copies of the Public Health Nuisance Code of New
Jersey (1953) have been placed on file in the offices of the Secretary of
the Board of Health and the Township Clerk for the use and
examination of the public.
D. Enforcing officials. "Enforcing officials" shall mean and include regular
and special patrolmen and superior officers of the Police Department,
the Code Official or Building Official, the Plumbing Inspector of the
Township, the Executive Officer, the Certified Health Officer or any
other official authorized by the Board of Health to enforce this code and
chapter.
E. Violations and penalties. Violations of the provisions of this section shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article 1 et seq., entitled
"General Penalty," in the Wall Township Code.
§ 164-3 WALL CODE § 164-3
150:706
ARTICLE I
Sale of Merchandise on Highways
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 3-2 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 167-1. Parking of vehicles; exceptions.
A. No person shall park a vehicle upon a public roadway or street for the
purpose of, or during the process of, soliciting sales or business,
displaying goods for sale or selling, or offering to sell, for delivery of
goods or merchandise to buyers, consumers or other persons who are
occupants of vehicles, standing or moving on the public streets or
highways.
B. This section shall not apply to any ice cream vendor who has received a
valid permit from the Township of Wall in accordance with Chapter 167
of the Code of the Township of Wall as well as all other permits and
licenses applicable to ice cream vending and vehicles. [Added
5-13-2009 by Ord. No. 11-2009]
§ 167-1 MINING § 167-1
150:707

ARTICLE II
Solicitors, Canvassers and Peddlers
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 5-1 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 167-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HAWKER or PEDDLER — Any person who goes from home to home or
person to person and carries with him goods, wares, or merchandise of any
description for the purpose of selling and delivering them to purchasers.
For purposes of this chapter, included within the definition of "hawker or
peddler" are ice cream vendors who offer frozen food products for sale from
a vehicle which stops within the Township for purposes of immediate sales
of frozen food products to the public either directly from the vehicle or
proximate thereto.[Amended 5-13-2009 by Ord. No. 11-2009]
HOME — Any structure intended primarily as a residence and consisting of
one or more rooms occupying all or part of a floor or floors in a building
of one or more floors or stories, including single-family residences or
apartments.
SOLICITOR or CANVASSER — A person who goes from home to home or
person to person selling or buying goods, wares or merchandise by sample
or taking orders for future delivery or selling a service to be rendered in the
future with or without accepting an advance payment for the goods, wares,
merchandise or service.
§ 167-3. Permit required.
No hawker, peddler, canvasser or solicitor as defined in this article shall
engage in any such business or operations in the Township without first
having obtained a permit therefor.
§ 167-4. Exceptions. [Amended 5-13-2009 by Ord. No. 11-2009]
This article shall not apply to:
A. The acts of persons selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in
such articles.
B. Any sale required by statute or by order of court.
C. Any honorably discharged soldier, sailor, marine, nurse or army field
clerk of the United States and any exempt member of a volunteer fire
department, as defined and provided in N.J.S.A. 45:24-9, provided such
person holds a special license issued by the Clerk of the county in which
he resides pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-10 and provided also that such
person shall notify the Chief of Police, in writing, of their intentions to
solicit and the dates on which they will solicit at least five days prior to
commencement of solicitation.
§ 167-2 MINING § 167-4
150:709
§ 167-5. Application for permit. [Amended 5-13-2009 by Ord. No.
11-2009]
D. Any person, organization or society or association of a charitable,
religious, patriotic, philanthropic or community nature, desiring to
solicit or have solicited in its name money, property or financial
assistance for which no merchandise, wares or services are required,
provided that there is filed with the Chief of Police an application, in
writing. [Amended 10-23-2013 by Ord. No. 20-2013]
(1) The application shall be submitted five (5) days prior to
commencement of solicitation and shall include the following
information:
(a) The names of solicitors and the purpose or cause for which
solicitation is being made.
(b) The names and addresses of the officers of the organization.
(c) The names and addresses of the agents or representatives who
will solicit, canvass or distribute literature in the Township.
(2) Each solicitor for such organization, society or association shall
carry proper identification and shall display the same upon request.
(3) Each solicitor for such organization, society or association shall be
permitted to solicit during the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
Solicitation pursuant to Subsection D at all other times shall be
prohibited.
E. Children under the age of 17, engaged in the sale or delivery of
newspapers published in the State of New Jersey and qualified as legal
newspapers within the meaning of N.J.S.A. 35:1-1 et seq.
A. Any person desiring a permit to canvass, solicit, peddle or hawk in the
Township pursuant to this article shall pay a fee of $25 to the Township
of Wall Police Department, where an application form shall be obtained,
completed and filed with the Chief of Police, which form shall include,
but not be limited to:
(1) Name and physical description of applicant.
(2) Permanent home and local address of applicant.
(3) Name and address of employer or firm represented.
(4) Place or places of residence of the applicant for the preceding three
years.
(5) A description of the nature of merchandise to be sold or offered for
sale or the nature of the service to be furnished.
§ 167-4 WALL CODE § 167-5
150:710
§ 167-6. Investigation. [ Amended 5-13-2009 by Ord. No. 11-2009]
The Chief of Police of the Township shall cause such investigation to be
made of the applicant's business and moral character as he deems
necessary for the protection of the public good. This investigation shall
include the fingerprinting of the applicant, the costs of which shall be
borne by the applicant. However, if the applicant has been fingerprinted
within six months of the date of the application by another municipality for
similar purposes, the Chief of Police shall accept the results of the other
municipality's fingerprint inquiry in lieu of refingerprinting the applicant.
If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business
responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police shall endorse
his disapproval and the reasons therefor on the application, and the permit
shall not be issued.
(6) Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime,
misdemeanor, or violation of any ordinance concerning canvassing
or soliciting and if so, when, where and the nature of the offense.
(7) Date on which he desires to commence canvassing or soliciting.
(8) All hawkers, peddlers, solicitors or canvassers shall be required to
identify any person(s) who will participate in any of the activities
regulated by this chapter in the manner provided above and such
person(s) shall be required to apply for and obtain a permit prior to
engaging in any such activities.
(9) Ice cream vendors shall provide proof of valid license(s),
registration(s) and insurance(s) for the vehicle(s) to be used as well
as proof of satisfactory permits and approvals from the Township
Board of Health at the time of the submission of the application.
B. The applicant shall attach to the application:
(1) Two recent photographs of the applicant, which shall be
approximately two inches by two inches, showing the head and
shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.
(2) A letter or other written statement from the individual, firm or
corporation employing the applicant, which such letter or
statement shall be notarized, certifying that the applicant is
authorized to act as the employer's representative.
C. No such application shall be filed more than three months prior to the
time such canvassing or soliciting shall commence.
D. In addition to the application fee set forth in Subsection A herein, the
applicant shall pay to the Township of Wall Police Department a sum in
the amount charged by any state or federal agency for a fingerprint
inquiry concerning the applicant.
§ 167-5 MINING § 167-7
150:711
§ 167-7. Issuance of permit; term. [Amended 5-13-2009 by Ord. No.
11-2009]
If, as a result of investigation, the applicant's character and business
responsibility are found to be satisfactory, the Chief of Police shall endorse
his approval and shall cause a permit to be issued. The permit shall show
the name, address, photograph and thumbprint of the permittee, the kind of
goods or services to be sold or performed thereunder, the date of issuance
and the date on which such permit shall expire, which shall be December
31 of the year in which issued. The permit shall be laminated and shall be
signed and sealed by the Township Clerk and the Chief of Police.
§ 167-8. Time permitted for investigation.
The investigation by the Chief of Police shall be completed within 20 days
of the date of filing of the application and the permit either issued or
denied within five days after the date the Chief of Police has completed his
investigation.
§ 167-9. Carrying and display of permit.
Every person holding a permit under this article shall carry the permit
with him while engaged in canvassing or soliciting and shall exhibit the
same upon request of any authorized permit inspector of the Township or
proposed customer.
§ 167-10. Revocation of permit.
Any permit issued under this article shall be revoked by the Township Clerk
if the holder of the permit is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions
of this article, or has made a false material statement in the application, or
otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a permit under the terms
of this article. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof
shall be given by the Township Clerk to the holder of the permit in person
or by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to his residence
address set forth in the application. Immediately upon the giving of such
notice the certificate of registration shall become null and void.
§ 167-11. Conditions.
It shall be unlawful for any person holding a permit under this article to:
A. Canvass, solicit, hawk or peddle as defined in this article prior to 9:00
a.m. or after 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday or at any time on
Sunday, with the exception of ice cream vendors who may sell from
trucks between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Sunday through
Saturday. [Amended 5-13-2009 by Ord. No. 11-2009]
B. Enter in or upon any house, building or other structure or any land or
property, without the prior consent of the owner or occupant thereof
where there is placed or posted, on the premises in a conspicuous
§ 167-7 WALL CODE § 167-11
150:712
§ 167-12. Renewal of permit.
All permits may be renewed by following the same procedure set forth in
§§ 167-5 through 167-9, except that renewal applications shall be filed by
December 1 of each year.
§ 167-13. Enforcement.
All duly appointed police officers, the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Township, or his duly authorized representatives, are hereby appointed
inspectors of permits and are hereby authorized to examine all persons to
ascertain whether or not such person possesses a proper permit. Inspectors
have the power to cause complaints to be filed against all persons violating
any of the provisions of this article.
§ 167-14. Payment of taxes.
No permit under this chapter shall be issued until the Township Clerk
receives a certification from the Tax Collector that all real property taxes
and assessments are current and that no such taxes or assessments are then
due and owing.
§ 167-15. No-Knock List. [Added 10-23-2013 by Ord. No. 20-2013]
position at or near the usual means of ingress, a sign or other form
of notice stating or indicating that the owner or occupant thereof
forbids or otherwise does not desire persons engaged in canvassing or
soliciting activities to enter upon the premises.
C. Fail to immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the owner or occupant.
D. To fail to give a written receipt to the purchaser, which receipt shall be
signed by the holder and shall set forth a brief description of the
articles ordered, the total purchase price thereof, and the amount of the
payment, if any, received by the holder from the purchaser.
A. All residents of the Township may register their name, address and/or
unit/apartment number with the Township Clerk to be placed on the No-
Knock List, indicating that they do not want canvassers, peddlers,
solicitors or hawkers of any sort to approach their homes and/or seek
personal contact with the occupants of the registered home. The
Township Clerk shall provide the registration form, which shall be
available during normal business hours. By registering for the No-
Knock List, the resident chooses to allow Wall Township Police, Fire or
First Aid Rescue squads to be exempt.
B. Residents shall remain on the No-Knock List until such time as they
advise the Municipal Clerk in writing that they wish to be removed from
the list.
§ 167-11 MINING § 167-15
150:713
C. The Township Clerk shall maintain a No-Knock List a copy of which
shall be provided to all persons or organizations required to obtain a
license or register pursuant to Chapter 167. In accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5, the Municipal Clerk shall charge a fee for
a copy of the No-Knock List. The list shall be updated periodically.
D. It shall be unlawful for any peddler, hawker, solicitor or canvasser to
approach and/or seek personal contact with the occupants thereof if
that residence is registered on the No-Knock List. Anyone violating this
subsection shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than
$100 for each violation.
E. Upon completion of registration on the No-Knock List the subscriber
shall purchase and receive, for a nominal fee, a decal stating "DO NOT
KNOCK; Registered on the No-Knock List with Wall Township's
Municipal Clerk's office; VIOLATORS WILL BE PROSECUTED" which
must be displayed in a clearly visible location (i.e., front door or window
adjacent to the front door).
§ 167-15 WALL CODE § 167-15
150:714
Chapter 169
PRECIOUS METALS AND SECONDHAND GOODS, DEALERS
OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Auctions and auctioneers — See Ch. 68.
Junk shops and junk dealers — See Ch. 136.
§ 169-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION — A current valid New Jersey driver's
license or identification card, a current valid photo driver's license issued
by another U.S. state, a valid United States passport, or other verifiable
United States government-issued identification, which will be recorded on
the receipt retained by the dealer and subsequently forwarded to the local
police department or request.
DEALER — Any person, partnership, limited-liability company, corporation,
or other entity who, either wholly or in part, engages in or operates any
of the following trades or businesses: the buying for purposes of resale
of precious metals, jewelry, or other secondhand goods as defined herein;
pawnbrokers as defined herein; itinerant businesses as defined herein. For
the purposes of this chapter, transient buyers, as defined herein, are subject
to the same licensing and reporting requirements as any other dealers.
ITINERANT BUSINESS — A dealer who conducts business intermittently
within the municipality or at varying locations.
MUNICIPAL CLERK OR TOWNSHIP CLERK — The statutory officer whose
duties are defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 and may refer to the duly appointed
clerk of the city, town, township, village or borough.
PAWNBROKER — Any person, partnership, association or corporation
lending money on deposit or pledge of personal property, other than choses
in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness; purchasing
personal property on condition of selling it back at a stipulated price; or
doing business as furniture storage warehousemen and lending money on
goods, wares or merchandise pledged or deposited as collateral security.
PRECIOUS METALS — Gold, silver, platinum, palladium, and their alloys, as
defined in N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq. and 51:6-1 et seq.
PUBLIC — Individuals and retail sellers, not to include wholesale
transactions or transactions between other merchants.
§ 167-15 MINING § 169-1
150:715
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION — Every transaction conducted between a
dealer and a member of the public in which precious metals, jewelry, or any
other secondhand goods as defined herein are purchased or pawned.
SECONDHAND GOODS — Used goods such as antiques, gold, silver,
platinum, or other precious metals, jewelry, coins, gemstones, gift cards,
any tools, telephones, typewriters, word processors, GPS devices,
computers, computer hardware and software, television sets, radios, record
or stereo sets, electronic devices, musical instruments, sporting goods,
automotive equipment, collectibles, game cartridges, DVDs, CDs, and other
electronically recorded material, firearms, cameras and camera equipment,
video equipment, furniture, clothing, and other valuable articles. For the
purposes of this chapter, secondhand goods shall not include goods
transacted in the following manner:
SELLER — A member of the public who sells or pawns used goods such as
precious metal, jewelry, or other secondhand goods to a dealer.
TRANSIENT BUYER — A dealer, as defined herein, who has not been in
a registered retail business continuously for at least six months, at any
address in the municipality where the dealer is required to register, or who
intends to close out or discontinue all retail business within six months.
§ 169-2. License requirement for dealers.
A. Judicial sales or sales by executors or administrators;
Occasional or auction sales of household goods sold from private
homes;
B.
C. Auctions of real estate;
The occasional sale, purchase, or exchange of coins or stamps by
a person at his permanent residence or in any municipally owned
building who is engaged in the hobby of collecting coins or stamps
and who does not solicit the sale, purchase, or exchange of such coins
or stamps to or from the general public by billboard, sign, handbill,
newspaper, magazine, radio, television, or other form of printed or
electronic advertising.
D.
A. No person, partnership, limited-liability company, corporation, or other
entity shall engage in the business of buying, selling, or pawning of
precious metals or other secondhand goods, as defined above, within
the jurisdiction of the municipality without having first obtained a
license therefor from the Municipal Clerk, which license shall bear a
number issued by the Municipal Clerk.
B. The application for a license to the Municipal Clerk shall set forth the
name, date of birth, and address of the dealer, whether or not he or she
is a citizen of the United States, and whether or not he or she has ever
been convicted of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s), or
municipal ordinance violation(s), and the date(s) thereof.
§ 169-1 WALL CODE § 169-2
150:716
§ 169-3. Application process for dealers; approval or denial.
C. Advertising in any print or electronic media or by sign that any of those
articles or secondhand goods referred to in § 169-1, above, are being
bought in any location within the municipality shall constitute engaging
in business as a dealer of secondhand goods for purposes of this
chapter. No person, partnership, limited-liability company, corporation
or other entity shall place or cause to be placed any advertisement for
purchase of such articles or goods without stating in the advertising the
license number issued to a person or entity by the municipality. In any
print advertisement, the license number shall appear in type no smaller
than eight-point in the lower-right-hand corner of the advertisement. In
any advertisement in electronic media, the license number shall be
visually or audibly stated. Failure to state or indicate the license
number shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the
penalties established in § 169-8.
D. Licensees may not operate at any location other than site specified in
the license. Licensees operating at multiple locations must have each
location separately licensed. Each location must be permanent.
Itinerant businesses and transient buyers, as defined in Chapter above,
are not eligible for licensure and are prohibited from operating in the
Township.
A. Upon receipt of an application completed pursuant to this chapter, the
Municipal Clerk shall refer such application to the Chief of Police, who
shall make an investigation of the prospective licensee pursuant to this
chapter, for the purpose of determining the suitability of the applicant
for licensing. The investigation shall include, but shall not be limited to,
the following:
(1) The experience of the applicant in the business of purchase and
sale of those articles or goods referred to in § 169-1 above,
although nothing in this section shall be construed to warrant
denial of a license solely on the basis of lack of experience.
(2) The reputation of the applicant for fair dealing in the community,
which shall be made among credible sources, which sources shall
be disclosed to the applicant in the event of a denial of any license.
(3) Any criminal record of the applicant, including any past convictions
for any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s), or municipal
ordinance violation(s) within this or any other jurisdiction. The
Chief of Police shall, as part of the initial application process and
annual renewals, require fingerprint criminal background checks
through the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Criminal Justice
Information Services Division, for the applicant and all owners and
employees, which may require payment of additional fees by the
applicant.
§ 169-2 MINING § 169-3
150:717
(4) The type of operation contemplated to be conducted by the
applicant, particularly whether the business is to be operated from
a fixed location, whether it is to be conducted from a location
primarily devoted to the purchase and sale of precious metal or
other secondhand goods, and other factors bearing on whether the
licensed business will be of a fixed and permanent nature.
B. The Chief of Police shall complete any investigation pursuant to this
chapter within 30 days of the submission of the application to the
Municipal Clerk, fully completed by the applicant. If a criminal record
check has been requested within the thirty-day period and has not been
received by the Chief of Police within that period, the Chief of Police
may, if all other factors are satisfactory, recommend a conditional
issuance of the license subject to the finding regarding criminal record.
C. The Chief of Police shall, upon completion of the investigation,
recommend grant or denial of the license to the Municipal Clerk, who
shall grant or deny the license. Any recommendation of the Chief of
Police shall be in writing and, in the case of a recommendation of
denial, shall state fully and specifically the reasons for said
recommendation. If the Municipal Clerk accepts the recommendation
of the Chief of Police to deny any license, the applicant shall be notified
in writing within 10 days of such denial and the Clerk shall forward to
the applicant a statement of the reason or reasons for such denial.
D. Grounds for recommending denial of license may include reliable
information indicating that the applicant has in the past engaged in
fraudulent or deceptive business practices in a business identical to or
similar to a dealer in secondhand goods. A license may be denied if the
investigation reveals a conviction of the applicant or any of its principal
officers or employees of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s) in
which deceit or misrepresentation is an element; or any conviction of
any crime(s), disorderly persons offense involving theft or the receiving
of stolen goods, regardless of whether the applicant was a principal,
accessory before the fact, after the fact, or a co-conspirator; or any
prior municipal ordinance violation(s) by the applicant or any of its
principal officers or employees in this or any other jurisdiction. A
license may be denied if the applicant fails to demonstrate an ability to
satisfactorily comply with the electronic reporting requirements
specified in § 169-4 the retention and inspection requirements of
§ 169-5 or any other portion of this chapter. Upon receipt of the
recommendation of the Chief of Police, the Municipal Clerk shall issue
or deny the license accordingly, contingent upon the receipt of a bond
as required by § 169-6 of this chapter.
E. Whenever any application for a permit is denied, the applicant shall be
entitled to a hearing before the Township Attorney or one of the
Assistant Township Attorneys in the Division of Law, or another official
designated by the Township Attorney, at which time the applicant shall
be permitted to introduce such evidence as may be deemed relevant to
such denial. Any applicant exercising the right to appeal must file a
§ 169-3 WALL CODE § 169-3
150:718
§ 169-4. Identification of seller; recordkeeping requirements for
dealers.
For every reportable transaction between a dealer and the public, the
dealer shall be required to do as follows:
written notice of appeal within 10 days of receiving written notice of
denial of a license to act as a dealer of secondhand goods.
F. No license shall be assignable by the dealer.
A. Require of each person selling or pawning precious metals or other
secondhand goods acceptable identification as defined above in § 169-1.
B. Require each seller to execute a declaration of ownership, which shall
contain the following certification: "My signature confirms that I am the
sole legal owner of and am legally authorized to sell the goods being
sold. By signing below I certify that I did not obtain and do not possess
the identified goods through unlawful means. I am the full age of 18
years and the identification presented is valid and correct."
C. Record and issue to each person selling or pawning such goods on a
sequentially numbered receipt:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the purchaser,
including the clerk or employee of the licensee making the
purchase;
(2) The name, address, date of birth, and telephone number of the
seller or sellers;
(3) A photographed recording of the seller in a format acceptable to
the Chief of Police, along with a physical description of the seller,
including height and weight (approximate), hair color, eye color,
facial hair, if any, etc.;
(4) A photographed recording of the seller's presented acceptable
identification, as set forth in § 169-1 in a format acceptable by the
Chief of Police;
(5) A photographed recording of all items sold in a format acceptable
by the Chief of Police. When photographing, all items must be
positioned in a manner that makes them readily and easily
identifiable. Items should not be grouped together when
photographing or imaging. Each item should have its own
photograph;
(6) The receipt number;
(7) A detailed, legible description of the item(s) and the manufacturer
and model of the item(s) if known; in the case of jewelry, the
descriptions must include style, length, color, design, and stones, if
any; any identifying marks, including numbers, dates, sizes,
§ 169-3 MINING § 169-4
150:719
shapes, initials, names, monograms, social security numbers
engraved thereon, serial numbers, series numbers, or any other
information, which sets apart the particular object from others of
like kind;
(8) The price paid for the purchase or pawn of the item(s);
(9) If precious metals, the net weight in terms of pounds Troy,
pennyweight (Troy) or kilograms/grams; fineness in terms of karats
for gold, and sterling or coin for silver in accordance with N.J.S.A.
51:5-1 and 51:6-1 et seq.; and
(10) The time and date of the transaction.
D. The information outlined in Subsection C above must additionally be
electronically documented through the use of an electronic database
system authorized by the Chief of Police. Installation and training in this
software will be made mandatory as of the effective date of this chapter,
and licensing will be conditional upon compliance with proper use of
the system as described herein. These records shall be subject to the
inspection of any authorized police officer or any sworn law
enforcement officer acting in the performance of his or her duty as set
forth in Subsection F below. Through the use of applicably required
computer equipment, and using the electronic format approved by the
Chief of Police, every dealer shall enter all reportable transactions into
the electronic database by the end of the close of business on the same
date as the purchase or receipt of property for pawn or consignment.
The information entered must contain all pertinent information outlined
in Subsection C, above.
E. In the event of a database failure or dealer's computer equipment
malfunction, all transaction information is required to be submitted on
paper forms approved by the Chief of Police within 24 hours from the
date of purchase. In the event that paper forms are used, the dealer is
responsible to enter all transaction information set forth in Subsection
C above into the database as soon as possible upon the dealer's
equipment being repaired or replaced or the database coming back into
service. Failure by the dealer to properly maintain computer equipment
in a reasonable fashion or failure by the dealer to replace faulty
computer equipment may result in the dealer being cited for a violation
of this chapter and subsequently being subject to the penalties for
doing so including revocation of the dealer's license as described in
Chapter § 169-5.
F. It shall be the requisite duty of every dealer, and of every person in the
dealer's employ, to admit to the premises during business hours any
member of the Police Department to examine any database, book,
ledger, or any other record on the premises relating to the reportable
transactions of precious metals or other secondhand goods, as well as
the articles purchased or received and, where necessary, relinquish
custody of those articles as provided in § 169-5.
§ 169-4 WALL CODE § 169-5
150:720
§ 169-5. Retention; revocation; other restrictions.
A. All precious metals, jewelry, and other secondhand goods purchased,
received for pawn, or received for consignment as described above, are
to be made available for inspection by the Chief of Police or designee
thereof at the designated business address for a period of at least 15
calendar days from the date the transaction information is actually
reported to the Chief of Police in the approved manner described above
in § 169-4. All precious metal or other secondhand goods subject to
inspection must remain in the same condition as when purchased or
received for pawn and shall not be sold, disposed of, changed, modified,
or melted by the dealer until the fifteen-day retention period has
expired. Itinerant businesses and transient buyers will be responsible
for notifying the Chief of Police of the location where the purchased
item(s) are being held.
B. Upon probable cause that goods held by a dealer are stolen, and
providing that the seller signed the mandatory statement required by
§ 169-4B upon the sale of those goods, a law enforcement officer with
jurisdiction should charge the seller with theft by deception under
N.J.S.A. 2C:20-4 on behalf of the dealer, who shall be considered the
victim of the offense for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 2C:43-3. The officer
shall seize the goods, provide the dealer with a receipt, and issue a
criminal complaint against the seller for theft by deception and any
other criminal charges for which the officer has probable cause that the
seller has committed. If convicted of theft by deception and if so found
by an order of a court of valid jurisdiction, the seller will be responsible
for providing restitution to the dealer under N.J.S.A. 2C:44-2 for the
amount paid by the dealer to the seller for the stolen goods.
C. In addition to all other reporting requirements, every dealer shall
maintain, for at least five years, a paper record of all purchases of
precious metals and other secondhand goods in the form prescribed in
§ 169-4C.
D. No dealer shall purchase any item covered by this chapter from any
person under the age of 18 or in the absence of providing prior
notification of such purchase to the Chief of Police or business designee
identifying the individual from whom such purchase is to be made and
the item to be purchased.
E. Suspension. The Chief of Police or a designee thereof is hereby
empowered to temporarily suspend for cause any dealer's license and
rights to operate thereunder. This penalty shall be in addition to any
fines and penalties the dealer may incur pursuant to § 169-8 of this
chapter.
(1) Grounds for suspension. The following shall constitute grounds for
suspension: violation of any provisions of this chapter, including
failure to comply with any training or fees associated with the
electronic database software system in use by the municipality;
§ 169-5 MINING § 169-5
150:721
violation of any other statute, regulation, or local ordinance; or any
other illegal, improper, or fraudulent activity.
(2) Procedure for suspension. Upon determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a suspension is warranted, the Chief of
Police or a designee thereof shall issue a written notice of
suspension of license to the offending dealer and to the Municipal
Clerk, which shall set forth the grounds for the suspension and
notify the dealer of his or her right to appeal pursuant to
Subsection G. A temporary suspension shall issue immediately,
pending the outcome of any appeal taken. Suspended dealers must
immediately cease engaging in the business of purchasing for
resale, receiving for pawn, and/or selling of precious metals and/or
other secondhand goods in the municipality until reinstatement.
(3) Reinstatement. Suspended dealers may be reinstated only when
the grounds leading to the suspension have, in the determination of
the Township Attorney, or other official designated by the Township
Attorney to review the grounds for suspension, been cured,
corrected, or appropriately rectified.
F. Revocation. A license issued under this chapter may be revoked by the
Municipal Clerk upon written recommendation from the Chief of Police
or the Chief's designee that the dealer is no longer qualified, capable or
competent to comply with the requirements of this chapter. This penalty
shall be in addition to any fines and penalties the dealer may incur
under § 169-8.
(1) Grounds for revocation. The following shall constitute grounds for
revocation: a third violation under this chapter; a second violation
under this chapter less than one year after an earlier violation
under this chapter; conviction for a criminal offense within this or
any jurisdiction; or multiple violations of any other regulations or
local ordinances within this or any jurisdiction.
(2) Procedure for revocation. Upon a determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a revocation is warranted, the Chief of
Police or the Chief's designee shall so report to the Municipal Clerk
in writing. A temporary suspension will immediately and
automatically issue, if one is not already in effect, pending the
outcome of the charge. The Township Attorney, or other official
designated by the Township Attorney, shall review the stated
grounds for revocation and shall issue an appropriate disposition of
either suspension, revocation, or reinstatement. If it is determined
that revocation is the appropriate disposition, the grounds therefor
shall be set forth in writing in the form of a notice of revocation,
which shall be provided to the dealer. The notice shall advise the
dealer of the right to appeal. If determined that suspension is the
appropriate disposition, the dealer shall be so notified in writing
and shall be advised of the right to appeal. Following revocation,
the dealer must relinquish his or her license and must immediately
§ 169-5 WALL CODE § 169-5
150:722
§ 169-6. Bond.
Each dealer covered under this chapter shall deliver a bond to the
Municipal Clerk, executed by the applicant as principal, and executed by a
surety company authorized to do business under the laws of the State of
New Jersey as surety. The bond shall be subject to review and approval by
the Municipal Attorney, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-139, and shall be in the
penal sum of $10,000, conditioned for the due and proper observance of
and compliance with the provisions and requirements of all ordinances of
the municipality in force or which may be adopted respecting the conduct of
this business, and conditioned also that the bond shall be and remain for the
benefit of any person or persons who shall have received judgment against
the dealer licensed under this chapter, which damage shall be established
by a judgment of a court of proper jurisdiction. Said bond shall contain
the following language. "The obligation of this bond shall, in addition to
the Township of Hazlet, be and remain for the benefit of any person who
shall obtain a judgment against obligor as a result of damage sustained in
operation pursuant to any license granted under this chapter." Said bond
shall be kept for a minimum of one year from the date of issuance of license
and must be renewed annually along with the license.
§ 169-7. Fees; license term.
and indefinitely cease operating as a dealer of precious metals or
other secondhand goods within the municipality.
G. Appeal. Any applicant wishing to appeal a suspension or revocation
shall be entitled to a hearing as provided in § 169-3F. Any applicant
exercising the right to appeal must file a written notice of appeal within
10 days of receiving written notice of revocation or suspension of
license.
H. A dealer shall have the right to change the location of the licensed
business, provided that he or she notifies the Municipal Clerk, in
writing, of the street address of said new location.
A. A nonrefundable fee for the initial application and license for a
pawnbroker or a dealer in precious metals or other secondhand goods
as covered under this chapter is $200. The annual renewal fee for a
license is $100. These fees are separate from and in addition to any fees
the dealer must pay in relation to the mandatory electronic database
system designated by the Chief of Police, as provided by § 169-4D.
Payments are to be made in the manner directed by the Municipal
Clerk.
B. Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are valid for one year, from
January 1, or date of enactment through December 31. Initial
applications and applications for renewal must be submitted no later
than October 1.
§ 169-5 MINING § 169-8
150:723
§ 169-8. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any provision of this chapter by any dealer shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not in excess of the limitations
of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5 or by a term of imprisonment or a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days, in addition to a suspension or revocation
of operating license as provided in §§ 169-5E and 169-5F above. Each and
every violation shall be considered a separate violation. Each violation shall
result in an additional suspension period. Any person who is found guilty
of violating the provisions of this chapter within one year of the date of
a previous violation and who was fined for the previous violation may be
sentenced by the court to an additional fine as a repeat offender, and in
addition, may be subject to revocation proceedings as provided in § 169-5F.
The additional fine imposed as a repeat offender shall not be less than the
minimum or exceed the maximum fine provided herein, and same shall be
calculated separately from the fine imposed for the violation of this chapter.
§ 169-9. Implementation.
Chapter 171
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 81.
Housing standards — See Ch. 132.
Storage of unregistered vehicles — See Ch.
140, § 140-118D.
Outdoor storage — See Ch. 140, Art. XXXV.
A. Effective upon approval of the governing body of this chapter, no
existing licensee may continue to operate without having been licensed
pursuant to this chapter.
B. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to replace any preexisting
statutory requirements governing pawnbrokers, as in N.J.S.A. 45:22-1
et seq., the sale of precious metals as in N.J.S.A. 51:6A-1 et seq., the sale
of secondhand jewelry as in N.J.S.A. 2C:21-36 et seq., or any other
statutory provision regarding any subject matter discussed herein.
§ 169-8 WALL CODE § 169-9
150:724
ARTICLE I
Removal of Brush, Junk and Debris
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 3-6 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 171-1. Removal required.
Where it shall be necessary and expedient for the preservation of the public
health, safety, general welfare or to eliminate a fire hazard, an owner
or tenant in possession of land in the Township is hereby required to
remove from such land brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots,
obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash, debris, junk and disabled vehicles
or parts thereof. A "disabled vehicle" is one that is unregistered or incapable
of operation upon a public roadway.
§ 171-2. Notice to owner to remove; removal by Township.
The Superintendent of Public Works or the Code Enforcement Officer shall
notify the owner or tenant of lands, whereon exists such brush, weeds, dead
and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash,
debris, junk or disabled vehicles to remove the same within 10 days after
such notice, and in the event that the owner or tenant shall have refused or
neglected to do so within the time provided, the same shall be removed by
the Township under the direction of the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 171-3. Certification of removal costs; costs to become lien.
In all cases where brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots,
obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash, debris, junk or disabled vehicles
are removed from any lands by virtue hereof, the Superintendent of Public
Works shall certify the cost of the removal to the Township Committee
which shall examine such certificate and, if found correct, shall cause the
cost as shown thereon to be charged against the lands, and the amount so
charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall be added
to and become and form a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied
upon such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes and
shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same manner
as taxes.
§ 171-4. Removal of disabled vehicles.
In those cases where disabled vehicles are removed by virtue hereof, such
vehicles shall be removed at the direction of the Superintendent of Public
Works by an authorized towing operator and stored at the operator's
premises. The storage and disposal of such vehicles shall be in accordance
with Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
§ 171-1 MINING § 171-4
150:725

ARTICLE II
Dumping of Garbage and Trash
§ 171-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARBAGE AND TRASH — Any refuse, rubbish, ashes, debris, garbage,
construction waste, trash, automobile parts and tires, motor vehicles, grass,
leaves, decay or other vegetative substances, and any other unwanted or
discarded materials.
§ 171-6. Prohibitions.
§ 171-7. Nuisance declared.
The use of any area, place or location for the dumping, disposal or
accumulation of garbage and trash is hereby deemed and declared to be a
detriment to the public health, safety, and welfare, a public nuisance and
unlawful.
§ 171-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-13-2012 by Ord. No.
8-2012]
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this article
shall be subject to the following penalties:
A. No person shall dump, dispose of or accumulate any garbage or trash in
any location in the Township.
B. No person shall establish, maintain or permit the establishment or
maintenance of any area, place or location for the dumping, disposal or
accumulation of garbage and trash.
A. A fine of not more than $1,250, provided that the minimum mandatory
fine for a first offense under this article shall be $250; the minimum
mandatory penalty for a second offense under this article shall be $500;
and the minimum mandatory fine for a third or subsequent offense
under this article shall be $1,250; or
B. Imprisonment for a term of not more than 90 days or community service
in the Township's recycling program for a period of not more than 90
days; or
C. Both a fine and imprisonment or, as an alternative to imprisonment,
community service.
§ 171-5 MINING § 171-9
150:727
§ 171-9. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer of the Township shall be the official
responsible for the enforcement of this article, concurrently with the Wall
Township Police Department.
§ 171-9 WALL CODE § 171-9
150:728
ARTICLE III
Minimum Responsibilities of Owners
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 3-25 of the Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 171-10. Conformance required.
The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum conditions and
responsibilities of the owners of property for the maintenance of structures
and the exterior of property, including all vacant structures and premises
and vacant land. All property, structures or vacant land shall be maintained
in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not
to adversely affect the public health or safety.
§ 171-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Includes the following:
The physical condition or occupancy of any premises regarded as a
public nuisance at common law; or
A.
Any physical condition or occupancy of any premises or its
appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including,
but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations and
unsafe fences or structures; or
B.
C. Any premises that has unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities; or
D. Any premises designated as unsafe for human habitation; or
Any premises that is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard, or is
manifestly unsafe or unsecured so as to endanger life, limb or property;
or
E.
Any premises from which the plumbing, heating or facilities required
by this code have been removed, or from which utilities have been
disconnected, destroyed, removed or rendered ineffective, or the
required precautions against trespassers have not been provided; or
F.
Any premises that is unsanitary, or that is littered with rubbish or
garbage, or that has an uncontrolled growth of weeds; or
G.
Any structure that is in a state of dilapidation, deterioration or decay;
faulty construction; overcrowded; open, vacant or abandoned; damaged
by fire to the extent so as not to provide shelter; in danger of collapse
or failure; and dangerous to anyone on or near the premises.
H.
§ 171-10 MINING § 171-12
150:729
§ 171-12. Exterior property areas.
The owner of each premises in the Township shall maintain the structures
and the exterior property in compliance with the following regulations:
A. Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a
clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of
the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a
clean and sanitary condition.
B. Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to
prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any
structure located thereon.
C. Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways,
parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of
repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions.
D. Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from
weeds or plant growth in excess of 10 inches. All noxious weeds shall be
removed. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation, other than trees or shrubs; provided, however, that this
term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens.
E. Rat harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept free
from rat infestation. Where rats are found, they shall be promptly
exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to
human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to
prevent reinfestation.
F. Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached
garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in
good repair.
G. General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair,
structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public
health, safety and welfare.
H. Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free
from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the
imposed dead and live loads.
I. Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and
free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so
as to prevent the entry of rats.
J. Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, loose
or rotting materials, and maintained weatherproof and properly surface
coated where required to prevent deterioration.
K. Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not
have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to
prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the
§ 171-12 WALL CODE § 171-12
150:730
§ 171-13. Unlawful to maintain premises constituting a public
nuisance; notification of violation; time limit for correction.
structure. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates
a public nuisance.
L. Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim,
wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good
repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
M. Overhang extensions. All canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings,
stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts and similar overhang
extensions shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored
as to be kept in a safe and sound condition. When required, all exposed
surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and
against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating
materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
N. Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and
similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound,
and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be
protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic
application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar
surface treatment.
O. Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
P. Window and door frames. Every window, door and frame shall be kept
in sound condition, good repair and weather tight.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any premises in the Township to
maintain, occupy or permit another person to occupy a premises which
constitutes a public nuisance as defined in this article. It shall be
further unlawful for the owner of any premises in the Township to
maintain, occupy, or permit another person to occupy a premises which
violates any regulation pertaining to exterior property areas contained
in this article.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the owner of any property
found to be in violation of this article, in writing, of any such violation.
Such violation notice shall provide a reasonable period of time for the
correction of any such deficiency, which period of time shall not be less
than 10 days. If the owner of the premises shall have failed, refused or
neglected to correct such deficiencies within the time provided, the
Code Enforcement Officer may issue a summons for any such violation
of this article.
§ 171-12 MINING § 171-13
150:731

ARTICLE IV
Obstruction of Intersections
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 3-5 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 171-14. Height limited.
The owner or tenant of lands lying within the limits of the Township is
hereby required to keep all brush, hedges or other plant life growing
within 10 feet of any roadway and within 25 feet of the intersection of two
roadways cut to a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet.
§ 171-15. Notice to owner; failure to comply.
Where it shall be necessary and expedient for the preservation of public
safety, the Township Committee shall cause notice to be served upon the
owner or tenant of any lands to cut any brush, hedges or other plant life
growing within 10 feet of any roadway and within 25 feet of the intersection
of two roadways to a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet, requiring such
owner or tenant to cut the same within 10 days after such notice, and in the
event such owner or tenant shall have refused or neglected to cut the same
in the manner and within the time provided above the Township Committee
shall authorize the same to be cut as aforesaid.
§ 171-16. Certification of removal costs; costs to become lien.
In the event that it becomes necessary for the Township Committee to
authorize the cutting of such brush, hedges and other plant life, the same
shall be done under the direction of the road foreman, who shall certify the
cost thereof to the Township Committee, which shall examine the certificate
and, if found correct, shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged
against the lands, or in the event that such cost is excessive, to cause the
reasonable cost thereof to be charged against the lands. The amount so
charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall be added to
and become and form a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon
such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as other taxes and to
be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same manner as
taxes.
§ 171-17. Offending growth on county roads.
Where the growth of brush, hedges and other vegetation creates a
restriction of site distance along county roadways within the Township, the
County of Monmouth is hereby designated as an officer of the Township and
is empowered to cut any brush, hedges or other plant life growing within
10 feet of any county roadway and within 25 feet of the intersection of two
county roadways to a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet. The cost of cutting
any brush and hedges pursuant to this section shall not be levied against
the affected property owners.
§ 171-14 MINING § 171-17
150:733

ARTICLE V
Control of Invasive Plants
[Adopted 12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 21-2012]
§ 171-18. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect and promote the public health
through the control of the growth of invasive plant species.
§ 171-19. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INVASIVE PLANTS — All native and non-native vines and vegetation that
grow out of place and are competitive, persistent, and pernicious. These
plants may damage trees, vegetation or structures. Examples include but
are not limited to bamboo (spreading or running type), ragweed, multi flora
rose and kudzu vine.
§ 171-20. Control of growth.
All persons must control the growth of invasive plants. Failure to control the
spread of such vegetation beyond the boundaries of a resident's property is
a violation of this article.
§ 171-21. Inspections.
All places and premises in the Township of Wall shall be subject to
inspection by the enforcing officer. Such inspections shall be performed
by such person, persons or agency duly authorized and appointed by the
Township of Wall. Such inspection shall be made if that official has reason
to believe that any section of this article is being violated.
§ 171-22. Violations and penalties.
A. Whenever an invasive plant as defined by this article is found on any
plot of land, lot or any other premises or place, a violation shall be given
to the owner, in writing, to remove or abate the same within one year of
notification.
B. The cost of abatement shall be borne by the property owner.
C. If the owner fails to comply with such notice within the time specified
therein, the enforcing official may remove or otherwise control the
invasive plant species and the Township may thereafter recover the cost
of such removal from the property owner and place a lien on the
property to recover the cost of invasive plant removal.
D. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this
article shall be subject to the following penalties:
§ 171-18 MINING § 171-22
150:735
(1) A fine of not more than $1,250, provided that the minimum
mandatory fine for a first offense under this article shall be $250;
the minimum mandatory penalty for a second offense under this
article shall be $500; and the minimum mandatory fine for a third
or subsequent offense under this article shall be $1,250; or
(2) Imprisonment for a term of not more than 90 days or community
service in the Township's recycling program for a period of not
more than 90 days; or
(3) Both a fine and imprisonment or, as an alternative to imprisonment,
community service.
§ 171-22 WALL CODE § 171-22
150:736
Chapter 173
PUBLIC CONTRACTING REGULATIONS
§ 173-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENCY or INSTRUMENTALITY — Any agency, department, board,
committee or commission which derives its authority from or through the
Township of Wall.
BUSINESS ENTITY — Any natural or legal person, business corporation,
professional services corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
limited partnership, business trust, association or any other legal
commercial entity organized under the laws of this state.
CONTRIBUTION — Money or anything of value, including in-kind
contributions.
FAIR AND OPEN PROCESS — At a minimum, that the contract shall be:
publicly advertised in newspapers or on the Internet website maintained by
the Township in sufficient time to give notice in advance of the contract;
awarded under a process that provides for public solicitation of proposals
or qualifications and awarded and disclosed under criteria established in
writing by the Township prior to the solicitation of proposals or
qualifications; and publicly opened and announced when awarded.
INTEREST — The ownership or control of more than 10% of the profits,
assets or stock of a business entity.
§ 173-2. Prohibition on the award of contracts.
A. The Township of Wall, or any agency or instrumentality thereof, shall
not enter into a contract having an anticipated value in excess of
$17,500, as determined in advance and certified in writing by the Chief
Financial Officer of the Township, with a business entity, except a
contract that is awarded pursuant to a fair and open process, if during
the preceding one year period that business entity has made a
contribution that is reportable by the recipient under P.L. 1973, c. 83
(N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et seq.), to any municipal committee of a political
party in the Township of Wall if a member of that political party is
serving on the Township Committee when the contract is awarded or to
any candidate committee of any person serving on the Township
Committee when the contract is awarded.
B. A business entity that has entered into a contract having an anticipated
value in excess of $17,500 with the Township, except a contract that is
awarded pursuant to a fair and open process, shall not make a
contribution that is reportable by the recipient under P.L. 1973, c. 83
(N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et seq.), to any municipal committee of a political
party if a member of that political party is serving on the Township
§ 171-22 MINING § 173-2
150:737
§ 173-3. Certain contributions deemed as contributions by a
business entity.
When a business entity is a natural person, a contribution by that person's
spouse or child, residing therewith, shall be deemed to be a contribution by
the business entity. When a business entity is other than a natural person,
a contribution by any person or other business entity having an interest
therein shall be deemed to be a contribution by the business entity.
§ 173-4. Repayment of contribution.
If a business entity makes a contribution that would cause it to be ineligible
to receive a public contract or, in the case of a contribution made during
the term of a public contract, that would constitute a violation of this
chapter, the business entity may request, in writing, within 60 days of the
date on which the contribution was made, that the recipient thereof repay
the contribution and, if repayment is received within those 60 days, the
business entity would again be eligible to receive a contract or would no
longer be in violation, as appropriate.
§ 173-5. Business entity to provide written certification.
Prior to awarding any contract, except a contract that is awarded pursuant
to a fair and open process, the Township, and any agency or instrumentality
thereof, shall require the business entity to which the contract is to be
awarded to provide a written certification that it has not made a
contribution that would prohibit the award of the contract pursuant to this
chapter.
§ 173-6. Violations and penalties.
Committee when the contract is awarded or to any candidate
committee of any person serving on the Township Committee when the
contract is awarded, during the term of that contract.
C. No such municipal committee or candidate committee shall accept a
contribution from a business entity during the term of any contract
between the entity and the Township or any agency or instrumentality
of the Township.
A. All Township contracts subject to this chapter shall provide that it shall
be a breach of the terms of the contract for the business entity, as
defined herein, to violate this chapter or to knowingly conceal or
misrepresent contributions made or received, or to make or solicit
contributions through intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or
misrepresenting the source of the contribution.
B. Any business entity that knowingly fails to reveal a contribution made in
violation of this chapter, or who knowingly makes or solicits
contributions through intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or
misrepresenting the source of the contribution, may be disqualified
§ 173-2 WALL CODE § 173-6
150:738
§ 173-7. Disqualification of a bidder. [Added 6-22-2016 by Ord. No.
7-2016]
from eligibility for future Township contracts for up to five years from
the date of the violation, and any current contract with such business
entity shall be terminated.
A. The governing body of a contracting unit may, by resolution approved
by a majority of the governing body and subject to Subsections B and C
of this section, disqualify a bidder who would otherwise be determined
to be the lowest responsible bidder, if the governing body finds that it
has had prior negative experience with the bidder.
B. As used in this section, "prior negative experience" means any of the
following:
(1) The bidder has been found, through either court adjudication,
arbitration, mediation, or other contractually stipulated alternate
dispute resolution mechanism, to have failed to provide or perform
goods or services, failed to complete the contract in a timely
manner or otherwise performed unsatisfactorily under a prior
contract with the contracting unit;
(2) The bidder defaulted on a contract, thereby requiring the local unit
to utilize the services of another contractor to provide the goods or
perform the services or to correct or complete the contract;
(3) The bidder defaulted on a contract, thereby requiring the local unit
to look to the bidder's surety for completion of the contract or
tender of the costs of completion; or
(4) The bidder is debarred or suspended from contracting with any of
the agencies or departments of the executive branch of the State of
New Jersey at the time of the contract award, whether or not the
action was based on experience with the contracting unit.
C. The following conditions apply if the governing body of a contracting
unit is contemplating a disqualification based on prior negative
experience:
(1) The existence of any of the indicators of prior negative experience
set forth in this section shall not require that a bidder be
disqualified. In each instance, the decision to disqualify shall be
made within the discretion of the governing body and shall be
rendered in the best interests of the contracting unit.
(2) All mitigating factors shall be considered in determining the
seriousness of the prior negative experience and in deciding
whether disqualification is warranted.
(3) The bidder shall be furnished by the governing body with a written
notice stating that a disqualification is being considered, setting
§ 173-6 MINING § 173-7
150:739
Chapter 174
PUBLIC RECREATIONAL BATHING FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation facilities — See Ch. 161.
§ 174-1. Applicability of state standards.
The provisions of State Sanitary Code, Chapter IX, Public Recreational
Bathing (N.J.A.C. 8:26-1 et seq.), shall be enforced by the Health Officer of
the Township of Wall.
§ 174-2. Permit required.
No person shall locate and construct, alter or operate a commercial
swimming pool or other recreational bathing facility until a permit therefor
shall have been issued by the Health Officer.
forth the reason for the disqualification, and indicating that the
bidder shall be accorded an opportunity for a hearing before the
governing body if the bidder so requests within a stated period
of time. At the hearing, the bidder shall show good cause why
the bidder should not be disqualified by presenting documents and
testimony. If the governing body determines that good cause has
not been shown by the bidder, it may vote to find the bidder lacking
in responsibility and, thus, disqualified.
(4) Disqualification shall be for a reasonable, defined period of time,
which shall not exceed five years.
(5) A disqualification other than a disqualification pursuant to which a
governing body is prohibited by law from entering into a contract
with a bidder may be voided or the period thereof may be reduced,
in the discretion of the governing body, upon the submission of a
good faith application under oath, supported by documentary
evidence, setting forth substantial and appropriate grounds for the
granting of relief, such as reversal of a judgment, or actual change
of ownership, management or control of the bidder.
(6) An opportunity for a hearing need not be offered to a bidder whose
disqualification is based on its suspension or debarment by an
agency or department of the executive branch of the State of New
Jersey. The term of such a disqualification shall be concurrent with
the term of the suspension or debarment by the state agency or
department.
§ 173-7 WALL CODE § 174-3
150:740
§ 174-3. Permit fees.
The following fees and charges are herewith established:
§ 174-4. Expiration of permit; renewal.
Permits issued for the operation of a commercial swimming pool or
recreational bathing facility shall expire annually on April 30 of each year,
and application for renewal thereof shall be submitted together with the
required fee prior to May 1 of each year.
§ 174-5. Denial and suspension of permits.
§ 174-6. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty.
Chapter 175
RECORDS, INSPECTION AND REPRODUCTION OF
§ 175-1. Public record defined.
The term "public record" as used in this chapter is defined in N.J.S.A.
47:1A-1 et seq.
§ 175-2. Right of inspection of public records.
Except as set forth in N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq., all public records maintained
in municipal offices in the Township of Wall are available for inspection
during the regular business hours of the Township. All requests for public
records shall be made through the office of the Municipal Clerk on a form
promulgated by the Township. All requests for public records shall be as
specific as possible.
A. For the issuance of a permit to locate and construct a commercial
swimming pool or recreational bathing facility: $200.
B. For the issuance of a permit to alter a commercial swimming pool or
recreational bathing facility: $150.
C. For the issuance or renewal of a permit to operate a commercial
swimming pool or recreational bathing facility: $500.
A. Permits required by this chapter or code may be denied or suspended
by the Health Officer for failure to comply with this chapter or code.
B. The Health Officer shall afford the person whose permit to locate and
construct, alter or operate has been denied or suspended an
opportunity to be heard in a public hearing, and following this to be
informed of the Board's decision.
§ 174-3 MINING § 175-3
150:741
§ 175-3. Fees for reproduction of records.
§ 175-4. Fees for reproduction of certified records. [Added
8-11-2004 by Ord. No. 21-2004; amended 11-23-2010 by Ord. No.
22-2010; 6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 12-2015]
Chapter 184
SMOKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
A. Photocopying. The fees charged for photocopies of public records shall
be as follows: $0.05 per page for 8 1/2 x 11; $0.07 per page for 8 1/2 x
14. [Amended 11-23-2010 by Ord. No. 22-2010]
B. Special services cost. If the inspection and/or photocopying of public
records requires more than 30 minutes per day of a municipal
employee's time, a special services charge equal to the "actual cost" of
that employee's time shall be charged. The requester shall be advised of
the hourly rate of the employee and estimated time anticipated for the
work. If the requester wishes to proceed with the production of the
records, he shall provide payment for the special services fee prior to
commencement of the work. The Township shall provide a statement of
the hours which were spent on the request. If the hours are less than
anticipated, the excess funds shall be returned to the requester.
[Amended 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 30-2011]
C. Deposit. A fifty-percent deposit will be required on all photocopy
requests estimated by the Municipal Clerk to cost $20 or more.
A. The request for certified copies of all marriage or civil union
certificates, birth certificates, death certificates and domestic
partnership certificates shall be $20 per certificate. The fee for
processing corrective form REG. 34 in the following instances shall be
$20: addition of father's name as a result of paternity action; correction
of false information or incorrect information given on any government
record. The fee of $20 will be waived in cases where error was caused
by a Registrar of Vital Statistics.
B. The fee for certification for burial permits shall be set at $5 or up to the
limits established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:6-17.
C. In cases where Wall Township's Mayor performs marriage, civil union,
or domestic partnership ceremonies for a Wall Township resident, the
fee of $20 shall be waived for the cost of the first copy of the certificate.
§ 175-3 WALL CODE § 184-1
150:742
§ 184-1. Definition.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SMOKING — The burning or use of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, ecigarette,
vape or any other matter or substance which contains tobacco
and/or emits a vapor or smoke.
§ 184-2. Smoking confined to certain areas at certain events.
§ 184-3. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable by a minimum fine of $100 and
up to $250 for a first offense. Subsequent violations will carry fines up to
$500.
Chapter 188
SOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Topsoil, sand and gravel — See Ch. 140,
§ 140-117.
Mining — See Ch. 150.
A. No person attending an athletic and/or recreational event that takes
place on Township property shall smoke in any area closer than 50 feet
from the boundary of any athletic field and/or within 50 feet of any of
the event participants whether or not such participants are engaged in
event activities. No smoking shall take place in any restrooms serving
an athletic and/or recreational event on Township property during the
course of an athletic or recreational event. Smoking is prohibited within
50 feet of any area where food or beverages are served. This prohibition
shall apply only to those athletic or recreational events where any of the
participants are 18 years of age or younger. Violations of this
prohibition shall be punishable as prescribed by law as stated in § 184-3
included herein.
B. For the purposes of this section, the courtyard at the municipal complex
located between the municipal building and the library including the
Veterans' Amphitheater and walkways to the parking lots shall be
considered prohibited smoking areas as there is a reasonable
anticipated presence of children involved in the various recreational
programs as well as the library.
C. It is further recommended that each organization that routinely utilizes
Township recreational space shall educate its participants and families
about this section and establish designated smoking areas.
§ 184-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 184-3
188:743
§ 188-1. Purpose.
The Township Committee finds and determines that the unregulated and
uncontrolled grading of land, relocation, filling, excavation and removal of
soil on a large scale for the sale or for use other than on the premises has or
may result in conditions detrimental to the public safety, health and general
welfare, substantially hampering and deterring the efforts of the Township
to effectuate the general purpose of municipal planning.
§ 188-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Wall Township
Grading and Soil Removal Ordinance."
§ 188-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERMIT — A land grading and soil removal permit issued under the terms
hereof.
SOIL — Includes dirt, stone, gravel, sand, humus, clay, loam, rock, and
mixtures of any of these.
TOPSOIL — The arable soil. Topsoil shall contain no stones, clumps, or
similar objects larger than one inch in any dimension and shall have a pH
value of not less than 5.8 nor more than 6.5. Topsoil shall be a mealy loam
obtained from a field which is comparatively free from objectionable weeds.
Topsoil shall have a minimum organic content of not less than 2.75% by
weight. The gradation of the topsoil shall be within the following limits:
sand, 40% to 80%; silt, 10% to 30%; clay 10% to 30%.
§ 188-4. Permit required.
No person shall excavate for the grading and removal of soil or otherwise
remove soil for sale or for use other than on the premises from which the
soil shall be taken, except in connection with construction or alteration
of a building on such premises, for which a building permit has been
issued, and excavation or grading incidental thereto, without first having
obtained site approval and a permit therefor approved by the Committee.
The permit shall be conspicuously posted and displayed on the entrance to
the premises.
§ 188-5. Informal feasibility conference.
Any person intending to make an application hereunder shall request an
informal conference with the Township Committee for the purpose of
ascertaining the feasibility of the proposal to remove soil. At such time,
§ 184-3 WALL CODE § 188-5
188:744
sketches or preliminary drawings shall be made available if necessary for
such purpose.
§ 188-6. Application for permit.
Before the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall make application
therefor on a form available from the Township Clerk and the data in the
application or accompanying documents shall show the following:
§ 188-7. Fees.
Each application shall be accompanied by a deposit of a fee of $100 plus $1
for each 1,000 cubic yards or part thereof, which shall be used to cover the
cost of examining the application, hearings, or other processing thereof. In
the event an application is denied, the fee deposited shall be returned alter
deducting actual engineering or legal fees incurred by the Township in the
course of processing the application.
§ 188-8. Engineering report.
The application and fee shall be filed with the Township Clerk and the
application shall promptly be referred to the Township Engineer for
investigation, report, and recommendations. The Engineer shall make a
report concerning the application to the Committee indicating specifically
A. The name and address of the owner or owners of the tract involved and
the name and address of the applicant, if a different person is involved.
The signature of the owner and contractor performing the work shall be
affixed to the application.
B. A map of the entire premises of the owner, including the premises for
which the permit is sought showing the existing topographical contour
lines of the land involved and abutting lands and roads, the proposed
topographical contour grades which will result from the intended soil
removal and the location of any streams or other bodies of water near
the premises with area to be graded shown in sections of three acres,
and numbered consecutively indicating order of sections to be graded.
C. The tax block and lot number of the property involved.
D. A description of any processing of the soil which will be done on the
premises including description of equipment and plans of such
processing equipment and facilities.
E. The name and address of the person who will do the work of grading
and removing the soil.
F. The number of cubic yards to be removed pursuant to the permit.
G. Routes to and from the proposed site to be used in transporting soil
removed.
H. Period for which the permit is sought.
§ 188-5 SOIL REMOVAL § 188-8
188:745
whether the proposed operation will result in any sharp declivities, pits,
or depressions, soil erosion or fertility problems, drainage or sewerage
problems, or other dangerous conditions, and recommending reasonable
conditions regarding the permit to be issued including the following:
§ 188-9. Issuance of permit.
A. Areas shown on map, if any, where excavation should not be permitted
because of adverse effects on abutting property or roads.
B. Changes, if any, in permitted contours and slopes to be accomplished by
proposed removal.
C. Maximum area from which topsoil may be stripped before replacement
thereof to permit soil removal, with consideration being given to the
number of cubic yards to be removed and the duration of the requested
permit.
D. Amount of bond to be required to insure the operation of the soil
removal and replacement of topsoil in accordance herewith on a form to
be furnished by the Township.
E. Capacity of public roads to be used for ingress and egress to withstand
damage from proposed operation.
F. Quantity and quality of topsoil.
G. Any other recommended considerations or conditions to protect the
public welfare or adjoining properties or roads.
A. After receiving the report, the Committee shall grant or deny the
permit, including any renewal, in order of date of filing, after giving
consideration to the engineering report (which shall be incorporated in
the record thereof by reference), the evidence adduced at the hearing,
and the effect of such permit on the public health, safety and general
welfare and particularly, but not in limitation thereof, the following
factors:
(1) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(2) Drainage or sewerage problems.
(3) Soil fertility.
(4) Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting roads and lands.
(5) Land values and uses.
(6) Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious physical development of the Township.
B. If the Committee finds that the permit, if granted, will not have an
adverse effect on the above considerations, the permit shall be issued.
§ 188-8 WALL CODE § 188-9
188:746
§ 188-10. Conditions for permit denial.
No permit shall be issued for any premises if the issuance of the permit
will create road damage, dust conditions, burdensome traffic conditions or
is otherwise inimical to the public safety, health and welfare.
§ 188-11. Bond required.
Before any work is done, for which a permit is required, and during the
period covered by a permit, the applicant shall file and maintain a bond
in form supplied by the Township Committee with surety acceptable to it
and in such amount as in the opinion of the Township Committee shall be
sufficient to insure the faithful performance of the work to be undertaken
pursuant to the conditions of the permit and the terms hereof.
§ 188-12. Regulation of operation.
No soil shall be removed nor shall any operation be conducted so as to
violate any of the following conditions after a permit is granted.
Permits may be issued with reasonable conditions designed to meet the
engineering recommendations made under § 188-8.
A. Removal of topsoil. The removal of any topsoil is hereby expressly
prohibited. All topsoil on premises shall be temporarily stored on
premises inside a fenced area during operations and, after grading is
completed, respread on premises to a depth of not less than four inches.
B. Limits of excavations. Not more than three acres shall be excavated at
one time, enclosed with a snow fence, including area used for storage of
topsoil, properly leveled off, cleared of debris and graded to conform
with the contour lines and grades approved by the Township
Committee.
C. Removal of trees and stumps. All trees, stumps, brush, etc., shall be
removed monthly and not buried on the premises.74
D. Grading and grass on excavated area. The area so excavated shall be
graded and covered with four inches of topsoil and seeded with
perennial grass not later than June 15 or September 15 whichever date
is sooner. If sufficient topsoil for four-inch cover was not available from
the premises then a cover crop as prescribed by the Engineer shall be
spread on the premises. Thereafter the snow fence may be removed.
E. Time permitted. The removal shall be completed within a period of
three months from the date of commencement of work. If adverse
weather or working conditions persist, the time period involved may be
extended on application to the Township Committee. The Zoning Officer
shall be notified in advance at least one week by the contractor of the
74.Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Land Use and Development Regulations, § 140-122.
§ 188-9 SOIL REMOVAL § 188-12
188:747
§ 188-13. Inspections; fee.
Each operation shall be inspected by the Zoning Officer and the Engineer,
at least once in each month and a written report made of such inspection.
The permittee shall pay the cost of reinspection not exceeding $20 per acre,
required because of violations found in the course of regular inspections,
and paid to the Township Clerk.
§ 188-14. Revocation of permit.
After reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard before the Township
Committee, the permit of any person may be revoked or suspended for such
period as the Township Committee may determine, for any violation of the
terms hereof or the terms and conditions of any permit granted hereunder.
The Zoning Officer shall be specifically charged with the enforcement of this
chapter.
date of commencement of and of the expected date of completion of
work.
F. Excavating below road grade. No excavation below the grade of any
adjoining road shall be permitted.
G. Placement of soil removed. Soil removed shall not be deposited or in
any way thrown or placed upon adjoining property or public roads.
H. Compliance with laws and permit. All operations shall be conducted in
strict accordance with any state law, other ordinances of the Township,
and the terms of the application as modified by the permit as granted.
I. Nuisance prohibited. The operation shall be so conducted as not to
constitute a nuisance to adjoining owners and in no event shall any
sharp declivities, pits or depressions be created.
J. Final grading. Upon completion of an operation or an excavation, the
area shall be properly leveled off, cleared of debris, and graded to
conform to the contours and grades as approved by the Committee.
K. Slope permitted. No slope along the perimeter of any excavated area
shall exceed one foot vertical to five feet horizontal.
L. Hours of operation. Hours of operation shall be limited to the following:
7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Mondays to Fridays, both inclusive. There shall
be no operations of any kind or character on Saturdays except as to
premises located in the business or industrial zone as defined in
Chapter 140, Land Use and Development Regulations.
M. Invalidation of permit for noncompliance. The failure to comply with the
provisions of this chapter shall invalidate a permit immediately and
constitute reasons for denial of any permit.
§ 188-12 WALL CODE § 188-15
188:748
§ 188-15. Violations and penalties.
In addition to action on the bond required or the revocation provided for
herein, any person who violates this chapter or any director or officer of
a corporation who participates in a violation of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine as stated in Chapter 1, Article I.
§ 188-16. Exemption.
This chapter shall not apply to land and premises for which a license to
mine, sell and deal in sand and gravel was granted under Chapter 150,
Mining.
§ 188-17. Land located in residential zone.
The excavation, grading or removal of soil or topsoil from lands or premises
which are located in a residential zone as defined by Chapter 140, Land
Use and Development Regulations, of the Code, for the purpose of sale or
removal of such soil or topsoil from any such lands or premises is expressly
prohibited, except that excess soil or topsoil not needed on the premises
may be removed if the excavation is in connection with the construction
or alteration of a building for which a building permit has been granted,
but only after a basement or cellar of the proposed building has been
constructed and the premises rough graded.
§ 188-18. Payment of taxes.
No permit for the grading or removal of soil shall be issued until the
Township Clerk receives a certification from the Tax Collector that all real
property taxes and assessments pertaining to the property for which the soil
removal or grading permit is sought are current and that no such taxes or
assessments are then due and owing.
Chapter 191
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage and trash in waterways — See Ch. 72.
Outdoor storage of solid waste and
recyclables — See Ch. 140, §§ 140-164A(1)
and 140-173 and Art. XXXV.
Garbage pickup in mobile home parks — See
Ch. 153.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 171.
§ 188-15 SOIL REMOVAL § 188-18
188:749

ARTICLE I
Garbage and Refuse Collection
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 3-7 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 191-1. Conformance required.
No person shall store, collect or dispose of solid wastes within the confines
of the Township in any manner other than as provided in this article.
§ 191-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BULK ITEMS — Items such as furniture, household effects and appliances.
This shall also include debris resulting from minor alteration to private
residence by the owner. This is not intended to include debris from
alterations done by contractors.[Amended 12-23-2014 by Ord. No.
29-2014]
CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS — Any debris including fencing, decks,
sheds, and all debris generated as a result of remodeling, demolishing
or constructing homes or other buildings. Also includes by-products of
clearing of land for the purpose of preparing the same for use as the site
for a building or structure or for roadways or similar purposes.[Amended
12-23-2014 by Ord. No. 29-2014]
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can or bucket
such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or blowing out into the street
and coming into contact with stormwater.[Added 3-8-2006 by Ord. No.
7-2006; amended 12-23-2014 by Ord. No. 29-2014]
GARBAGE — Includes all waste, liquid and solids, resulting from the
handling, consumption, preparation and disposal of meat, fish, fowl, birds
and all vegetable matter which has been or was intended to be used as food
and all other items that are construed as garbage by the rules, regulations
or specifications of New Jersey State Board of Health. All ordinary
household waste and worthless matter shall also be included in this
definition. Debris resulting from the construction, alteration or demolition
of buildings or structures or clearing of lots or acreage shall not be deemed
to be garbage under this article.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE — Includes but not limited to paint,
antifreeze, propane gas, pesticides, motor oil, oil filters, chemicals,
driveway sealer stain.
PAPER — Includes newspapers, periodicals, cardboard and all other waste
paper.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and which may be comprised of pavement, shoulders, gutters,
§ 191-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 191-2
188:751
curbs, sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street
lines.[Added 3-8-2006 by Ord. No. 7-2006]
TRADE WASTE — All materials resulting from the conducting of any
business, trade or industry conducted for profit; includes, but is not limited
to, rubber, cartons or metal.
YARD WASTE — Leaves, branches, hedge clippings and grass
clippings.[Added 3-8-2006 by Ord. No. 7-2006]
§ 191-3. Preparation for collection.
A. Garbage. Garbage shall only be placed in the containers provided by
the Township of Wall for that purpose. Each eligible residential property
shall receive an initial container from the Township at no cost for use
with solid waste disposal. The property owner shall have a choice of
three container sizes which shall be 96 gallons, 64 gallons, or 48
gallons. Each property owner may "purchase" up to two additional
household trash containers from the Township. Requests for additional
containers shall result in the economizing of sizes as to maximize the
efficiency of the collection program. For example, a resident with a
current forty-eight-gallon container that requests a second shall receive
a ninety-six-gallon container in place of those two containers resulting
in one garbage container to be "tipped" each week as opposed to two.
Exceptions to this policy shall only be made in cases where there exists
a proven hardship or limitation that requires multiple smaller-sized
cans. Once the container(s) is placed at the property by the Township,
any changes in size shall be at the cost of the property owner unless the
Township can accommodate a swap with another returned container.
[Amended 12-23-2014 by Ord. No. 29-2014]
(1) Placement. Each container shall be placed near the roadway at the
curb or near the edge of the pavement free of obstructions with the
wheels and hinge facing toward the house in order accommodate
the orderly collection of debris as designed. No bags or trash
should be placed outside of the container. Garbage shall be
thoroughly and completely drained of all liquids and placed in the
containers hereinbefore set forth. The Township shall collect no
more than three household trash containers from any separate
residence. No containers shall be placed for collection prior to
sunset of the evening before the scheduled collection day, nor shall
containers remain at the roadside later than 9:00 p.m. the day they
are collected.
(2) Ownership. All containers shall remain the property of the
Township of Wall regardless of whether the container was an
initially provided container at no cost to the property or if it was an
additional purchased container. For the purposes of this section,
the term "purchase" shall be interpreted to mean a perpetual lease
between the Township, the property, and the property owner. For
clarity of this interpretation, the initial container provided by the
§ 191-2 WALL CODE § 191-3
188:752
Township shall remain with the property when ownership of the
property changes. Any additional containers that may have been
"purchased" by an owner shall remain with the owner if said owner
acquires or moves to a different eligible property within Wall
Township. In the event that a resident owner ceases domicile of an
eligible property, all additionally "purchased" containers shall be
returned to or collected by the Department of Public Works.
(3) Newly constructed residential eligible property. Each newly
constructed residential property within the Township of Wall shall
be issued an initial garbage container, at no cost, upon the
provision of a copy of the temporary certificate of occupancy.
(4) Maintenance. The Township of Wall will provide maintenance to the
Township containers at no cost to the residents. In the unlikely
event that the can is damaged due to misuse or abuse by the
resident, it will be the resident's responsibility to pay for the
necessary repairs or replacement of the container. If a container is
lost or stolen, it is the resident's responsibility to pay for a
replacement container.
B. Single-stream recycling. Single-stream recycling shall only be placed in
the containers provided by the Township of Wall for that purpose. This
Township-issued container shall be clearly distinguishable from the
container provided for household trash collection. Each eligible
residential property shall receive an initial container from the Township
at no cost for use with the single-stream recycling program. The
property owner shall have a choice of three container sizes which shall
be 96 gallons, 64 gallons or 48 gallons. Each property owner may
"purchase" up to two additional household recycling containers from
the Township. Requests for additional containers shall result in the
economizing of sizes as to maximize the efficiency of the collection
program. For example, a resident with a current forty-eight-gallon
container that requests a second shall receive a ninety-six-gallon
container in place of those two containers resulting in one garbage
container to be "tipped" each week as opposed to two. Exceptions to
this policy shall only be made in cases where there exists a proven
hardship or limitation that requires multiple smaller-sized cans. Once
the container(s) is placed at the property by the Township, any changes
in size shall be at the cost of the property owner unless the Township
can accommodate a swap with another returned container. Material to
be placed in the single-stream recycling container includes: cardboard,
newspaper, plastic bottles, glass jars, magazines, etc. Single-stream
recycling material must go directly into the container, trash bags in
these containers are not acceptable. Each container shall be placed in a
position by the curbline free of obstructions to the collection system
operating as designed. The Township shall collect no more than three
household trash containers from any separate residence. [Amended
12-23-2014 by Ord. No. 29-2014]
§ 191-3 SOIL REMOVAL § 191-3
188:753
(1) Placement. Each container shall be placed near the roadway at the
curb or near the edge of the pavement free of obstructions with the
wheels and hinge facing toward the house in order to accommodate
the orderly collection of debris as designed. No recyclables should
be placed outside of the container. Recycling material shall be
thoroughly and completely drained of all liquids and placed in the
containers hereinbefore set forth. The Township shall collect no
more than three household recycling containers from any separate
residence. No containers shall be placed for collection prior to
sunset of the evening before the scheduled collection day, nor shall
containers remain at the roadside later than 9:00 p.m. the day they
are collected.
(2) Ownership. All containers shall remain the property of the
Township of Wall regardless of whether the container was an
initially provided container at no cost to the property or if it was an
additional purchased container. For the purposes of this section,
the term "purchase" shall be interpreted to mean a perpetual lease
between the Township, the property, and the property owner. For
clarity of this interpretation, the initial container provided by the
Township shall remain with the property when ownership of the
property changes. Any additional containers that may have been
"purchased" by an owner shall remain with the owner if said owner
acquires or moves to a different eligible property within Wall
Township. In the event that a resident owner ceases domicile of an
eligible property all additionally "purchased" containers shall be
returned to or collected by the Department of Public Works.
(3) Newly constructed residential eligible property. Each newly
constructed residential property within the Township of Wall shall
be issued an initial recycling container, at no cost, upon the
provision of a copy of the temporary certificate of occupancy.
(4) Maintenance. The Township of Wall will provide maintenance to the
Township containers at no cost to the residents. In the unlikely
event that the can is damaged due to misuse or abuse by the
resident, it will be the resident's responsibility to pay for the
necessary repairs or replacement of the container. If a container is
lost or stolen, it is the resident's responsibility to pay for a
replacement container.
C. Ashes. Ashes shall not be collected. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord.
No. 32-2006]
D. Bulk items. Bulk items will be picked up on such dates as may be
designated for such pickup. Bulk items are to be placed curbside in a
neat and orderly fashion, not earlier than 6:00 p.m. the day before the
scheduled pickup. No more than 10 bulk items may be placed curbside
for each collection.
§ 191-3 WALL CODE § 191-3
188:754
E. Trade waste. Trade waste is not to be collected by the Township. Trade
wastes are to be disposed of at the county dump. [Amended
12-23-2014 by Ord. No. 29-2014]
F. Construction materials. Construction materials will not be collected by
the Township. Construction materials are to be disposed of in an
appropriate manner by the homeowner.
G. Cardboard, periodicals and other waste paper. Cardboard, periodicals
and other waste paper should be placed with single-stream recycling in
the Township-issued recycling container in accordance with § 191-3B
above. [Amended 12-23-2014 by Ord. No. 29-2014]
H. Branches, hedge clippings and leaves.
(1) Tree branches and hedge clippings shall be cut to a maximum
length of four feet and shall be placed curbside in a neat and
orderly fashion in a pile not to exceed 3.5 cubic yards, or
approximate size of 4 x 3 x 8. No viney material, prunings or leaves
may be mixed with branches. Pickup will be between such dates as
may be designated for such pickup. Branches and hedge clippings
may also be collected and brought to a Township recycling center.
[Amended 11-23-2010 by Ord. No. 23-2010]
(2) Leaves shall be loosely piled in a neat and orderly fashion, free of
any other vegetative material such as vines, prunings or grass, and
placed curbside for collection by Township vehicles. Leaves in bags
will not be collected. Leaves may also be collected and brought to a
Township recycling facility. Pickup will be between such dates as
may be designated for such pickup.
(3) Grass. Grass shall be brought to the Township recycling center.
Grass trimmings shall not be placed loose or in piles on the
sidewalk, gutter or street.
(4) Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is
not containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed
during the seven days prior to a scheduled and announced
collection and shall not be placed closer than 10 feet from any
storm drain inlet. [Added 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 32-2006]
I. Volatile, explosive materials or household hazardous waste. Nothing of
a highly volatile or explosive nature, or household hazardous waste,
whether in liquid, gaseous or solid form shall at any time be placed or
set out for collection either by itself or in connection with garbage,
waste or other refuse material. Any person convicted of violating any of
the provisions of this article shall be subject to the maximum fines and
penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, Article I, of the Code.
J. Sawdust. Sawdust shall be properly contained in a sealed bag.
§ 191-3 SOIL REMOVAL § 191-3
188:755
§ 191-4. Garbage and recycling receptacles. [Amended 11-21-2006
by Ord. No. 32-2006; 12-23-2014 by Ord. No. 29-2014]
K. Animal waste and human waste. Animal and human waste (i.e., pet
waste or diapers) shall be contained in a tightly sealed bag or container
and placed with household trash. [Amended 12-23-2014 by Ord. No.
29-2014]
L. Needles. Needles shall not be collected. [Amended 11-21-2006 by
Ord. No. 32-2006]
A. The owner, resident, tenant, agent, lessee or occupant of every
residential dwelling shall provide and keep on such premises sufficient
and suitable receptacles supplied by the Township for automated
pickup.
B. All Township-supplied receptacles will be picked up by automated
vehicles.
C. Any trash contained in bags must be put in Township-authorized
receptacles. It is highly recommended that small household trash items
and especially food and other perishables be placed in garbage bags
before placing in the Township-issued containers that are used in
conjunction with the automated sanitation trucks.
D. Apartment complexes and condominium developments. The owner or
manager of such complexes or developments shall provide suitable
trash and recycling receptacles if said garbage and recycling is to be
collected by the Township. Trash and recycling receptacles shall be in
accordance with the requirements established by the Superintendent of
Public Works for Township collection.
E. At no time shall garbage or recycling be picked up in anything other
than Township-authorized containers. The Township will only pick up
any material that is in the proper Township-authorized containers that
are compatible with the automated sanitation trucks and system.
F. Public litter containers. No place of business or contractor shall deposit
garbage, paper, trade waste or construction materials in any public
litter container placed upon the streets of the Township for use by the
public to prevent littering of the streets. No person shall deposit
household or commercial garbage into any public receptacle. Any
person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be
subject to the fines and penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, Article I, of
the Code.
G. The owner, resident, tenant, lessee, or occupant of every residential
dwelling shall keep on such premises suitable Township-approved
receptacles for the collection of trash and recyclables.
H. All receptacles supplied by the Township for single-stream recycling
shall be clearly marked with a distinguishable colored and marked lid
§ 191-3 WALL CODE § 191-4
188:756
§ 191-5. Storage and placement for collection. [Amended
12-23-2014 by Ord. No. 29-2014]
on the container. Each container shall be placed near the roadway at
the curb or near the edge of the pavement free of obstructions with the
wheels and hinge facing toward the house in order accommodate the
orderly collection of recyclable material as designed.
I. Fees.
(1) Household trash containers. Property owners may purchase up to
two additional containers for household trash collection. The fee
for these containers shall be no less than the cost to the Township
for the acquisition of the containers through the bulk public
purchase of the container. Such subsequent price to the resident/
property owner shall be established by resolution of the Township
Committee upon the advice and recommendation of the Township
Administrator and Director of the Department of Public Works from
time to time as it becomes necessary depending upon demand. It is
not the intention of the Township to financially benefit from such
sale to the resident/property owner but to merely pass on the
actual cost of the initial acquisition so that no additional cost
through taxation is borne by a property owner not receiving the
additional container.
(2) Single-stream recycling containers. Property owners may purchase
up to two additional containers for household recyclables. The fee
for these containers shall be no less than the cost to the Township
for the acquisition of the containers through the bulk public
purchase of the container. Such subsequent price to the resident/
property owner shall be established by resolution of the Township
Committee upon the advice and recommendation of the Township
Administrator and Director of the Department of Public Works from
time to time as it becomes necessary depending upon demand. It is
not the intention of the Township to financially benefit from such
sale to the resident/property owner but to merely pass on the
actual cost of the initial acquisition so that no additional cost
through taxation is borne by a property owner not receiving the
additional container.
(3) In order to encourage residential recycling, the Township will
reduce the cost of the first additional recycling container by 50%.
Such reduction shall be reflected in the approved resolution of the
Township Committee adopted to establish the fees for the
acquisition of additional containers by eligible Township residents/
property owners.
A. Storage. All receptacles containing solid waste or recyclables which are
not being placed for collection or disposal shall be stored in such a
manner as to minimize the potential negative impact upon the adjoining
property owners reasonably inconspicuous from adjacent streets.
§ 191-4 SOIL REMOVAL § 191-5
188:757
§ 191-6. Animals in garbage.
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or permit any domestic animal
owned by him to disturb any receptacles in which solid wastes have been
deposited for storage or collection. "Disturb" shall mean the removal of any
part of the contents of solid wastes receptacles and allowing the same to
fall or be cast upon the ground.
§ 191-7. Accumulation of waste.
Any accumulation of solid wastes, as defined herein, or any premises,
except in the manner herein provided, is hereby declared to be a nuisance
and is prohibited.
§ 191-8. Unauthorized disposal.
No person shall store, collect, deposit or dispose of refuse, garbage,
rubbish, combustible waste, noncombustible waste, trade wastes, or solid
wastes in any receptacle of any kind which is located on property owned
by another person. No person shall store, collect, deposit or dispose of any
such materials upon any property owned by another person.
§ 191-9. Township recycling facilities.
All items taken to a Township recycling facility as provided for in this article
are subject to the provisions of Article II of this chapter.
Receptacles should be stored indoors, in sheltered storage areas or, if
kept outdoors, receptacles should be stored at the rear of each private
dwelling not closer than 15 feet from the boundary line of the property
or located in such other place as the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or
agent of the premises may be reasonably certain that the receptacles
will not interfere with the health, safety and welfare of an adjoining
owner.
B. Placement. No containers shall be placed for collection prior to sunset
of the evening before the scheduled collection day, nor shall containers
remain at the roadside later than 9:00 p.m. the day they are collected.
§ 191-5 WALL CODE § 191-9
188:758
ARTICLE II
Separation and Collection of Recyclable Materials
[Adopted 5-12-2010 by Ord. No. 4-201075]
§ 191-10. Purpose; legislative authority.
Proper management of solid waste is an important matter of public health
and safety. The source separation and recovery of certain recyclable
materials will serve the public interest by conserving energy and natural
resources and reducing waste disposal expenses. In accordance with the
requirements of the New Jersey Mandatory Source Separation and
Recycling Act (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.11 et seq.) and the 2009 update to the
Monmouth County Solid Waste Management Plan, it is therefore necessary
to update and amend existing municipal rules and regulations for the
separation, storage, collection and recovery of designated recyclable
materials.
§ 191-11. Source separation required.
It shall be mandatory for all persons who are owners, lessees and occupants
of residential property, of business and industrial properties, and of private
or public and government institutions and buildings to separate newspaper,
corrugated cardboard, clean mixed paper, aluminum cans, tin and bimetal
cans, glass bottles and jars, and pourable plastic bottles ("designated
recyclables") from all other solid waste produced by such residences and
establishments for the separate collection and ultimate recycling of such
materials.
§ 191-12. Provision and labeling of recycling containers.
§ 191-13. Residential and public institutional single-stream
recycling. [Amended 12-23-2014 by Ord. No. 29-2014]
A. All apartment and other multifamily complexes, businesses, schools and
other public or private institutions shall provide separate and clearly
marked containers for trash and the various types of recyclables, as
appropriate, for use by residents, students, employees, customers or
other visitors.
B. Any company or agency providing dumpsters or roll-off or other
containers to any apartment or other multifamily complex with shared
disposal and recycling areas or to any business, school or other
institution or for any construction/demolition project shall clearly mark
such container for trash or for single-stream recycling as may be
appropriate. [Amended 12-23-2014 by Ord. No. 29-2014]
A. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
75.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, Recycling, adopted as Sec. 3-13
of the Revised General Ordinances, as amended.
§ 191-10 SOIL REMOVAL § 191-13
188:759
SINGLE STREAM RECYCLING — Also known as "fully commingled"
or "single-sort" recycling refers to a system in which all paper fibers,
plastics, metals, and other containers are mixed in a collection truck,
instead of being sorted by the depositor into separate commodities
(newspaper, paperboard, corrugated fiberboard, plastic, glass, etc.)
and handled separately throughout the collection process. In single
stream, both the collection and processing systems are designed to
handle this fully commingled mixture of recyclables, with materials
being separated for reuse at a materials recovery facility.
B. Residences, businesses and institutions provided with recyclables
collection service by municipal forces or through municipal contract
shall place all designated recyclables in the appropriate containers at
curbside or other area(s) in the manner and according to the schedule
as regularly published and distributed by the municipality.
C. Any multifamily complex, business or institution not provided
recyclables collection service by municipal forces or through municipal
contract shall be responsible for arranging the appropriate separation,
storage, collection and ultimate recycling of all designated recyclables.
D. Any multifamily complex, business or institution which is not provided
recyclables collection service by municipal forces or through municipal
contract shall provide the municipality with, at a minimum, an annual
report describing arrangements for both solid waste and recyclables
collection services, including the size, number and location of storage
containers, frequency of pickup service, the name and address of any
contractor hired to provide such service, and phone and other contact
information for the contractor.
E. Leaves shall be kept separate from other vegetative waste and shall
only be placed for collection in the manner and according to the
schedule as shall be published and distributed by the municipality.
Grass clippings shall not be placed with other materials for solid waste
collection. This requirement shall not prohibit any person or
establishment from making arrangements to collect leaves and grass
directly from his, her or its property through his, her or its own efforts.
F. The following bulky recyclables shall not be placed with solid waste at
the curbside or in containers provided for waste collection and
transportation to a disposal facility: concrete, asphalt, brick, block, tree
stumps, tree limbs over three inches in diameter, metal appliances or
bulk metal items larger than one cubic foot and/or heavier than five
pounds.
G. Automotive and other vehicle or wet-cell batteries, used motor oil and
antifreeze shall not be disposed of as solid waste. Such items are to be
kept separate from other waste materials and recyclables and are to be
brought to local service stations, scrap yards, or publicly operated
recycling facilities designed and permitted to handle such products.
§ 191-13 WALL CODE § 191-13
188:760
§ 191-14. Commercial, business, industrial and private institutional
single-stream recycling. [Amended 12-23-2014 by Ord. No. 29-2014;
11-24-2015 by Ord. No. 21-2015]
All persons who occupy commercial, industrial, institutional or
governmental premises, both private and public, including owners, lessees,
tenants or licensees, shall separate the following types of solid waste
produced by such premises for collection and recycling by a private hauler:
H. Common, nonrechargeable dry-cell batteries, commonly labeled "A,"
"AA," "AAA," "C," "D" and "9-volt," may be disposed of with regular
municipal solid waste. However, rechargeable dry-cell and button
batteries still contain significant amounts of toxic metals, including
mercury, and shall be separated and brought to retail outlets or publicly
operated recycling facilities providing specific arrangements for the
proper packaging and shipment of rechargeable and/or button batteries
to appropriate processing facilities.
I. Computers, computer monitors and other related electronic hardware,
as well as analog and digital televisions, are prohibited from being
placed with other solid waste for disposal. These and other electronic
devices shall be kept separate and brought to retail outlets or publicly
operated recycling facilities providing specific arrangements for
shipment of these items to appropriate processing facilities.
A. Newspaper: includes paper of the type commonly referred to as
"newsprint," and includes any inserts which are normally included in
the newspaper. Specifically excluded are any pages of the newspaper
used for household projects and crafts, such as painting or papiermache
projects, or used for cleanup of pet waste.
B. Corrugated cardboard: layered cardboard including a waffled section
between the layers, of the type commonly used to make boxes and
cartons. Specifically excluded are waxed cardboard and any cardboard
contaminated by direct contact with food, such as pizza boxes.
C. Clean mixed paper: high-grade bond paper, mixed office papers and
school papers, such as stationery, construction paper and writing
tablets, including computer printouts, magazines, gift-wrapping paper,
softcover books, junk mail and single-layer cardboard (chipboard).
Specifically excluded are carbon papers, hardcover books (unless cover
and binder are removed), paper cups and plates, food wrappers or any
other paper contaminated by direct contact with food products, and
paper products used for personal hygiene, such as tissues.
D. Aluminum cans: all disposable cans made of aluminum and used for
food or beverages. Specifically excluded are aluminum foils, pie tins,
trays, cookware and other aluminum products.
E. Tin and bimetal cans: all disposable cans made of tin, steel or a
combination of metals, including but not limited to containers
§ 191-13 SOIL REMOVAL § 191-14
188:761
commonly used for food products. Specifically excluded are cans which
contain toxic products, such as paints and oils.
F. Glass bottles and jars: transparent or translucent containers made from
silica or sand, soda ash and limestone and used for the packaging or
bottling of various products. Specifically excluded are dishware, light
bulbs, window glass, ceramics and other glass products.
G. Pourable plastic containers: plastic bottles that have a neck that is
smaller than the body of the container; limited to plastic resin Type No.
1 PET and plastic resin Type No. 2 HDPE. Specifically excluded are
other resin types (Nos. 2 through 7) and nonbottle plastic containers
such as margarine tubs and other consumer items and packages, such
as film plastics, blister packaging, boxes, baskets, toys and other
products.
H. Customers of private haulers shall comply with the requirements of
Subsections A through G as set forth herein. In the alternative, if
mandated by private haulers, customers shall employ single stream
recycling as defined in this section.
SINGLE STREAM RECYCLING — Also known as "source separation"
or "fully commingled" or "single sort" recycling is defined as a system
in which all paper fibers, plastics, metals, and other containers are
mixed in a collection truck, instead of being sorted by the depositor
into separate commodities (paper, newspaper, paperboard, corrugated
fiberboard, plastic, glass, cans, aluminum) and handled separately
throughout the collection process. In single stream, both the collection
and processing systems are designed to handle this fully commingled
mixture of recyclables, with materials being separated for reuse at a
materials recovery facility.
I. Commercial, business, industrial and private institution establishments
are required to report on a yearly basis to the Wall Township Municipal
Recycling Coordinator, on such forms as may be prescribed, regarding
recycling activities at their premises, including the amount and type of
recycled material not placed curbside for municipal collection. If
material is removed from the premises by a hauler, recycler or paper
shredder, the quantity and final disposition of the material is to be
reported on the form.
J. Exemptions: Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16(d), the Wall Township
Committee may exempt persons occupying commercial, business,
industrial and private institutional establishments within the Wall
Township boundaries from the source separation requirements of this
section, which requires persons generating municipal solid waste
within its municipal boundaries to source separate, from the municipal
solid waste stream, the specified recyclable materials if those persons
have otherwise provided for the recycling of all designated recyclable
materials. To be eligible for an exemption pursuant to this chapter, a
commercial, business, industrial and private institutional generator
§ 191-14 WALL CODE § 191-14
188:762
§ 191-15. Used motor oil.
All service stations, oil retailers and motor vehicle reinspection stations
with used-oil holding tanks shall accept up to five gallons at a time of used
motor oil from individuals changing oil in cars, lawn mowers, or motorcycles
and shall post a sign on their premises informing the public that they are
a used oil collection site. Such collection of used oil shall be in accordance
with applicable state regulations.
§ 191-16. Liquids; hazardous waste.
§ 191-17. Recycling Coordinator.
§ 191-18. Method of collection.
The Township Committee, in its discretion, may determine an arrangement
for the collection and disposal of recyclable materials utilizing any of the
following methods:
§ 191-19. Ownership of recyclables; unauthorized collection; sale or
donation; fees.
shall file an application for exemption with the Township recycling
coordinator on forms provided for that purpose. The form shall conform
to the requirements of N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16(d).
A. No liquids of any type shall be placed with recyclables or with solid
waste for collection and disposal.
B. No chemicals, liquid paints, pesticides, herbicides, reactive polishes or
cleansers, cleaning or automotive products, or other hazardous waste
shall be placed with recyclables or with solid waste for collection and
disposal.
A. The position of Recycling Coordinator is hereby created and established
in the Township.
B. The Superintendent of Public Works shall serve as the Recycling
Coordinator for a term to coincide with his/her term of office as
Superintendent of Public Works.
A. The use of municipal personnel to collect recyclable materials at
curbside or from a dropoff center and to arrange for the sale of said
materials.
B. By entering into arrangements with qualified persons authorizing the
collection and sale of said materials.
C. By entering into interlocal services agreements with other
municipalities or governmental entities for the collection and sale of
said materials.
§ 191-14 SOIL REMOVAL § 191-19
188:763
§ 191-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this article
or any rule or regulation adopted hereunder shall be subject to the following
penalties:
A. Recyclable materials shall become the property of the Township when
properly placed at curbside for collection or delivered to a designated
dropoff center.
B. No person shall pick up or cause to be picked up any recyclable
materials unless specifically engaged or authorized by the Township to
do so.
C. Any person may sell or donate recyclable materials to any other person,
whether or not the recipient operates for profit. Such sold or donated
materials shall not, however, be picked up at curbside or at Townshipdesignated
dropoff centers.
D. In order to defray the costs to the Township for the disposal of certain
building materials and tires, fees shall be charged at the Township
recycling facilities for the disposal of such items in such cases where
such disposal is permitted by the Township's recycling rules and
regulations. The fees to be charged for the disposal of such materials
shall be as follows:
Type of Material Fee
Single door $5
Single window $5
30-gallon can of mixed building materials $5
1/4 of a pickup truck load $25
1/2 of a pickup truck load $50
Full pickup truck load $100
Tires, per tire (limit 4 tires) $5
E. Freon disposal fee.
(1) In order to defray the costs to the Township which are required to
be paid for the removal of Freon from certain appliance items,
which removal must take place prior to the disposal of such items, a
fee shall be charged for the disposal of any refrigerator, freezer, air
conditioner, humidifier or any other appliance or item containing
Freon.
(2) The fee to be charged shall be $20, which fee may be increased, by
directive issued by the Township Administrator, should the cost to
the Township for removal of Freon from appliances increase, up to
a maximum of $30 per appliance or item.
A. A fine of not more than $1,250; or
§ 191-19 WALL CODE § 191-20
188:764
§ 191-21. Enforcement.
§ 191-22. Unauthorized disposal.
No person shall store, collect, deposit or dispose of recyclable materials
in any receptacle of any kind which is located upon property owned by
another person. No person shall store, collect, deposit or dispose of any
recyclable materials upon property which is owned by another person.
This prohibition shall not apply to the disposal of recyclable materials at
designated recycling centers.
B. Imprisonment for a term of not more than 90 days or community service
in the Township's recycling program for a period of not more than 90
days; or
C. Both a fine and imprisonment or community service.
A. The duly appointed Municipal Recycling Coordinator, the Monmouth
County Health Department, and the Code Enforcement Officer are
hereby jointly and severally empowered to inspect solid waste and
recycling arrangements and compliance at local residences,
businesses, schools and institutions and to enforce the provisions of this
article, by issuance of warnings, notices, summonses and complaints. A
typical inspection may consist of sorting through containers and
opening bagged solid waste to detect the presence of recyclable
materials.
B. The authorized inspector may, in his or her discretion, issue a warning
rather than a summons following an initial inspection, with a follow-up
visit to determine compliance within a stated period of time.
§ 191-20 SOIL REMOVAL § 191-22
188:765

ARTICLE III
Litter Control
[Adopted 3-8-2006 by Ord. No. 7-2006]
§ 191-23. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which has
been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper, or
other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof, including
but not limited to any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or detachable
tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar, match or any
flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish,
grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers, magazines,
glass, metal, plastic or paper containers, or other packaging or construction
material; but not including the waste of the primary processes of mining or
other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling, farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of litter.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
§ 191-24. Prohibited acts and regulated activities.
§ 191-25. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this article
or of any rule or regulation adopted hereunder shall be subject to the
following penalties:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon public or private property other than
in a litter receptacle, or having done so, to allow litter to remain.
B. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this article, the operator or owner, or
both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to have violated
this article.
A. A fine of not more than $1,250;
B. Imprisonment for a term of not more than 90 days or community service
in the Township's recycling program for a period of not more than 90
days; or
C. Both a fine and imprisonment or community service.
§ 191-23 SOIL REMOVAL § 191-26
188:767
§ 191-26. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer and Police Department shall be the officials
responsible for the enforcement of this article and the rules and regulations
established hereunder.
§ 191-26 WALL CODE § 191-26
188:768
Chapter 192
STORM SEWER SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disposal of animal solid waste — See Ch. 65,
§ 65-16.
Feeding of wildlife — See Ch. 65, Art. II.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 116.
Solid waste — See Ch. 191.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 195.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 222.
Land use regulations — See Chs. 139 and 140
in separate volume.
§ 191-26 SOIL REMOVAL § 191-26
188:769

ARTICLE I
Improper Disposal of Waste to Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
System
[Adopted 3-8-2006 by Ord. No. 7-2006]
§ 192-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township or other public body, and
is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 192-2. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater into
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township is
hereby prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than
stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system is also hereby prohibited.
§ 192-3. Exceptions to prohibition.
The following exceptions to the prohibitions established in § 192-2 are
hereby recognized:
A. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated ground water (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising ground
waters).
C. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
§ 192-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 192-3
188:771
§ 192-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this article
or of any rule or regulation adopted hereunder shall be subject to the
following penalties:
§ 192-5. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be the official responsible for the
enforcement of this article and the rules and regulations established
hereunder.
F. Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing equipment used in the application of salt and
deicing materials immediately following salt and deicing material
applications. Prior to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and
deicing materials must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the
maximum extent practical using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling
and sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded. Rinsing equipment is limited to the
exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not apply to
engines or other enclosed machinery.
A. A fine of not more than $1,250; or
B. Imprisonment for a term of not more than 90 days or community service
in the Township's recycling program for a period of not more than 90
days; or
C. Both a fine and imprisonment or community service.
§ 192-3 WALL CODE § 192-5
188:772
ARTICLE II
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
[Adopted 2-9-2011 by Ord. No. 2-2011]
§ 192-6. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require the retrofitting of existing storm
drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property,
to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles,
cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Township of Wall so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 192-7. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by Wall Township or other public body and
is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 192-8. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 192-6 SOIL REMOVAL § 192-8
188:773
§ 192-9. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 192-8 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard, see § 192-9C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 192-9 below prior to
the completion of the project.
A. Grates.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle-safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning
and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than seven (7.0) square inches or is no
greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
(2) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways, parking
areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open channels,
and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
(7.0) square inches or be no greater than two (2.0) inches across the
smallest dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end-of-pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
§ 192-8 WALL CODE § 192-9
188:774
§ 192-10. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be the official responsible for the
enforcement of this article and the rules and regulations established
hereunder.
§ 192-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this article
or of any rule or regulation adopted hereunder shall be subject to the
following penalties:
§ 192-12. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this article to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this article.
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
A. A fine of not more than $1,250; or
B. Imprisonment for a term of not more than 90 days or community service
in the Township's recycling program for a period of not more than 90
days; or
C. Both a fine and imprisonment or community service.
§ 192-9 SOIL REMOVAL § 192-12
188:775

ARTICLE III
Covering of Refuse Containers and Dumpsters
[Adopted 2-9-2011 by Ord. No. 2-2011]
§ 192-13. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all
times and to prohibit the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge
of liquids, semiliquids or solids from the containers to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Wall and/or the
waters of the state so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 192-14. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by Wall Township or other public body and
is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls,
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 192-15. Covering of containers and dumpsters; prevention of
leaks and discharges.
§ 192-13 SOIL REMOVAL § 192-15
188:777
§ 192-16. Exceptions.
§ 192-17. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be the official responsible for the
enforcement of this article and the rules and regulations established
hereunder.
§ 192-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this article
or of any rule or regulation adopted hereunder shall be subject to the
following penalties:
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semiliquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by Wall Township.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
A. A fine of not more than $1,250; or
B. Imprisonment for a term of not more than 90 days or community service
in the Township's recycling program for a period of not more than 90
days; or
C. Both a fine and imprisonment or community service.
§ 192-15 WALL CODE § 192-18
188:778
Chapter 195
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations associated with mining
operations — See Ch. 150.
Excavations associated with soil removal
operations — See Ch. 188.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 222.
§ 192-18 SOIL REMOVAL § 192-18
188:779

ARTICLE I
Excavations
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 9-1 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 195-1. Permit required.
§ 195-2. Application for permit.
Any person desiring to excavate or dig up any street or public place for
the purpose of laying down pipes or conduits, or for any other purpose
whatever, shall file an application with the Township Clerk containing a
legible drawing of the proposed excavation and shall pay with such
application to the Township Clerk for the use of the Township the fee
prescribed in this article.
§ 195-3. Fees.
The applicant or other person desiring to excavate or dig up any street
or public place for the purpose of laying down pipes or conduits therein
shall pay to the Township Clerk a fee of $25 with the application, which
shall permit an opening in any street or public place not to exceed three
feet in diameter or three feet square. In the event the application proposes
to open a street for a greater distance than above set forth, the applicant
shall pay to the Township Clerk with such application, in addition to the
aforementioned fee, the sum of $2 for each additional running foot of
excavation.
A. No person, firm, corporation, or public utility company shall dig up any
street or public place without first having obtained a permit therefor as
provided in this article.
B. No permits shall be issued for any excavation in a street which has been
resurfaced by or on behalf of the Township for a period of five years
from the date of the acceptance by the Township of the resurfacing
work. The Township Clerk shall maintain a list of all public streets
resurfaced by, on behalf of, or at the direction of the Township within
the five years immediately preceding the date of adoption of this
subsection76 and shall supplement the list of resurfaced streets as
required. The list shall contain the name of each street which is
resurfaced; the portion or portions of the street which have been
resurfaced and the date of acceptance of the resurfacing improvements
by the Township. The Township Clerk shall deny any application for a
permit to excavate any street or portion thereof which has been
resurfaced within the five-year period preceding the date of such
application.
76.Editor's Note: Added 6-13-2001 by Ord. No. 24-2001.
§ 195-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 195-4
188:781
§ 195-4. Excavation regulations.
All street excavations in the Township shall be subject to the following
regulations:
§ 195-5. Issuance of permit.
Upon receipt of the aforesaid application and fee, the Township Clerk shall
refer the application to the Township Engineer for review. The Township
Clerk shall, if appropriate, issue a permit authorizing the digging up of
a street or public place for the purpose of laying down pipes or conduits
therein to the applicant, and shall include such conditions to the permit
as may be recommended by the Township Engineer. No opening may be
made by virtue thereof except that which is delineated on the drawing
hereinbefore referred to.
A. The issuance of the permit shall be conditioned upon the posting by the
applicant of an inspection fee and cash road restoration guarantee, the
amounts of which shall be determined by the Township Engineer and
based on the scope of work covered by the permit. [Amended
5-12-2010 by Ord. No. 6-2010]
B. The area excavated shall be restored with stabilized base course level
and shall be made flush with the existing pavement.
C. After the passage of 60 days and prior to the expiration of 90 days from
the date of the completion of the work, the patched area shall be
restored by an infrared pavement restoration process, or another
pavement restoration process approved by the Township Engineer to an
area two feet outside of the edge of the original cut, and bituminous
concrete surface shall be installed over the extended area. [Amended
5-12-2010 by Ord. No. 6-2010]
D. The Township Engineer shall inspect the restoration work. If the
restoration work is properly and timely completed, the Township Clerk
shall return the restoration deposit to the applicant. Should the
Township Engineer determine that the restoration work has not been
properly completed, or if the restoration work is not completed within
90 days, the restoration deposit shall be forfeited to the Township.
E. In the case of an excavation for the purpose of a water main tap or
sewer lateral to be made by the Water/Sewer Utility Department where
a street opening is required to perform the required work, the Water/
Sewer Utility Department shall only temporarily restore the roadway.
The applicant shall post the required inspection fees and cash
restoration guarantees as required by Subsection A and shall be
responsible for the final pavement restoration as required by
Subsections B and C. [Amended 5-12-2010 by Ord. No. 6-2010]
§ 195-4 WALL CODE § 195-6
188:782
§ 195-6. Term of permit.
Any permit issued hereunder shall expire one month after the date of its
issuance and shall be void thereafter.
§ 195-7. Maximum size of excavation.
No excavation shall be more than three feet in width.
§ 195-8. Traffic controls.
Any person holding a permit to excavate in a public street or in a public
place shall comply with all conditions of such permit and shall further
comply with the provisions of Article II of this chapter.
§ 195-9. Water or sewer connections.
§ 195-10. Payment of taxes.
No license under this chapter shall be issued until the Township Clerk
receives a certification from the Tax Collector that all real property taxes
and assessments are current and that no such taxes or assessments are then
due and owing.
A. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any street opening made
for the purpose of an initial water tap or sewer connection made or
approved by the Water/Sewer Utility Department, as required by the
applicable water and sewer connection ordinances.77
B. At the time of a street opening made for the purpose of an initial water
tap or sewer connection for a new structure, a street opening may also
be made for other utility connections, subject to the conditions set forth
in § 195-4B hereof.
C. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any street opening made
for the purpose of providing utility services to a new single-family
residence constructed on a vacant lot or constructed after the complete
demolition of an existing residence. [Added 9-17-2003 by Ord. No.
22-2003; amended 11-10-2004 by Ord. No. 30-2004]
77.Editor's Note: See Ch. 222, Water and Sewers.
§ 195-6 SOIL REMOVAL § 195-10
188:783

ARTICLE II
Traffic Controls During Street Construction
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 9-2 of the Revised General Ordinances]
§ 195-11. Preconstruction meetings.
No person, firm, corporation, contractor or public utility shall conduct work
on, under or above a public roadway without first contacting the Police
Department Traffic Bureau in order to arrange a preconstruction meeting.
There shall be submitted to the Traffic Bureau, either prior to or at the
time of the preconstruction meeting, plans for the safe movement of traffic
during the period of construction or repair work to be performed upon the
public roadway. No work on, under or above a public roadway shall be
commenced unless a traffic plan has been approved by the Traffic Bureau.
Any person, firm, contractor or utility who fails to comply with this section
prior to the commencement of such work, or whose plans are not approved
by the Traffic Bureau is in violation of this article. The traffic movement
plan submitted to the Traffic Bureau shall also include the proposed routes
of travel of all construction vehicles and equipment for the approval of the
Traffic Bureau.
§ 195-12. Emergency contact phone numbers.
§ 195-13. Time limits.
A. Any person, firm, contractor or utility performing repair, maintenance
or construction work upon a public roadway shall provide the Traffic
Bureau, prior to the commencement of such work, with at least two
emergency contact telephone numbers to be called in the event an
emergency arises at the site.
B. Should the Traffic Bureau, for any reason, not be able to reach the
emergency contacts, or if the contact person does not respond to a call
from the Police Department in the event of an emergency or to correct a
hazardous condition, the Police Department may take such action to
correct any emergency or hazardous condition. The reasonable costs of
such correction incurred by the Township shall be charged to, and paid
by the person, firm, contractor or utility responsible for the work.
A. No person, firm, contractor or utility shall perform construction,
maintenance, repair or utility work on any public roadway in the
Township, except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
B. Should the Traffic Bureau determine that the proposed work would not
substantially delay traffic, or cause a safety or health hazard if
performed at other hours, a waiver may be granted to permit such work
to be performed either prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m.
§ 195-11 SOIL REMOVAL § 195-14
188:785
§ 195-14. Road closings and detours.
No person, firm, contractor or utility shall close a public roadway or detour
traffic on a public street unless prior approval therefor has been issued by
the Traffic Bureau.
§ 195-15. Traffic directors.
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction, maintenance or utility
sites on public roadways as directed by the Traffic Bureau when the Bureau
determines that traffic directors are required to provide for the safety and
expeditious movement of traffic.
§ 195-16. Stop-work orders.
Should construction, maintenance repair or utility work upon any public
roadway in the Township be performed in such a manner as to create a
nuisance or safety or health hazard, or if such work is performed in violation
of any section of this article, the Traffic Bureau shall issue a stop-work order
and may, if necessary, order removal of equipment, vehicles and stored
material from any public right-of-way, and may further order the backfilling
of open excavations or related work.
§ 195-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation, contractor or public utility who violates any
provision of this article shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,250
or imprisonment in the county jail, or in any other place provided by the
municipality for not more than 90 days, or both, or 90 days' community
service in the discretion of the court or judicial officer before whom a
conviction may be had. Each and every day that such violation continues
shall be considered a separate and specific violation of this article.
§ 195-14 WALL CODE § 195-17
188:786
Chapter 201
TATTOO, BODY PIERCING AND BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 201-1. Body art regulations.
The New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services has promulgated
certain regulations known as the "New Jersey State Sanitary Code, Chapter
8, Body Art Procedures," N.J.A.C. 8:27-1.1 through 8:27-1.4, which
establishes standards for sterilization, sanitation and safety for persons
engaged in the business of tattooing, permanent cosmetics, and ear and
body piercing and same is hereby adopted in its entirety, with the exception
of N.J.A.C. 8:27-10.1 through 8:27-10.3 which are prohibited, and shall be
controlling unless higher standards are prescribed herein by the governing
body.
§ 201-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — Any place or premises, whether public
or private, where the practices of body art, body piercing or permanent
cosmetics, whether or not for profit, are performed.
HEALTH OFFICER — The appointed licensed municipal Health Officer or
authorized representative.
§ 201-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a body art establishment
without a current license to operate issued by the Health Department to
operate such establishment pursuant to the provisions established hereof.
An establishment operating with an expired license shall be considered as
operating without a license.
§ 201-4. Requirements to obtain license.
A. The application for an initial license shall be accompanied by the
appropriate fee. The license shall not be transferable. Any change of
ownership shall require a new application and license with payment of
the requisite fees therefor. All licenses shall expire on the last day of
December annually and must be renewed annually for continuing
operation of the establishment.
B. An application for renewal and the appropriate license fee shall be
submitted prior to the expiration of the current license as further set
forth herein.
A. The operation of the body art establishment shall take place within a
permanent, nonmobile building. The location of the building shall be
§ 195-17 SOIL REMOVAL § 201-4
188:787
§ 201-5. Fees.
§ 201-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person or business in violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
punished by a fine of not less than $250 for each violation of this chapter.
Each day that a violation exists shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 201-7. Severability; repealer.
indicated in the initial license application. The license shall not be
transferable to any other building, place, location or person.
B. Prior to the issuance or renewal of a license, the Health Officer or
authorized representative shall inspect the body art establishment. A
license may not be issued if the establishment is found to be in violation
of any of the requirements of this chapter, including the state
regulations (N.J.A.C. 8:27 et seq.) as referenced in § 201-1.
C. A body art establishment license may be renewed if said establishment
has been inspected by the Health Officer or authorized representative
and found to comply with all the requirements of this chapter and the
state regulations, providing the inspection is performed and compliance
is determined within 90 days prior to the expiration of the license.
D. A license shall not be issued for operation of a temporary body art
establishment or to perform body art procedures outside of the physical
site of a licensed establishment.
E. A license shall not be issued to any temporary establishment for the
purposes of product demonstrations, industry trade shows, educational
reasons or any other purpose.
F. Any establishment not served by a NJDEP-approved public community
water supply shall be required to sample for total coliform bacteria on a
quarterly basis. The sample must be collected from the sampling point
by personnel employed by a New Jersey licensed laboratory and tested
by a New Jersey licensed laboratory. The results must be provided to
the Health Department upon receipt.
G. An establishment shall employ the services of a licensed pesticide
operator to inspect the premises on a monthly basis and to treat, as
needed, for insects and rodents.
A. Initial application fee for body art establishment license: $250; fee for
body art license reinstatement after suspension or revocation: $150.
B. Initial application fee for license for establishment limited solely to
piercing of the ear: $100; fee for establishment limited solely to
piercing of the ear reinstatement after suspension or revocation: $50.
C. There shall be no license fee for renewals required on a yearly basis.
§ 201-4 WALL CODE § 201-7
188:788
Chapter 202
TAXATION
A. In the event that any court of competent jurisdiction determines that
any word, phrase, paragraph, or any other portion of this chapter is
void, then that portion of the chapter shall be severable from the
remaining portion of this chapter, and only that specific portion of the
chapter shall be void and all other portions of this chapter shall remain
completely in force and full effect.
B. All other Township ordinances which are in conflict with this chapter
are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 201-7 SOIL REMOVAL § 201-7
188:789

ARTICLE I
Payment Prior to Issuance of Permits
[Adopted 11-8-1978 as Sec. 3-18 of the Revised General
Ordinances]
§ 202-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISCRETIONARY ACT — Any act of the Township Committee which it is
requested to take on behalf of any property owner, developer or contract
purchaser of property located within the Township, which rests within the
sound discretion of the Township Committee and which it is not obligated
by law to approve, issue or endorse. Such acts include, by way of example
and not by way of limitation, the issuance of any permit or license under
any ordinance of the Township which relates in any way to the use or
development of any property or the conduct of any business enterprise
thereon; the endorsement or approval of any application for a highway
occupancy permit, road opening permit, utility opening permit, sewer
extension permit; or any other permit or license issued by any other
governmental agency which requires the endorsement of the Township
Committee.
§ 202-2. Payment of taxes required.
A. Prior to the issuance of any permit or the taking of any discretionary act
by the Township Committee, the Township Clerk shall ascertain the
status of real property tax and assessment payments for the property
which will directly or indirectly benefit from the permit or discretionary
act, and shall report such information to the Township Committee. The
Township Committee shall include in any resolution adopted
authorizing the taking of any such discretionary act a condition that,
prior to the execution of any permit, license or endorsement or the
performance of any other discretionary act, a certification be received
by the Township Clerk from the Tax Collector that all real property
taxes and assessments pertaining to the property directly or indirectly
benefited by the discretionary act are current and that no real property
taxes or assessments are then due and owing.
B. No Township official or employee shall issue any permit or license,
execute any endorsement on a permit, license or application or perform
any other discretionary act on behalf of the Township until such time as
the employee or official has received a certification from the Tax
Collector that all real property taxes and assessments pertaining to the
property directly or indirectly benefited by the permit, license or
discretionary act are current and that no such taxes or assessments are
then due and owing.
§ 202-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 202-3
188:791
§ 202-3. Ordinances deemed amended.
All ordinances of the Township of Wall pertaining to the issuance of permits,
licenses or other approvals or endorsements shall be and are hereby
amended to include as a precondition to such issuance a requirement that
all real property taxes and assessments pertaining to the property to be
benefited directly or indirectly by such discretionary act shall be current
and that no such taxes or assessments shall be due and owing at the time
the permit or license is issued or discretionary act performed, except in
such cases where such a condition would violate an applicable provision of
state law.
§ 202-3 WALL CODE § 202-3
188:792
ARTICLE II
Redemption of Tax Sale Certificates
[Adopted 9-8-2010 by Ord. No. 13-2010]
§ 202-4. Redemption calculations; fee.
§ 202-5. Tax lien foreclosure; fee.
§ 202-6. Notice of tax sale.
The Tax Collector shall mail a notice of tax sale to each interested party by
regular or certified mail. The mailing shall be in lieu of any two publications
of the notice. The cost for the mailing shall not exceed $25 per set of notices
and shall be added to the cost of the tax sale for the particular property in
addition to those provided in N.J.S.A. 54:5-38.
A. The Tax Collector shall provide any party entitled to redeem a
certificate two calculations of the amount required for redemption
within one calendar year at no cost.
B. Any additional request by a party after the two calculations of the
amount required to redeem shall be provided to the party for a fee of
$50.
C. All requests for a redemption calculation shall be made in writing to the
Tax Collector.
A. A plaintiff (except a municipality) seeking to foreclose a tax lien shall
not recover any search fees, counsel fees or other fees when foreclosing
on a tax lien unless the plaintiff gives all persons entitled to redeem 30
days' notice, by certified mail, of the intention to file this complaint.
B. The notice shall include the amount due on such tax lien as of the date
of the notice.
C. The Tax Collector shall charge the lien holder seeking to file the
foreclosure complaint $50 for the calculation of the amount due to
redeem the tax lien.
(1) A request for the redemption calculation shall be in writing and
specify the date for the calculation, which shall be the date of the
notice.
(2) Neither the Tax Collector nor the municipality shall be liable for an
incorrect calculation.
(3) The fee paid to the Township under this section shall not become
part of the lien and shall not be passed on to any party entitled to
redeem the tax lien under N.J.S.A. 54:5-54.
§ 202-4 SOIL REMOVAL § 202-6
188:793
Chapter 203
TAX EXEMPTIONS AND ABATEMENTS
§ 203-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABATEMENT — That portion of the assessed value of a property as it
existed prior to construction, improvement or conversion of a building
or structure thereon, which is exempted from taxation pursuant to this
chapter.
AREA IN NEED OF REHABILITATION — A portion or all of the Township
which has been determined to be an area in need of rehabilitation or
redevelopment pursuant to the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, P.L.
1992, c. 79 (N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et al.).
ASSESSOR — The Tax Assessor of the Township.
COMMERCIAL or INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURE — A structure or part thereof
used for research, office, industrial, commercial, retail, recreation, hotel
or motel facilities, or for any combination thereof, which the Township
Committee determines will tend to maintain or provide gainful employment
within the Township, assist in the economic development of the Township,
maintain or increase the tax base of the Township and maintain or diversify
and expand commerce within the Township.
COMPLETION — Substantially ready for the intended use for which a
building or structure is constructed, improved or converted.
CONSTRUCTION — The provision of a commercial or industrial structure,
or the enlargement of the volume of an existing commercial or industrial
structure by more than 30%, but shall not mean the conversion of an
existing building or structure to another use.
IMPROVEMENTS — The modernization, rehabilitation, renovation,
alteration or repair of a commercial or industrial structure that does not
increase the volume of the structure by more than 30%.
PROJECT — The construction of a new facility or facilities to be used or
occupied by any person for research, office, industrial, commercial, retail,
recreation or hotel or motel facilities, or for any combination thereof, and
which the Township Committee determines will tend to maintain or provide
gainful employment within the Township, maintain or increase the tax base
of the Township and maintain or diversify and expand commerce within the
Township. “Project” shall also mean an enlargement of the volume of an
existing structure by more than 30%.
§ 203-2. Exemptions.
Exemptions may be granted for improvements to commercial or industrial
structures located in an area designated as an area in need of rehabilitation,
§ 202-6 WALL CODE § 203-2
203:794
as same is defined pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-3, after applications are
submitted to the Township Committee for its review, evaluation and
approval.
§ 203-3. Valuation.
§ 203-4. Exemption; procedure for approval.
No exemption authorized pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
granted or allowed except upon written application therefor filed with and
approved by the Township Committee. The Township Committee may grant
an exemption pursuant to this chapter if the project or improvements are
consistent with the applicable redevelopment plan; the applicant proposes
to enhance the aesthetics, design, public improvements, layout, facilities or
other aspects of the project beyond the minimum required by the applicable
redevelopment plan; and subject to the approval of the Planning Board
with respect to the development plan for the project. If approved by the
Township Committee, the granting of any such exemption shall be recorded
and made a permanent part of the official tax records of the Township,
which record shall contain a notice of the termination date of the exemption
and the application of such exemption in the event of a transfer of title to
the property which is the subject of such exemption.
§ 203-5. Tax abatement application; contents.
Applicants for tax abatement, as provided in this chapter, shall provide an
application to the Township Committee setting forth:
A. The Assessor's full and true value of improvements to a property
granted approval for exemption pursuant to this chapter shall not be
assessed as increasing the value of such property for a period of five
years after the completion of such improvement(s), notwithstanding
that the value of the property to which the improvements are made is
increased thereby.
B. In no event shall the assessment on the property granted the exemption
be less than the assessment existing immediately prior to the
construction of the improvement(s), unless the structure(s) on the
property has incurred damage through action of the elements sufficient
to warrant reduction or the prior assessment is contested in accordance
with the remedies provided by law.
A. A general description of the project for which abatement is sought,
together with a description of the project enhancements to be included
in the event that an abatement is granted.
B. A legal description of all real estate necessary for the project.
C. Plans, drawings and other documents as may be required by the
Township Committee to demonstrate the structure and design of the
project.
§ 203-2 TAX EXEMPTIONS AND ABATEMENTS § 203-5
203:795
§ 203-6. Tax abatement agreements for projects; payments in lieu of
full property tax.
The Township Committee may enter into a written agreement with the
applicant for the abatement of local real property taxes as to premises
located within an area designated as in need of rehabilitation as defined
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-3. The agreement shall provide for the applicant
to pay to the Township in lieu of full property tax payments an amount equal
to a percentage of taxes otherwise due, according to the following schedule:
D. A description of the number, classes and type of employees to be
employed at the project site within two years of completion of the
project.
E. A statement of the reasons for seeking tax abatement on the project and
a description of the benefits to be realized by the Township if a tax
abatement is granted.
F. Estimates of the cost of completing such project.
G. A statement showing:
(1) The real property taxes currently being assessed at the project site;
(2) Estimated tax payments that would be made annually by the
applicant on the project during the period of tax abatement; and
(3) Estimated tax payments that would be made by the applicant on the
project during the first full year following the termination of the tax
abatement agreement.
H. A description of any lease agreement between the applicant and
proposed users of the project, and a history and description of the
users' business.
I. Such other pertinent information as the Township Committee may
require.
A. In the first full calendar year after completion, no payment in lieu of
taxes otherwise due.
B. In the second calendar year, an amount not less than 20% of taxes
otherwise due.
C. In the third calendar year, an amount not less than 40% of taxes
otherwise due.
D. In the fourth calendar year, an amount not less than 60% of taxes
otherwise due.
E. In the fifth calendar year, an amount not less than 80% of taxes
otherwise due.
§ 203-5 WALL CODE § 203-7
203:796
§ 203-7. Tax abatement agreements; duration.
All tax abatement agreements entered into by the Township pursuant to the
terms of this chapter shall be in effect for a period of not more than five
years next following the date of completion of the project.
§ 203-8. Disqualification of property owner prior to termination of
agreement; tax payments due.
§ 203-9. Termination of agreement; tax consequences.
At the termination of an agreement for tax abatement authorized pursuant
to this chapter, a project shall be subject to all applicable real property taxes
as provided by applicable state law and/or ordinances of the Township,
provided that nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit a project, at the
termination of an agreement for tax abatement, from qualifying for and
receiving the full benefits of any other tax preferences provided by state
law.
Chapter 205
TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 215.
A. If, during any tax year prior to the termination of the tax agreement, the
property owner ceases to operate or disposes of the property, or fails to
meet the conditions for qualifying as set forth in the written agreement
with the Township, then the tax which would have otherwise been
payable for each tax year shall become due and payable from such
property owner as if no exemption and abatement had been granted.
The Township Committee shall notify the property owner and the Tax
Collector forthwith, and the Tax Collector shall, within 15 days thereof,
notify the owner of the property of the amount of taxes due.
B. However, with respect to the disposal of the property, where it is
determined that the new owner of the property will continue to use the
property pursuant to the conditions which qualified the property for
abatement, no tax shall be due, the exemption and the abatement shall
continue and the agreement shall remain in effect.
§ 203-7 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 203-9
205:797

ARTICLE I
Taxicabs
§ 205-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CRUISING — The practice of driving about the Township streets with
a taxicab so as to solicit passengers or to bring the presence of the
taxicab to the attention of prospective passengers. A taxicab driving
along the streets of the Township for any purpose other than
transporting a passenger, going to a definite destination by the most
direct route in response to a call for a taxicab by a prospective
passenger or returning by the most direct route to the taxicab's home
terminus after discharging a passenger or going to or from the
terminus, to the drivers home by the most direct route shall be prima
facie evidence of cruising.
DRIVER — Any person who drives a taxicab within the Township,
whether or not such person is also the owner thereof.
IDENTIFICATION CARD — The card issued by the Chief of Police
containing the name, address and description of the person named
thereon as owner or driver, together with a recent photograph of the
holder thereof affixed thereon.
OPERATION OF A TAXICAB — Consists of accepting one or more
passengers for hire anywhere within the Township and transporting
such passenger or passengers along any Township streets. The
operation of a taxicab as above described by one other than the owner
shall be deemed operation by the owner thereof as well as by the person
actually driving the same. The transportation of any person other than
the owner or driver in any motor vehicle bearing the sign therein or
thereon using the word "taxi," "taxicab," "cab," or "hack" shall be prima
facie evidence of operation.
OWNER — Any person in whose name title to any taxicab is registered
with the New Jersey Department of Motor Vehicles or who appears in
such records to be the conditional vendee or lessee thereof.
TAXICAB PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
TAXICAB — Any automobile or motor car, commonly called "taxi,"
engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire which is held
out, announced or advertised to operate or run or which is operated
or run over any of the Township streets, and which accepts passengers
in the Township for transportation from points or places to points or
places within or without the Township.
B. Word usage. Nothing herein contained shall include or apply to
"autobus" as defined in N.J.S.A. 48:16-23 or jitneys or other vehicles
operated under municipal consent upon a route established wholly
§ 205-1 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 205-1
205:799
§ 205-2. Permits required.
§ 205-3. Applications.
within the Township or the public conveyances which are by law subject
to state or federal regulation exclusively.
A. Required. No person shall operate any taxicab within the Township
unless the owner thereof has secured the necessary permit as provided
herein and conforms to all the provisions hereof.
B. Permit. A taxicab permit shall entitle the taxicab therein described to be
operated in the Township until the permit either expires or is
surrendered, suspended or revoked and shall not be transferable.
C. Display of permit. All permits issued hereunder shall be affixed to the
left fender of the taxicab in a position which is equal in distance from
the top of the fender and the bottom of the fender and six inches behind
the left front headlamp.
D. Expiration of permits. Every permit issued pursuant to this section shall
expire annually at midnight on December 31 of the year in which issued
unless sooner surrendered, suspended or revoked.
E. Number of permits permitted. The number of permits permitted to be
issued or outstanding in any one year shall be fixed by resolution of the
Township Committee.
F. Identification card. The identification card issued by the Chief of Police
shall be carried by the person to whom issued during any period in
which said person is operating.
A. All applications for permits shall be filed with the Township Clerk,
together with the required fee and shall be in writing, in duplicate, and
shall contain the full name and address, date and place of birth of the
owner, the serial number, type, color, age and maker of the taxicab, the
number of persons it is to carry, and the names and addresses of two
responsible property owners of the Township as references. In addition,
every application for a permit shall contain the name and address, date
and place of birth of every person employed by the owner as a driver of
the taxicab, together with a recent photograph of the owner and drivers
listed on the application of a size not less than 1 1/4 inches in height
and 1 3/4 inches in length. Every change of address of the owner and/or
driver shall be reported in writing to the Township Clerk within three
days after such change. An application must be filed for each individual
taxicab.
B. Upon receipt of an application for a permit, the Township Clerk shall
submit the application to the Wall Township Police Department for
fingerprinting and a records check of the owner and driver(s) of the
taxicab proposed to be licensed.
§ 205-1 WALL CODE § 205-3
205:800
§ 205-4. Insurance.
C. Upon receipt of a reply from the Wall Township Police Department, the
Township Clerk shall submit the application together with the Police
Department's report thereon to the Township Committee at its next
succeeding meeting for action, and all applications so submitted may be
approved or denied by a majority vote of the members present at such
meeting. Upon the approval of the application by the Township
Committee, the Township Clerk shall cause a permit to be issued to the
applicant, together with an identification card for the owner of the
taxicab and each driver thereof.
A. No permit shall be issued or become effective until the owner of the
taxicab shall have filed with the Clerk of the municipality in which such
operation is permitted, an insurance policy of a company duly licensed
to transact business under the insurance laws of this state, conditioned
for the payment of a sum of not less than $10,000 to satisfy all claims
for damages by reason of bodily injury to, or the death of, any one
person resulting from an accident and a sum of not less than $20,000 to
satisfy all claims for damages by reason of bodily injuries to, or the
death of, all persons on account of any such accident, by reason of the
ownership, operation, maintenance or use of such autocab upon any
public street; and conditioned for the payment of a sum not less than
$5,000 to satisfy any claim for damages to property of any one person,
resulting from an accident, and a sum not less than $5,000 to satisfy all
claims for damages to property of all persons, on account of any such
accident, by reason of the ownership, operation, maintenance or use of
such taxicab upon any public street.
B. The permit shall become effective and operation thereunder shall be
permitted only so long as the insurance policy shall remain in force to
the full and collectible amounts as aforesaid.
C. The insurance policy shall specifically provide that all passengers
entering such taxicab for transportation shall be protected whether
such passenger is accepted for transportation from a fixed taxi stand or
other public place, or from any other point or place whether fixed or
otherwise.
D. If such owner operates more than one taxicab, he may file with the
Township Clerk, in lieu of the policy required as set forth above, a bond
or insurance policy of a company duly licensed to transact business
under the insurance laws of this state, in the sum of $50,000 which shall
be a blanket insurance covering all cabs operated by such owner which
shall provide for the payment of any final judgment recovered by a
person on account of the ownership, maintenance and use of any such
taxicab or any fault in respect thereto, and shall be for the benefit of
every person suffering loss, damage or injury as aforesaid.
§ 205-3 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 205-5
205:801
§ 205-5. Power of attorney.
The owner of the taxicab shall execute and deliver to the Clerk of the
municipality concurrently with the filing of a policy or bond referred to
in the aforesaid sections a power of attorney, wherein and whereby the
owner shall appoint the Township Clerk of the Township his true and lawful
attorney for the purpose of acknowledging service of any process out of a
court of competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured by virtue of
the indemnity granted under the insurance policy or bond filed.
§ 205-6. Permit fees.
The fees for the issuance of the taxicab permits referred to herein shall be
as follows:
§ 205-7. Revocation or suspension.
The Township Committee may, in its discretion, refuse to issue or renew or
may, after notice and hearing revoke or suspend:
§ 205-8. Insurance required for lawful operation.
The operation of any taxicab licensed pursuant hereto shall be permitted
and shall be lawful only so long as the applicable liability insurance policies
prescribed by this chapter shall remain in full force and collectible amount
stated in the policies.
A. For each taxicab permit: the sum of $50 per year or any portion thereof.
B. For each additional taxicab permit: the sum of $25 per year or any
portion thereof.
A. Any permit if the applicant or permittee, within two years next
preceding the filing of an application hereunder or who, having
obtained a permit while the permit is in effect hereunder has been
convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude in this or any other
jurisdiction, or of being a disorderly person in this or any other
jurisdiction, or of reckless driving in this or any other state, or who
violates or who has any judgment unsatisfied of record against him
arising out of an automobile accident, or who has failed to render
reasonably prompt, safe and adequate taxicab service, or who has not
complied fully with all the requirements of this chapter; or
B. Any taxicab permit if the applicant has any communicable or contagious
disease; or
C. Any taxicab permit if the taxicab for which a permit is issued, by reason
of unsafe or unsanitary condition is dangerous to the safety and health
of the occupants or others, or if the insurance policy required herein or
by any statute of New Jersey has once lapsed, or such coverage is not
maintained at all times.
§ 205-5 WALL CODE § 205-9
205:802
§ 205-9. Identification on exterior of taxicabs.
Every taxicab shall have conspicuously located on the exterior thereof,
the words "Taxi" or "Cab" or "Taxicab" which shall be illuminated during
darkness.
§ 205-10. Cruising prohibited.
No person shall cruise on the Township streets with any taxicab for the
purpose of soliciting passengers.
§ 205-11. Rules and regulations.
The Township Committee may by resolution make such general rules and
regulations and such special rulings and findings as may be necessary
for the proper regulation and control of the operation of taxicabs in the
Township and enforcement of this chapter. In addition thereto and not
inconsistent therewith the Township Committee may alter, amend, repeal
and publish the same.
§ 205-12. Revocation of permit.
The violation by the taxicab owner or the driver thereof of any rules,
regulations, special rulings and findings which are hereafter promulgated
by the Township Committee and included with a resolution adopted by the
Committee shall be sufficient cause for revocation of any permit granted to
the taxicab owner pursuant to this chapter and shall be sufficient cause for
the refusal by the Township Committee to renew such permit, in addition to
all other grounds heretofore specifically mentioned herein.
§ 205-13. Other automobile laws applicable.
Nothing in this chapter contained shall exempt any person owning or
operating any taxicab from complying with the laws relating to the
ownership, registration and operation of automobiles in this state.
§ 205-9 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 205-13
205:803

ARTICLE II
Limousines
§ 205-14. Limousine defined.
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms, "limousine" or "limousine or
livery service" shall have the meanings set forth in N.J.S.A. 48:16-13, as that
statute may be amended and supplemented from time to time.
§ 205-15. Certification required.
No person shall maintain or operate a limousine or livery service in the
Township unless the owner thereof has secured a limousine service
certification, signed by the Township Clerk and the land use officer, as
provided herein.
§ 205-16. Application and fee.
A. All applications for limousine service certification shall be filed with the
Township Clerk, together with the required fee, and shall contain the
full name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; the names,
titles and complete addresses of all corporate officers or partners of the
applicant; and the federal identification or social security number of the
applicant. In addition, every application for a limousine service
certification shall contain the complete business address of the
limousine service and the Tax Map lot and block number of the property
on which the business is located.
B. Each such application shall be accompanied by an insurance policy
from a company duly licensed to transact business under the insurance
laws of this state in the sum of $1,500,000 against loss by reason of the
liability imposed by law upon every limousine owner for damages on
account of bodily injury or death suffered by any person as a result of an
accident occurring by reason of the ownership, maintenance or use of
the limousine upon any public street. Such operation shall be permitted
only so long as the insurance policy shall remain in force to the full and
collectible amount of $1,500,000. The policy must provide for the
payment of any final judgment recovered by any person on account of
the ownership, maintenance and use of such limousine or any fault in
respect thereto, and shall be for the benefit of every person suffering
loss, damage or injury as aforesaid. In addition, each such application
shall be accompanied by a copy of power of attorney executed and
delivered to the Division of Motor Vehicles concurrent with the filing of
the required insurance policy, as set forth above; a power of attorney
wherein and whereby the owner shall appoint the Director of the
Division of Motor Vehicles his true and lawful attorney for the purpose
of acknowledging service of any process out of a court of competent
jurisdiction to be served against the insured by virtue of the indemnity
granted under the insurance policy filed.
§ 205-14 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 205-16
205:805
C. Each application shall also be accompanied by photocopies of the
registrations of all vehicles utilized in connection with the limousine
service.
D. The fee for the issuance of a limousine service certification shall be the
sum of $50.
E. Upon receipt of an application for a limousine service certification, the
Township Clerk shall refer the application documents to the Land Use
Officer who shall determine whether the operation of a limousine
service at the location specified in the application is permitted under
the land use regulations of the Township. No limousine service
certification shall be issued by the Township Clerk unless the Land Use
Officer has certified that the operation of the limousine service is a
permitted use at the specified business location.
§ 205-16 WALL CODE § 205-16
205:806
ARTICLE III
Enforcement
§ 205-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate a provision of this chapter
or fail to comply therewith shall severally for each and every such violation
and noncompliance, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty as set
forth in Chapter 1, Article I. The imposition of a penalty for violation of
this chapter shall not excuse the violation nor permit it to continue. Such
violation shall be remedied within a reasonable time and each day that such
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 205-18. Effect of conviction.
The conviction of a permittee for a violation hereunder shall not prevent the
Township from taking action to suspend or revoke the permit of the person
so convicted as herein provided.
§ 205-17 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 205-18
205:807
Chapter 206
TOWING AND STORAGE OF MOTOR VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 36. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 215.
§ 206-1. Intention.
This chapter shall govern the towing and storage of motor vehicles when the
call for such services is initiated by the Wall Township Police Department
and the vehicle owner has not made other arrangements for towing and
storage of a disabled vehicle or where the towing and storage occurs
without the consent of the owner.
§ 206-2. List of approved and licensed towing vendors.
The Police Department shall institute a towing policy establishing a rotating
list of approved and licensed towing vendors. Such approved and licensed
towing vendors are the only vendors who may be called by the Wall
Township Police Department for towing and storage services for disabled
and impounded vehicles in both public and private places of the Township of
Wall. The rotation shall be determined according to the number of licensed
towing vendors and shall provide for a fair distribution of towing services.
§ 206-3. Approval and licensing of towing vendors to be placed on
the Police Department rotating list. [Amended 11-24-2015 by Ord.
No. 18-2015]
A. Applicant standards/requirements.
(1) The vendor agrees that all employees, including the owners or
officers of the company, will be photographed and fingerprinted by
an agency recommended by Wall Township and will be issued an
identification card by the Wall Township Police Department. The
identification card shall be available for inspection by police
officers and customers and renewed every two years. The cost will
be the responsibility of the tow vendor.
(2) All drivers of the vendor shall be at least 18 years of age and shall
possess a current, valid New Jersey driver's license appropriate for
the categories of vehicles that he/she may drive.
(3) The vendor agrees that the owner(s) or officers of the company
shall be responsible, except as otherwise provided by law, for the
negligent acts of their employees while acting pursuant to this
chapter.
§ 205-18 WALL CODE § 206-3
205:808
(4) If for any reason the driver's license or privileges of an employee of
a vendor are suspended or expired, he/she will not be allowed to
operate a wrecker under this chapter, and the vendor shall notify
the Police Department, in writing, as to the reason for and duration
of the suspension or expiration.
(5) The vendor will ensure adequate available personnel to provide
necessary Township wrecker services on a twenty-four-hour basis
seven days per week.
(6) The vendor will furnish copies of driver's licenses and all applicable
certifications of all employees to the Wall Township Police
Department on an annual basis.
(7) The Wall Township Police Department reserves the right to conduct
driver's license and background checks on all vendor employees.
This is to include periodic inspection of company personnel by the
Department, as well as updated reports from the Division of Motor
Vehicles.
(8) The vendor agrees to provide the Department with a roster of all
drivers, to include names and home addresses. All new employee
information must be immediately provided to the Wall Township
Police Department. The employees shall not respond to tow
requests until approved by the Police Department.
(9) The vendor shall provide information as to any trade association
memberships pertaining to the vendor and/or employees.
(10) Employees of the vendor shall not claim to represent or be
employed by the Township of Wall.
(11)No operator shall solicit, demand or receive from any person any
commission or fee except the fee for transporting or servicing the
vehicle to be towed, as established by this chapter.
(12)No vendor or his operators shall pay any gratuity or tip to any third
person not involved in the towing or removal of any vehicle for any
information as to the location of any crash or for soliciting the
employment of the vendor's/operator's service.
(13)No vendor shall engage in the conduct of cruising for tows or
service calls within the Township.
(14) Vendor equipment, as outlined herein, must be of the type,
condition and design to efficiently perform the work required by
the Township as outlined in Subsection B.
(15) All wreckers shall be equipped with two-way radio capability or
cellular telephone and an established dispatching center on a
twenty-four-hour basis.
§ 206-3 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 206-3
205:809
(16) The vendor agrees to provide such wrecker services within a
reasonable response time, not to exceed 15 minutes, from time of
police request.
(17) Vendors shall be required to clean up all broken glass and debris
from the scene of any crash to which they are called prior to leaving
the scene of said crash.
(18)No subcontracting of towing services shall be permitted. Only
licensed vendors employing approved operators and utilizing
inspected and approved vendor equipment will be permitted.
(19) Switching or trading of rotation assignments by licensed vendors
shall not generally be permitted unless some exigent
circumstances exist which necessitate same. Such circumstances
shall be submitted, in writing, to the Chief of Police for approval
prior to any such activity taking place.
(20) The schedule of fees associated with towing and storage in
conjunction with the rotation program shall be conspicuously
displayed in all vendor facilities for review by customers. Similarly,
a schedule of these fees shall also be placarded on each approved
wrecker to be utilized in conjunction with this rotation program.
(21) Only one vendor may occupy any one principal address for towing
services.
(22) In times of emergent circumstances and/or natural disasters, or at
the situational discretion of the Police Supervisor, the Wall
Township Police Department reserves the right to contract other
towing service operators who may not be on the rotation list.
(23) All tow truck drivers will be required to wear an A.N.S.I Level II
traffic vest or equivalent clothing, at minimum.
B. Applicant equipment requirements. The following vehicles/equipment
are required for consideration to participate in the towing rotation
program:
(1) One wheel lift wrecker.
(2) Two flatbed wreckers; one must have a wheel lift.
(3) Each tow vehicle shall be equipped with three-hundred-sixtydegree
amber lighting.
(4) All lights shall be of such candle power in intensity as to be visible
1/4 of a mile away.
(5) Dual rear wheels or equivalent.
(6) A power take-off controlled winch with a minimum cable thickness
of 3/8 inch or equivalent.
§ 206-3 WALL CODE § 206-3
205:810
§ 206-4. Designation of municipal officer to enforce provisions in
accordance with due process of law.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.49, the Chief of Police is designated as
the municipal officer with responsibility to enforce the provisions of this
chapter in accordance with due process of law. The Chief of Police may, by
(7) Weight equal to the vehicles to be towed, with a minimum of 5,500
pounds.
(8) A three-eighths-inch safety chain. The lift chain and the safety
chain are not to be attached in any form or manner to the same part
of the wrecker.
(9) One shovel and one broom for use in removing debris from the
roadway.
(10) One twenty-pound dry chemical fire extinguisher.
(11) One five-gallon bucket of sand or absorbent material.
C. Insurance requirements. No wrecker shall be licensed or authorized,
nor shall any licensed wrecker be operated within Wall Township
without first submitting the following insurance policies and/or
certificates of insurance:
(1) An auto garage keeper's legal liability policy covering fire, theft
and explosion in the minimum amount of $120,000 and collision
coverage, subject to a maximum deductible of $500 with each
accident deemed a separate claim.
(2) A liability policy covering the operation of the vendor's equipment
and wrecker for any bodily injury or property damage in the
minimum amount of $750,000, and for any one person killed or
injured, $1,000,000 and $3,000,000 for more than one person
killed or injured in any one accident. This policy shall also provide
for coverage in the minimum amount of $100,000 for all damage
arising out of or injury to, or destruction of, property.
(3) Each policy as required must contain an endorsement providing for
10 days' notice to the Township in the event of any material change
or cancellation. If the policy is not maintained according to these
guidelines, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to
immediately suspend the wrecker license and collect any licensing
identification.
(4) Licensees shall indemnify and hold the Township of Wall and the
Police Department harmless from any damages or liability which
may arise by reason of the action of the licensee, his agents or
employees in connection with furnishing the services required.
Licensees shall provide proof of workers' compensation insurance
for all employees participating in Township towing services.
§ 206-3 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 206-4
205:811
order, delegate this responsibility to a subordinate officer within the Police
Department.
§ 206-5. Fees.
A. The following fees are hereby established for towing services in
conjunction with the Wall Township Police Department: [Amended
2-13-2008 by Ord. No. 1-200878; 11-24-2015 by Ord. No. 18-2015]
Towing
Service Fees
Standard tow $105
Flatbed tow $105
Tows over 6,999 GVW $175 plus tax
Tows over 15,000 GVW $350 plus tax
Vehicle Winching
Service Fees
Under 6,999 GVW $100 first hour/$75 per hour
thereafter
7,000 to 14,999 GVW $200 first hour/$150 per hour
thereafter
Road Calls
Service Fees
All road calls $60 plus fuel
Vehicle lockouts $60
Police vehicle tow $50; $3 per mile out of town to
Wall border; maximum of $200
MVA scene cleanup $25 flat plus $15 per bag of
absorbent
Rollover/recovery up to 14,999
GVW
$225 first 1/2 hour; $150 per hour
after
Disabled tow from scene to site of
owner's choice
Applicable tow cost (plus $3.50
per mile out of town to Wall
border)
Wait time (investigative delays) $30 per half hour
Police car after-hour tire $40
78.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall be retroactive to 1-1-2008.
§ 206-4 WALL CODE § 206-5
205:812
§ 206-6. Availability to public.
A copy of this chapter, including all regulations and fee schedules, shall be
made available to the public during normal business hours of the Township.
Storage
Service Fees
Passenger vehicles $35 per day, plus $10 for indoor
Over 6,999 GVW $40 per day, plus $10 for indoor
Over 15,000 GVW $60 per day, plus $10 for indoor
B. Liability for operators who engage in a pattern and practice of
knowingly violating fee limits. Operators who engage in removal of
motor vehicles, or any employee, officer or agent thereof, who engages
in a pattern or practice of knowing violation of the fee limits set herein
may be liable to the municipality for a civil penalty of not less than $25
or more than $50 for each motor vehicle stored with the operator. Such
penalties will be collected in a summary manner in the Wall Township
Municipal Court in accordance with the Penalty Enforcement Law of
1999.79
C. Fees paid by municipality. Storage fees will only be paid by the
Township in cases where the owner cannot be located for payment of
the fees after diligent inquiries. This will only apply when such a vehicle
is towed at direction of the Police Department and has extensive
damage so that storage at the police impound lot is not feasible. This
determination shall be made by a police officer at the scene. In that
case, the storage fees shall be:
(1) Three dollars per day for the first 30 days of storage per vehicle.
(2) Two dollars per day for the 31st day of storage and thereafter.
(3) A maximum of $400 per vehicle storage, regardless of the duration
of the storage, except that the Division of Local Government
Services in the Department of Community Affairs may grant a
waiver for good cause upon the request of a municipality.
D. Administrative fee. The Township of Wall shall assess an administrative
fee of $25 per vehicle to recover costs of administering the towing and
storage services for all vehicles coming under the purview of the police
impound. The assessment will be placed on each vehicle processed in
addition to the model fees outlined in this chapter for towing and
storage services. [Added 2-13-2008 by Ord. No. 1-200880]
79.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.
80.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall be retroactive to 1-1-2008.
§ 206-5 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 206-7
205:813
§ 206-7. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RECOVERY — Recovery can be achieved by several actions which may
include, but are not limited to, winching and rigging. Recovery is when
the tow operator applies his knowledge and equipment in a manner so as
to preserve the condition of the motor vehicle while moving the damaged
vehicle to a towable position. Winching in itself is not recovery. Recovery
occurs when a vehicle has left the roadway and berm and cannot be reached
or removed by conventional means.
ROAD CALLS — May include, but are not limited to, disabled vehicles,
vehicles out of gas, flat tires, etc.
WINCHING — The process of moving a motor vehicle by the use of a cable
from a position that is not accessible for direct hook up by conventional
means for loading onto a tow vehicle. Winching is not pulling a vehicle into
a tilt bed or carrier, nor lifting a motor vehicle with a conventional tow sling.
§ 206-8. Storage (nonpolice impounds).
A. In cases of nonpolice impound tows (i.e., MVA's), the tow vendor shall
remove vehicle to a storage area having the capacity and zoning
approval for such usage.
B. The storage facility shall be located within the boundaries of Wall
Township and shall be legally zoned for the storage of multiple vehicles.
Towing vendors can inquire as to such approved facilities through the
Township Land Use office.
C. The storage facility shall be in full compliance with all other local, state
and federal laws, ordinances and regulations, including compliance
with any applicable environmental laws or regulations.
D. The tow vendor shall retain the responsibility for safe and secure
storage of vehicles.
E. The storage area shall be such in nature so as to provide a reasonable
expectation of vehicle security on behalf of the Township of Wall and
customers.
F. Tow vendors shall provide proof of ownership or lease of approved
storage area.
G. Approved storage facility shall be accessible for storage 24 hours per
day, 365 days per year.
H. Storage facility shall be open to the public for vehicle recovery during
normal business hours on weekdays and for at least limited hours on
Saturdays.
§ 206-7 WALL CODE § 206-8
205:814
§ 206-9. Storage (police impounds).
I. Daily storage fees shall begin to accrue beginning 12:00 noon the
following day after vehicle enters storage.
J. Vehicles entering storage facilities after public retrieval hours on
Saturday or on Sundays shall not begin to accrue storage fees until
business hours begin on the following Monday, after 12:00 noon.
K. Tow vendors shall maintain computer records of all tows, services and
storage histories/fees to be available for Police Department inspection
at any time. Tow bill information should include all information as
necessary in conjunction with a police impound tow.
L. Storage fees shall be collected by the tow vendors within the
parameters set forth in this chapter.
A. All police-dictated impound tows shall be stored at the Wall Township
Police Department. On-scene officers shall advise operators in such
cases that tows are, in fact, impounds.
B. Said vehicle shall be stored in a space designated by the Chief of Police
at the Police Headquarters facility.
C. Upon placing impound vehicle in the police storage area, operators
shall ensure said vehicle is locked.
D. Tow operators shall respond to the police desk and turn over vehicle
keys along with a detailed bill of services rendered by the operator. Said
bill shall contain the following information:
(1) Services rendered.
(2) Costs incurred.
(3) Date and time of tow request.
(4) Date and time vehicle towed.
(5) Where vehicle towed from and where to.
(6) Name of operator performing tow.
(7) Date and time entered in storage.
(8) Make, model, year and license plate number of towed vehicle.
(9) General condition description of vehicle with any damage noted.
(10) Any other pertinent information as required by Police Department.
E. At the end of each rotation (i.e., two weeks, one months, etc.), the Police
Department will submit a purchase order to the Township Financial
Officer for all monies due to the tow vendor in connection with police
impound tows.
§ 206-8 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 206-9
205:815
§ 206-10. Licensing.
§ 206-11. Complaint procedure.
§ 206-12. General violations procedure.
F. Tow vendors will incur no storage fees for police vehicle impounds
storage at the Wall Township Police Department.
G. Police storage facility rates and terms will be consistent with that of the
nonimpound storage facilities, except that vehicle retrieval will only be
available during regular business hours, Monday through Friday,
excluding holidays.
A. Tow vendors who are interested in participating in the rotation
program, and meet all requirements listed within this chapter, shall
retrieve a license application from the Wall Township Police
Department.
B. Application should be complete and shall include all required proofs,
such as insurance documentation, equipment listing, employee
information, affirmative action affidavit and ownership/lease
information on storage facility.
C. Application to include name and address of applicant or applicants, and
if a corporation or other entities, the name and address of each officer,
director, partner or member thereof.
D. Name and address, including lot and block numbers, of wrecker
owner(s), if other than the applicant(s).
E. Location(s) of the premises, including Tax Map lot and block numbers at
which wreckers are principally domiciled or garaged.
F. A certification from the Tax Collector pursuant to § 202-2 of this Code.
G. Application, completed in full, shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police
for consideration.
H. An application fee of $250 shall be included to the Township of Wall. A
denial of the application will result in the return of the application fee.
A. Complaints shall be made to the Township Police Department on forms
designated by the Department for such purpose.
B. Complaints received by the Police Department by either tow vendors,
storage facilities or customers shall be investigated by officers of the
Wall Township Police Department Traffic Planning Unit.
C. Planning Unit officers shall complete full investigations of such
complaints and forward their findings and recommendations, in
writing, to the Chief of Police for any action to be taken.
§ 206-9 WALL CODE § 206-12
205:816
§ 206-13. Suspension/revocation of vendor license.
A. Generally, violations by towing vendors of this policy shall result in the
following consequences:
(1) First offense: written reprimand from the Chief of Police or his
designee.
(2) Second offense: suspension of tow privileges for one rotation.
(3) Third offense: revocation and return of Township towing license
and exclusion from towing rotation.
B. The Chief of Police reserves the right to enact suspension and/or
revocation in conjunction with any violation of this chapter or law
depending upon the severity of the violation. Accordingly, the penalties
set forth herein are only guidelines, and suspension and revocation may
occur on a first offense if sufficiently severe as determined by the Chief
of Police.
A. Any towing vendor license granted in accordance with this policy may
be suspended or revoked at the discretion of the Chief of Police for
violations to include the following:
(1) Misstatement or false representation in application.
(2) Failure to maintain insurance in accordance with this chapter.
(3) Violation of any other section of this chapter.
(4) Violation of any law or regulation of the Township of Wall/State of
New Jersey which would be deemed grounds for suspension/
revocation by the Chief of Police.
B. A towing vendor whose license has been suspended and/or revoked by
the Chief of Police may request, in writing, a hearing before the
Township Administrator in the event that said vendor does not believe
the suspension/revocation to be appropriate.
C. An informal hearing will be scheduled at the discretion of the
Administrator at which the towing vendor and Chief of Police (or his
designee) shall present their respective complaints.
D. The Administrator shall then rule as to his findings in regard to the
suspension/revocation. The decision of the Administrator shall be the
final resolution of the licensing matter.
§ 206-12 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 206-13
205:817
Chapter 215
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Off-street parking at auctions — See Ch. 68.
Parking of boat trailers — See Ch. 72.
Vehicles involved in hazardous materials
spills — See Ch. 125.
Fencing of junkyards — See Ch. 136.
Parking of certain vehicles — See Ch. 140,
§ 140-118.
Operation of vehicles at mining sites — See
Ch. 150, § 150-8A.
Parking of mobile homes — See Ch. 153.
Parking on highways to sell
merchandise — See Ch. 167, Art. I.
Junk vehicles — See Ch. 167, Art. I.
Recycling of used motor oil — See Ch. 191,
Art. II.
Traffic controls during street
construction — See Ch. 195, Art. II.
Motorized vehicles — See Ch. 218.
§ 206-13 WALL CODE § 206-13
205:818
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 215-1. Words and phrases.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle I of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes
of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used
herein.
§ 215-1.1. Applicability of Subtitle I of Title 39. [Added 10-10-2007
by Ord. No. 22-2007]
Upon written request of the owner of private property and upon the
adoption of a resolution of the Township Committee authorizing the
enforcement of the provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 on the subject
property, all provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of
the State of New Jersey shall be applicable to the subject property.
§ 215-2. Official time standard.
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter. they shall mean either
Eastern standard time or Eastern daylight saving time as may be in current
use in the Township.
§ 215-1 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-2
205:819

ARTICLE II
Parking Regulations
§ 215-3. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 215-4. Parking prohibited during state of emergency.
§ 215-5. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule I attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 215-6. Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule II
of any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in Schedule II attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 215-7. Stopping or standing prohibited during certain hours on
certain streets.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified in
Schedule III of any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary "EMERGENCY NO
PARKING" signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his absence,
the ranking police officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to
direct the posting of "EMERGENCY NO PARKING" signs when weather
conditions, accidents, fire or public celebrations, dictate or require the
avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free
flow of traffic. Notification that "EMERGENCY NO PARKING" signs are
being or will be posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any
vehicle which has been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
B. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this section
shall be deemed a nuisance and menace to the safe and proper
regulations of traffic and any police officer may provide for the removal
of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of removal
and storage which may result from such removal before regaining
possession of the vehicle.
C. The effectiveness of this section is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
§ 215-3 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-7
205:821
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule III attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 215-8. Parking time limited on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule IV at any time between the hours listed in Schedule IV of any day
(except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule IV attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 215-9. Parking prohibited during snowstorms.
§ 215-9.1. Stopping or standing prohibited in fire zone or lane.
[Added 7-9-2003 by Ord. No. 19-2003]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle in such a manner so as to obstruct a
fire lane, fire zone or fire hydrant.
§ 215-9.2. Municipal employee parking permits. [Added 12-19-2018
by Ord. No. 22-2018]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle, upon any cul-de-sac
in the Township during a snowstorm in which the accumulation of snow
has reached at least two inches.
B. The above parking prohibition shall remain in effect until a cul-de-sac
has been plowed from curbline to curbline and until parking will not
interfere with the operation of snowplows or the normal flow of traffic
on the cul-de-sac.
C. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this
subsection shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and
proper regulation of traffic and any police officer may provide for the
removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the
removal and storage which may result before regaining possession of
the vehicle.
A. There presently exists a designated area in the municipal building
complex that reserves parking spaces for Township employees. This
area shall be designated by signs or other form of distinguishing notice.
B. Municipal employees shall be issued a permit to be able to park in the
parking area designated for Township employees during normal
business hours Monday through Friday.
C. Any employee in possession of such permit shall forfeit the permit,
immediately, upon termination of employment with the Township.
D. The purpose of this section includes, without limitation, public safety
and efficiency.
§ 215-7 WALL CODE § 215-9.2
205:822
E. Any vehicle that is parked in the designated area without an
appropriate parking permit shall be in violation of this section and
subject to the violations of this section and subject to an initial parking
fine of $50.
F. Any subsequent violation, such violator shall be subject to a fine in the
amount of $100 for each additional offense.
G. The possession of a parking permit does not exempt the carrier from
obeying all traffic rules, regulations, and ordinances.
H. The Township Police Department may remove and impound any
vehicles which are parked in violation of this article. The cost of said
removal shall be borne by the vehicle owner or vehicle lessee.
§ 215-9.2 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-9.2
205:823

ARTICLE III
Traffic Regulations
§ 215-10. Trucks over 8,000 pounds GVWR (gross vehicle weight
rating) excluded from certain streets. [Amended 7-13-2011 by Ord.
No. 17-2011]
Trucks over 8,000 pounds GVWR (gross vehicle weight rating) are hereby
excluded from the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule V except
for the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets; Schedule V being
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 215-10.1. Low-speed vehicles. [Added 6-14-2006 by Ord. No.
17-2006]
§ 215-11. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VI attached to and
made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated.
§ 215-12. Through streets.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule VII attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
A. Low-speed vehicle defined. For purposes of this section, the term "lowspeed
vehicle" shall mean the type of vehicle defined and regulated by
P.L. 2006, c. 273. The term shall also include "neighborhood electric
vehicles (NEV)".
B. Operation prohibited. The operation of low-speed vehicles on any
roadway within the Township of Wall, except as provided in § 215-10.1C
hereof, be and the same is hereby prohibited.
C. Exception. The Township Committee may permit the operation of lowspeed
vehicles on roadways within a gated residential community, upon
receipt of a request from the Board of Directors of the homeowner's
association of such community and upon the review and advice of the
Police Department. The use of low-speed vehicles within gated,
residential communities shall be permitted only if it is determined that
the operation of such vehicles within a specific community will not be a
hazard to motorists, pedestrians or residents of the gated community.
Any such exception shall be established by ordinance and shall be set
forth in Subsection D hereof.
D. Exceptions enumerated:
(Reserved)
§ 215-10 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-12
205:825
installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through street
except where yield signs are provided for in the designations.
§ 215-13. Stop intersection.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule VIII attached to and made a part of this chapter are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided
therein.
§ 215-14. Yield intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule IX attached to and made a part of this chapter are hereby
designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed as provided
therein.
§ 215-15. Loading zones.
The locations described in Schedule X attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 215-16. Taxi stands.
The locations described in Schedule XI attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 215-17. Bus stops.
The locations described in Schedule XII attached to and made a part of this
chapter are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 215-18. Turn prohibitions.
A. Left turn prohibitions. No person shall make a left turn at any of the
locations described in Schedule XIII attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
B. U-turn prohibition. No person shall make a U-turn at any of the
locations described in Schedule XIV attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
C. No turns. No person shall make a turn at any of the locations described
in Schedule XV attached to and made a part of this chapter.
D. Lane reservations. No person shall turn or proceed at any of the
locations described in Schedule XIX attached to and made a part of this
chapter, except as the permissible direction of travel shall be
designated on the roadway as set forth in the schedule.
§ 215-12 WALL CODE § 215-19
205:826
§ 215-19. Speed limits.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XVI attached to and
made a part of this chapter shall have the speed limits designated in such
schedule for both directions of traffic.
§ 215-20. Temporary street closing.
A. The mayor or deputy mayor in the absence of the mayor. Is hereby
authorized upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police or the
Township Engineer, to order the closing of any street or portion thereof
to motor vehicle traffic on any day or days. whenever he finds that such
closing Is necessary for the preservation of the public safety. health or
welfare.
B. Any regulation adopted under the provisions of this section shall be
subject to the approval of the Commissioner of Transportation.
§ 215-19 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-20
205:827

ARTICLE IV
Penalty; Repealer
§ 215-21. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-10-2004 by Ord. No.
2-2004]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this ordinance or any
supplement thereto shall be subject to a fine of not more than $100,
excluding court costs, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or
both.
§ 215-22. Repealer.
All former traffic ordinances of the Township of Wall covered in this traffic
chapter are hereby repealed except that this repeal shall not affect or
prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any act done or
committed in violation of any ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking
effect of this chapter.
§ 215-21 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-22
205:829

ARTICLE V
Handicapped Parking
§ 215-23. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
PHYSICAL HANDICAP — A physical impairment which confines a person to
a wheelchair, causes a person to walk with difficulty or insecurity, affects
the sight or hearing to the extent that a person functioning in public areas
is insecure or exposed to danger, causes faulty coordination, or reduces
mobility, flexibility, coordination and perception to the extent that facilities
are needed to provide for the safety of that person.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Any building, structure, facility or complex used
by the general public or to which the general public is invited, including
but not limited to theaters, concert halls, auditoriums, museums, schools,
libraries, municipal facilities, recreation facilities, public transportation
terminals and stations, factories, office buildings, businesses, shopping
centers, hotels or motels and public eating places, whether privately or
publicly owned, except that this term shall not include one to four-family
private residences, warehouse storage areas or buildings conducting
hazardous occupancies that involve highly combustible, highly flammable or
explosive material.
§ 215-24. Handicapped parking spaces required.
The owners of all public buildings which provide parking spaces adjacent
to or used in conjunction with the public building shall, within 180 days
of the effective date hereof, provide for parking spaces for handicapped
persons in accordance with the guidelines set forth herein and in a location
and manner as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer. Any parking
facility with less than 16 existing spaces shall be exempt from the provisions
of this article. Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be
constructed according to the following guidelines:
A. A minimum of 1% of the total number of parking spaces in the parking
facility shall be used for handicapped parking, but there shall not be
less than two parking spaces in each such facility.
B. The location of the physically handicapped spaces shall be in an area of
the parking facility which is most accessible and approximate to the
building or buildings which the facility serves. The determination of
said location shall be made by the Code Enforcement Officer in
conjunction and consultation with the owner. In shopping centers and
other multistore facilities, the handicapped spaces shall be as near to
the flagship store as possible and/or at such other locations as may be
agreeable between the Code Enforcement Officer and the owner.
C. Each space or group of spaces shall be identified with a clearly visible
sign displaying the International Symbol of Access along with the
§ 215-23 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-24
205:831
§ 215-25. Vehicle identification markers.
§ 215-26. Violations and penalties.
Any person who parks a motor vehicle in a parking space which is restricted
for handicapped parking without a special vehicle identification card shall
be upon conviction fined the sum of $100 for the first such offense and
for subsequent offenses shall upon conviction be subject to a fine of at
least $100 and shall be subject to a period of community service upon such
terms and in such form as the court may deem appropriate, or both, at the
discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
following words: "These Spaces Reserved for Physically Handicapped
Only. Special Vehicle Identification Required." The lines designating the
area shall be painted in fluorescent yellow paint, and the center of the
space shall have painted thereon the capital letter "H." On or before
June 1, 1991, all signs identifying handicapped parking spaces shall
also state the penalties which may be imposed for a violation, pursuant
to the requirements of N.J.S.A. 39:4-198.
D. Each space shall be 12 feet wide to allow room for persons in
wheelchairs or on braces or crutches to get in or out of either side of the
automobile on a level paved surface suitable for wheeling and walking.
E. Where possible, such spaces shall be located so that persons in
wheelchairs or using braces or crutches are not compelled to wheel or
walk behind parked cars.
F. Where applicable, curb ramps shall be provided to permit handicapped
people access from parking area to sidewalk.
A. No person shall park a vehicle in any parking space designated and
marked as being set aside for the physically handicapped in any parking
facility unless said vehicle shall have affixed thereto a special
handicapped vehicle identification certificate or marker issued by the
New Jersey Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles, the Township
Clerk, or by the appropriate official or agency of another state or local
government. Parking in a handicapped space without the aforesaid
vehicle identification shall create a rebuttable presumption that use of
the space was not for the physically handicapped.
B. The Township Clerk shall issue free of charge a Township special
vehicle identification marker to any physically disabled person who may
not qualify for such identification under N.J.S.A. 39:4-204 but who does
qualify under the definition of "physical handicap" in § 215-23 hereof. A
physician's certification shall be necessary to establish the qualifying
status of each applicant.
§ 215-24 WALL CODE § 215-26
205:832
ARTICLE VI
Crosswalks
§ 215-27. Pedestrian crosswalks.
§ 215-28. Mid-block crosswalks.
A. Pedestrian crosswalks shall be established in the locations described in
Schedule XVII attached to and made a part of this chapter.
B. "Pedestrian Crossing" signs shall be installed in both directions of
traffic immediately adjacent to each crosswalk and 250 feet from each
crosswalk, in both directions.
C. Pedestrian crossings shall be marked in the manner approved by the
New Jersey Department of Transportation.
A. Mid-block crosswalks shall be established in the locations described in
Schedule XX, attached to and made a part of this chapter.
B. Pedestrian crossings shall be marked in the manner approved by the
New Jersey Department of Transportation.
§ 215-27 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-28
205:833

ARTICLE VII
No-Passing Zones
§ 215-29. No-passing zones established.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XVIII attached to and
made a part of this chapter shall be designated as no-passing zones, and no
driver of any vehicle shall cross any yellow line on his side of the road for
the purpose of passing another vehicle in any such zone.
§ 215-29 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-29
205:835

ARTICLE VIII
Unlicensed Motor-Driven Vehicles
§ 215-30. Restrictions on use.
No person shall operate any unlicensed motor vehicle or conveyance,
including but not limited to snowmobiles; two-wheel vehicles known as
minibikes; trail bikes; motor scooters; and four-wheel motor vehicles known
as go carts, under the following circumstances:
§ 215-31. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to police and emergency vehicles.
§ 215-32. Confiscation of vehicle.
The Police Department shall confiscate the unlicensed vehicle operated in
a prohibited area or in a prohibited manner described in § 215-30. The
unlicensed vehicle shall be returned to the owner thereof upon payment of
any fine imposed as a result of a violation of this article or upon the direction
of any court, except that a second or subsequent violation shall result in the
forfeiture of such vehicle.
§ 215-32.1. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-11-2002 by Ord. No.
49-2002]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be, upon
conviction, fined the sum of $1,000 and shall be subject to a period of
community service upon such terms and in such form as the court may deem
appropriate.
A. On the private property of another without the express permission of
the owner or occupant of the property.
B. On any public grounds or lands owned by the Township, excluding
streets the use of which is expressly provided for by the New Jersey
statutes.
C. In a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise so as to
disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons.
D. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger or be
likely to endanger the safety or property of any person, including the
operator of the vehicle.
§ 215-30 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-32.1
205:837

ARTICLE IX
Schedules
§ 215-33. Schedule I: No Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-5, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Sides Location
Allaire Road Both From Route 34 to Allenwood
Road
Baileys Corner Road
[Added 6-22-2016 by
Ord. No. 6-2016]
Both From Allaire Road to
Eighteenth Avenue
Bass Point Road
[Added 4-24-2013 by
Ord. No. 9-2013]
North Entire length
Belmar Boulevard Both From Route No. 35 to 630 feet
west of Route No. 35
Bowman Avenue West from State
Highway No. 33
Entire length
Carmerville Road Cul-de-sac Southerly end of Carmerville
Road
Conover Place [Added
4-24-2013 by Ord.
No. 9-2013]
South Entire length
Eighth Avenue West From Sea Girt Avenue to Route
No. 71
Elm Street Both Entire length
Fifth Avenue South From Route 71 to Meadow
Road
Fourth Avenue South From its eastern end to
Cottage Place
Gully Road Both From Remsen's Mill Road to
Township of Wall - Township of
Neptune Corporate Line
Kelly Lane West from State
Highway No. 33
From Highway No. 33, the
entire length of Kelly Lane
Marconi Road Both From Brighton Avenue to
County Bridge No. W55.
Mott Lane [Added
4-24-2013 by Ord.
No. 9-2013]
Both Entire length
§ 215-33 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-33
205:839
Name of Street Sides Location
M Street [Added
9-9-2009 by Ord. No.
23-2009]
Cul-de-sac Southerly end of M Street
New Bedford Road Both 18th Avenue to New Jersey
Route No. 38
New Bedford Road Both Allaire Road to State Highway
No. 35
New Bedford Road
[Added 6-22-2016 by
Ord. No. 6-2016]
East From Ocean Road to Route 35
Old Bridge Road West Between Route 70 and the
dead end of Old Bridge Road at
the Manasquan River
Old Mill Road Both Between Route 35 and the
Spring Lake Heights boundary
line
Old Mill Road East From the Spring Lake Heights
boundary to West Chicago
Boulevard
Paynters Road Both From the intersection of
Lakewood Road and running in
a northerly direction on
Paynters Road to a point
opposite utility pole No.
BT-6354-WL.
People Street West From 18th Avenue to end of
People Street
Rivercrest Lane
[Added 4-24-2013 by
Ord. No. 9-2013]
Both Entire length
Schoolhouse Road
[Added 6-22-2016 by
Ord. No. 6-2016]
Both From Belmar Boulevard to
Neptune Border
Schoolhouse Road Both From Garden State Parkway
Bridge to Shark River Bridge
Sea Girt Avenue North From Eighth Avenue to 300
feet west of Eighth Avenue
Second Avenue South From Route 71 to People Street
Sixth Avenue South From Camp Meeting Street to
Cottage Place
State Highway No. 34 Both Entire length, including ramps
Third Avenue South From Route 71 to People Street
§ 215-33 WALL CODE § 215-33
205:840
Name of Street Sides Location
Warren Avenue Both Between Route 35 east to the
Spring Lake Heights boundary
line on Warren Avenue
West Hurley Pond Road Both From Route 34, west to the
Township Boundary
§ 215-34. Schedule II: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-6, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours specified upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
Bergen Place Both 8:00 p.m. to 4:00
a.m.
Eighth Avenue to
Terrace Place
Brooklyn
Boulevard
Both 8:00 p.m. to 4:00
a.m.
Eighth Avenue to
Terrace Place
Cambridge Drive Both 8:00 p.m. to 4:00
a.m.
Entire length
Homestead Road Both 8:00 p.m. to 4:00
a.m.
Eighth Avenue to end
of Homestead Road
Hurley Pond
Road
Both 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
a.m.
New Bedford Road to
N.J. Route No. 38
"I" Street East 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
From 17th Avenue
south on "I" Street
for a distance of
approximately 210
feet
Jefferson Avenue Both 9:00 p.m. to 4:00
a.m.
Meeting House Road
to Philadelphia
Avenue
Meeting House
Road
Both 8:00 p.m. to 4:00
a.m.
Atlantic Avenue to
N.J. Route No. 35
Oxford Lane Both 8:00 p.m. to 4:00
a.m.
Entire length
Quackenbush
Boulevard
Both 8:00 p.m. to 4:00
a.m.
Eight Avenue to
Terrace Place
River Road Both 8:00 p.m. to 4:00
a.m.
Old Bridge Road to a
point 1,000 feet
north of Old Bridge
Road
§ 215-33 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-34
205:841
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
Rue de la Port Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m. on days when
school is in session.
Entire length
Taft Street West 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
Monmouth Boulevard
to Washington
Avenue
Terrace Place Both 8:00 p.m. to 4:00
a.m.
West Chicago
Boulevard to end of
Terrace Place
Wall Church Road Both 8:00 p.m. to 4:00
a.m.
New Bedford Road to
Spring Lake Heights
Boundary
West Chicago
Boulevard
Both 8:00 p.m. to 4:00
a.m.
Eighth Avenue to
Village Road
§ 215-35. Schedule III: No Stopping or Standing.
In accordance with provisions of § 215-7, no person shall stop or stand a
vehicle upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of
Street Location and Sides Hours
Allaire Road Entire length All hours
Allaire Road and
Atlantic Avenue
(Route 524 and
524 Spur)
Entire length All hours
Asbury Road and
Wyckoff Road
Entire length All hours
Belmar
Boulevard
Entire length All hours
Eighteenth
Avenue
Entire length -both sides All hours
Eighth Avenue From Sea Girt Avenue to Route 71 -
west side
All hours
Herbertsville
Road
Entire length All hours
Meetinghouse
Road
From Sea Girt Avenue to Atlantic
Avenue - both sides
Anytime
Megill Road From Belmar Boulevard to State
Highway 34 - both sides
All hours
§ 215-34 WALL CODE § 215-35
205:842
Name of
Street Location and Sides Hours
New Bedford
Road
From State Highway 38 to State
Highway 35 - both sides
Anytime
Ocean Road From State Highway 35 to the Spring
Lake Heights border southbound side
Anytime
Old Bridge Road From the Wall Township/Brielle
Borough boundary to State Highway
70 - west side
All hours
Old Mill Road From 18th Avenue to State Highway
35 - both sides
Anytime
Ramshorn Drive Entire length excluding the following: Anytime
a. A point between 25 feet to 240
feet south from Paynters Road on
the northbound side
b. A point between 583 feet to 1,444
feet north from Paynters Road on
the northbound side
c. A point between 3,120 feet to
3,680 feet north from Paynters
Road on the northbound side
Route 18 The entire length of the highway
inclusive of all ramps and connections
on both sides of the road within the
corporate boundary of the Township
of Wall
Anytime
Route 34 The entire length of the highway
inclusive of all ramps and connections
on both sides of the road within the
corporate boundary of the Township
of Wall
Anytime
Route 35 The entire length of the highway
inclusive of all ramps and connections
on both sides of the road within the
corporate boundary of the Township
of Wall
Anytime
Route 70 The entire length of the highway
inclusive of all ramps and connections
on both sides of the road within the
corporate boundary of the Township
of Wall
Anytime
§ 215-35 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-35
205:843
Name of
Street Location and Sides Hours
Route 71 The entire length of the highway
inclusive of all ramps and
connections on both sides of the road
within the corporate boundary of the
Township of Wall
Anytime
Squankum Road
and Road
Entire length All hours
Allenwood -
Lakewood
Warren Avenue Entire length All hours
West 18th
Avenue
Entire length All hours
Wyckoff Road/
Shafto Road
From State Highway 34 to the Wall
Township/Tinton Falls boundary both
sides
All hours
§ 215-36. Schedule IV: Parking Time Limited.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-8, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time shown on any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of
Street Side Time Limit/Hours Location
(Reserved)
§ 215-37. Schedule V: Trucks over 8,000 Pounds GVWR (Gross
Vehicle Weight Rating). [Amended 7-13-2011 by Ord. No. 17-2011]
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-10, trucks over 8,000 pounds
GVWR (gross vehicle weight rating) are excluded from the following
described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Location
Adrienne Road Between Belmar Boulevard and Marconi
Road
Allenwood Road From Route 34 to Route 38
Church Street From the Borough of Manasquan/Township of
Wall border west to Route 35
Holly Boulevard Between Route 34 and Ramshorn Drive
Hurley Pond Road East From Route 38 to New Bedford Road
Lakewood Road From a point 95 feet west of the westerly
curbline of Route 34 to Ramshorn Drive
§ 215-35 WALL CODE § 215-37
205:844
Name of Street Location
Lakewood Road From the Township of Wall/Borough of
Manasquan border to Route 35
Marconi Road Between Belmar Boulevard and Brighton
Avenue
Megill Road From Wyckoff Road to Route 34
Mohegan Road From the Township of Wall/Borough of
Manasquan border to Lenape Trail
Monmouth Boulevard Between Belmar Boulevard and Marconi
Road
New Bedford Road From 18th Avenue to Allaire Road
Paynters Road From a point 115 feet west of the westerly
curbline of Route 34 to Ramshorn Drive
Ramshorn Drive Between Old Bridge Road and Atlantic
Avenue
Ridgewood Road From Route 34 to Allenwood Road
Waterview Way [Added
3-28-2018 by Ord. No.
4-2018]
Between Gully Road and Belmar Boulevard
Wyckoff Road From Route 34 to Belmar Boulevard
§ 215-38. Schedule VI: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-11, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets:
Name of Street Direction Location
New Bedford Road South From a point 325 feet northwest
of the westerly curbline of Route
35 to the westerly curbline of
Route 35
Ridgewood Road
[Added 7-10-2002 by
Ord. No. 23-2002]
East From a point 270 feet southeast of
the westerly curbline of Route 34
to the westerly curbline of Route
34
Ridgewood Road
[Added 3-9-2005 by
Ord. No. 7-2005]
Southeasterly Between Allenwood Road (CR No.
524) and Route 34
§ 215-39. Schedule VII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-12, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop
signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the
§ 215-37 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-39
205:845
through street except where yield signs having sides 36 inches in length are
provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Adrienne Road -
Marconi Road
Between Belmar Boulevard and N.J. Route 18
Freeway
Algonkin Trail a. Between Old Bridge Road and Lakewood Road
b. Between Lakewood Road and Church Street
Alicia Drive Between Frances Drive and Williams Drive
Allenwood Road a. Between Allaire Road and N.J. Route 34
b. Between N.J. Route 34 and N.J. Route 38
c. Between N.J. Route 38 and Belmar Boulevard
Bay Plaza Between Belmar Boulevard and Marconi Road
Bayshore Court
[Added 9-8-2004 by
Ord. No. 26-2004]
Entire length
Bellewood Avenue Between 18th Avenue (County Road 30) and Glenn
Street
Boxwood Drive Between Cottonwood Drive and Old Mill Road
Brandon Road Between Allenwood Road and its westerly
terminus
Brighton Avenue Between Marconi Road and Gully Road
Carmerville Road Between Hurley Pond Road and a point 50 feet
south of the southerly curbline of Sands Road
Celeste Drive Between 18th Avenue (CR No. 30) and a point 50
feet east of the easterly curbline of Concord Drive
Church Street Between Route 35 and the Township of Wall -
Borough of Manasquan Corporate Line
Cleveland Avenue Between Belmar Boulevard (County Road 18) and
Pierce Street
Clinton Avenue Between Belmar Boulevard and a point 50 feet
south of the southerly curbline of Beverly Street
Concord Drive Between Baileys Corner Road and Celeste Drive
Cottage Place Between Fifth Avenue and a point 50 feet south of
the southerly curbline of Third Avenue
Crestview Road Between Lenape Trail and Oak Road
Curtis Avenue Between Route 35 and Route 71
Diana Road Between Marconi Road and Evans Road
Dubac Road Entire length
Edgemere Road Between Belmar Boulevard and Shore Drive
§ 215-39 WALL CODE § 215-39
205:846
Name of Street Limits
Evans Road Between Diana Road and a point 50 feet south of
the southerly curbline of Hadley Avenue
Fifth Avenue Between Meadow Road and Route 71
Fourth Avenue Between Cottage Place and Route 71
Glendola Road Between Monmouth Boulevard and Belmar
Boulevard
Gully Road Between Belmar Boulevard and the Township of
Wall - Township of Neptune corporate line
Hilltop Drive Between "M" Street and Maplewood Road
Holly Boulevard a. Between Riverside Terrace and Ramshorn Drive
b. Between Ramshorn Drive and N.J. Route 34
Hurley Pond Road a. Between Monmouth Boulevard and Allenwood
Road
b. Between Allenwood Road and N.J. Route 34
Juliet Drive Between Belmar Boulevard and Marconi Road
Lakewood Road a. Between Ramshorn Drive and N.J. Route 34
b. Between N.J. Route 34 and N.J. Route 35
c. Between N.J. Route 35 and the Township of Wall
- Borough of Manasquan corporate line
Lakewood Road From Ramshorn Drive westerly to its end at the
Manasquan River
Laurel Avenue Between Route N.J. 35 and Old Mill Road
Lenape Trail Between Algonkin Trail and Apache Road
Lenape Trail Between Lakewood Road and Church Street
Lincoln Avenue-
Woolley Road
Between New Bedford Road and Belmar Boulevard
Magnolia Avenue Between Old Mill Road and Village Road
Marconi Road a. Between N.J. Route 38 and Belmar Boulevard
b. Between Belmar Boulevard and Adrienne Road
Marigold Avenue Between Ramshorn Drive and Riverside Terrace
Meeting House Road -
Bailey Corner Road
a. Between Atlantic Avenue and Route 35
b. Between Route 35 and Allaire Road
c. Between Allaire Road and Eighteenth Avenue
Monmouth Boulevard a. Between Hurley Pond Road and Belmar
Boulevard
b. Between Belmar Boulevard and Marconi Road
§ 215-39 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-39
205:847
Name of Street Limits
Morris Lane Between Arthur Street and northerly terminus of
Morris Lane
Myrtle Avenue Between Ramshorn Drive and Riverside Terrace
Nan Street Entire length
New Bedford Road a. Between Ocean Road and N.J. Route 35
b. Between N.J. Route 35 and Allaire Road
c. Between Allaire Road and N.J. Route 38
d. Between N.J. Route 38 and Belmar Boulevard.
Newark Avenue a. Between Pennsylvania Avenue and Atlantic
Avenue (County Road 524)
b. Between Atlantic Avenue (County Road 524) and
Wildwood Avenue
Nowels Road - Louise
Court
Between Sharpe Road and Belmar Boulevard
Oak Road Between Algonkin Trail and the westerly terminus
of Oak Road
Ocean Road a. Between Bailey Corner Road and N.J. Route 35
b. Between N.J. Route 35 and the Township of Wall
- Borough of Spring Lake Heights corporate line
Old Mill Road a. Between Sea Girt Avenue and the Township of
Wall - Borough of Spring Lake Heights corporate
line
b. Between N.J. Route 35 and 18th Avenue
c. Between 18th Avenue and N.J. Route 38
Pascal Place Between State Highway No. 138 and a point 50
feet south of the southerly curbline of Janet Place
Paynters Road Between Lakewood Road and Route 34
Philadelphia Avenue a. Between Brielle Place and Atlantic Avenue
(County Road 524)
b. Between Atlantic Avenue (County Road 524) and
Wildwood Avenue
Philadelphia Avenue -
Wildwood Avenue -
Camden Avenue
Avenue
a. Between Atlantic Avenue and Atlantic Avenue -
Newark Avenue b. Between Atlantic Avenue and
Wildwood
Ramshorn Drive Between Old Bridge Road and Atlantic Avenue
River Road Between Old Bridge Road and Bass Point Road
Riverside Terrace From Lakewood Road north to its dead end
Romano Boulevard Between Sharpe Road and Brighton Avenue
§ 215-39 WALL CODE § 215-39
205:848
Name of Street Limits
Ruta Boulevard Between Sharpe Road and Brighton Avenue
Salem Avenue Between Diana Road and Shore Drive
Sea Grit Avenue a. Between Bailey Corner Road and Route 35
b. Between Route 35 and Eighth Avenue
Second Avenue Between People Street and Route N.J. 71
Seventeenth Avenue a. Between Route 35 and Route 71
b. Between Route 71 and the Township of Wall -
Borough of South Belmar corporate line
Shore Drive Between Evans Road and Bay Plaza
Sixth Avenue Between Central Avenue and Camp Meeting Street
Spring Street Between N.J. Route 34 and Birchwood Lane
Summit Road Between Lenape Trail and Oak Road
Terrace Place Entire length south of West Chicago Boulevard
Third Avenue Between Cottage Place and N.J. Route 71
Tilton Corner Road Between Atlantic Avenue and Bailey Corner Road
Voorhees Avenue Between Belmar Boulevard and Bertrand Place
Wall Church Road Between New Bedford Road and N.J. Route 35
Washington Avenue Between Belmar Boulevard (County Road 18) and
Buchanan Street
Washington Avenue Between Belmar Boulevard and Wilson Street
West Chicago
Boulevard
a. Between Old Mill Road and terminus
b. Between Old Mill Road and 8th Avenue
West Chicago
Boulevard
Between Old Mill Road and 8th Avenue
West Hurley Pond
Road
Between N.J. Route 34 and the Township of Wall -
Township of Howell corporate line
West Magnolia Between Old Mill Road and terminus
Williamsburg Drive Between Baileys Corner Road and westerly
terminus of Williamsburg Drive
Windsor Road Between Allenwood Road and its westerly
terminus
Woodfield Avenue Between Allenwood Road and Belmar Boulevard
Woodland Avenue Between Maplewood Road and Route N.J. 71
§ 215-39 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-40
205:849
§ 215-40. Schedule VIII: Stop Intersections. [Amended 9-8-2004 by
Ord. No. 26-2004; 11-15-2014 by Ord. No. 24-2014]
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-13, the following intersections
are hereby designated as stop intersections:
Intersection Stop Sign On
1st Avenue and Atlantic Avenue 1st Avenue, southbound approach
3rd Avenue and Cottage Place 3rd Avenue, westbound approach
4th Avenue and Cottage Place 4th Avenue, westbound approach
4th Avenue and State Route 71 4th Avenue, eastbound approach
5th Avenue and America Street America Street, northbound and
southbound approach
5th Avenue and Campmeeting Street Campmeeting Street, northbound
and southbound approach
5th Avenue and Central Avenue Central Avenue, southbound
approach
5th Avenue and Cottage Place Cottage Place, northbound approach
5th Avenue and Meadow Road 5th Avenue, westbound approach
5th Avenue and People Street People Street, northbound and
southbound approach
5th Avenue and World Street World Street, northbound and
southbound approach
6th Avenue and America Street America Street, southbound
approach
6th Avenue and Campmeeting Street 6th Avenue, eastbound approach
6th Avenue and Central Avenue Central Avenue, westbound
approach
6th Avenue and People Street People Street, southbound approach
6th Avenue and World Street World Street, southbound approach
17th Street and K Street K Street, northbound approach
18th Avenue and Allenwood Road 18th Avenue, eastbound and
westbound approach
Ace Drive and 18th Avenue Ace Drive, southbound approach
Adams Street and New Jersey
Avenue
New Jersey Avenue, northbound and
southbound approach
Adrienne Road and Marconi Road Adrienne Road, northbound
approach
§ 215-40 WALL CODE § 215-40
205:850
Intersection Stop Sign On
Adrienne Road and Pomerton Road Pomerton Road, northbound and
westbound approach
Alexandra Court and Squankum
Allenwood Road
Alexandra Court, northbound
approach
Algonkin Trail and Church Street Algonkin Trail, northbound
approach
Algonkin Trail and Lakewood Road Algonkin Trail, southbound
approach
Algonkin Trail and Oak Road Oak Road, westbound approach
Algonkin Trail and Old Bridge Road Algonkin Trail, southbound
approach
Alicia Drive and Brighton Avenue Alicia Drive, southbound approach
Alicia Drive and Frances Drive Alicia Drive, eastbound approach
Allaire Road and Allenwood Road Allaire Road, eastbound and
westbound approach
Allaire Road and Atlantic Avenue Allaire Road, westbound approach
Allaire Road and Fairway Drive Fairway Drive, northbound approach
Allaire Road and Nassau Drive Nassau Drive, northbound approach
Allen Way and Ramshorn Drive Allen Way, eastbound approach
Allen Way and River Road Allen Way, westbound approach
Allenwood-Lakewood Road and
Squankum Allenwood Road
Allenwood-Lakewood Road,
northbound approach
Allenwood Lakewood Road and West
Side Drive
Allenwood Lakewood Road,
westbound approach
Allenwood Road and Atlantic Avenue Allenwood Road, westbound
approach
Allenwood Road and Gully Road Allenwood Road, westbound
approach
Allenwood Road and Leumas
Terrace
Leumas Terrace, eastbound
approach
Allenwood Road and Rambling Hill
Court
Rambling Hill Court, northbound
approach
Allenwood Road and Sleepy Hollow
Court
Sleepy Hollow Court, eastbound
approach
Ambassador Court and Belmar
Boulevard
Ambassador Court, northbound
approach
America Street and 2nd Avenue American Street, northbound and
southbound approach
America Street and 3rd Avenue America Street, northbound and
southbound approach
§ 215-40 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-40
205:851
Intersection Stop Sign On
America Street and 4th Avenue America Street, northbound and
southbound approach
America Street and 6th Avenue America Street, northbound
approach
America Street and 18th Avenue America Street, northbound
approach
Anne Terrace and Bailey Road Anne Terrace, eastbound approach
Anne Terrace and Maxwell Drive Maxwell Drive, eastbound and
northbound approach
Anne Terrace and New Bedford
Road
Anne Terrace, westbound approach
Appache Road and State Route 35 Appache Road, westbound approach
Apache Road and West Union Lane West Union Lane
Apple Ridge Circle and Old Farm
Road
Old Farm Road, westbound
approach
Apple Street and Marigold Avenue Apple Street, southbound approach
Apple Street and Ramshorn Drive Apple Street, eastbound approach
Arnold Avenue and Carmerville
Road
Arnold Avenue, westbound approach
Arthur Street and Lincoln Avenue Arthur Street, eastbound approach
Arthur Street and Monmouth
Boulevard
Arthur Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
Arthur Street and Morris Lane Arthur Street, northbound approach
Autumn Drive and Lakewood Road Autumn Drive, northbound approach
Azalea Avenue and Laurel Avenue Azalea Avenue, northbound and
southbound approach
Azalea Avenue and Magnolia Avenue Azalea Avenue, northbound
approach
Azalea Avenue and Sea Girt Avenue Azalea Avenue, southbound
approach
Azure Drive and Martin Road Azure Drive, eastbound and
southbound approach
Bailey Road and Anne Terrace Anne Terrace
Bailey Road and Belmar Boulevard Bailey Road, northbound approach
Bailey Road and State Route 138 Bailey Road, southbound approach
Bailey's Corner Road and 18th
Avenue
Bailey's Corner Road, northbound
approach
Bakers Place and Collier Road Bakers Place, northbound approach
Barbara Lynn and 8th Avenue Barbara Lynn, eastbound approach
§ 215-40 WALL CODE § 215-40
205:852
Intersection Stop Sign On
Barkalow Road and Belmar
Boulevard
Barkalow Road, northbound
approach
Bay Plaza and Belmar Boulevard Bay Plaza, southbound approach
Bay Plaza and Hillview Avenue Hillview Avenue, eastbound and
westbound approach
Bay Plaza and Pomerton Road Pomerton Road, eastbound and
westbound approach
Bay Plaza and Shore Drive Bay Plaza, northbound approach
Bayshore Court and Marietta Drive
[Added 9-8-2004 by Ord. No.
26-2004]
Bayshore Court
Bay Shore Court and State Route
138
Bay Shore Court, northbound
approach
Bedford Corner Lane and Maxwell
Drive
Maxwell Drive
Bedford Corners Lane and New
Bedford Road
Bedford Corners Lane, westbound
approach
Beech Street and Holly Boulevard Beech Street, northbound and
southbound approach
Beech Street and Marigold Avenue Beech Street, northbound and
southbound approach
Beech Street and Myrtle Avenue Beech Street, northbound and
southbound approach
Begonia Avenue and Sea Girt
Avenue
Begonia Avenue, southbound
approach
Begonia Avenue and W. Magnolia
Avenue
Begonia Avenue, northbound
approach
Bellewood Avenue and 18th Avenue Bellewood Avenue, southbound
approach
Belmar Boulevard and Allenwood
Road
Allenwood Road, eastbound and
westbound approach
Belmar Boulevard and Gully Road Gully Road, southbound approach
Belmar Boulevard and Marion Street Marion Street, southbound
approach
Belmar Boulevard and North
Marconi Road
North Marconi Road, southbound
approach
Bennett Lane and Church Street Bennett Lane, westbound approach
Bentz Road and New Bedford Road Bentz Road, eastbound approach
Bergen Place and 8th Avenue Bergen Place, eastbound approach
Bergen Place and Terrace Place Bergen Place, eastbound approach
§ 215-40 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-40
205:853
Intersection Stop Sign On
Bernadette Court and Meeting
House Road
Bernadette Court, eastbound
approach
Beverly Street and Clinton Avenue Beverly Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
Beverly Street and Voorhees Avenue Beverly Street, eastbound approach
Birdsall Road and Belmar Boulevard Birdsall Road, northbound approach
Birch Place and Ramshorn Drive Birch Place, southbound approach
Birchwood Lane and Belmar
Boulevard
Birchwood Lane, northbound
approach
Birchwood Lane and Spring Street Spring Street
Blacksmith Row and Collier Road Blacksmith Row, southbound
approach
Blacksmith Row and Heathrow Lane Heathrow Lane, southbound
approach
Blacksmith Row and Morningstar
Road
Blacksmith Row, northbound
approach
Blansing Road and Atlantic Avenue Blansing Road, southbound
approach
Bowman Avenue and State Route 34 Bowman Avenue, southbound
approach
Boxwood Drive and Old Mill Road Boxwood Drive, eastbound approach
Boxwood Drive and Redwood Drive Redwood Drive, southbound
approach
Boxwood Drive and Spruce Drive Spruce Drive, southbound approach
Bradford Run and New Bedford
Road
Bradford Run, westbound approach
Brandon Road and Dunhill Way Dunhill Way, westbound approach
Brandon Road and Randolph Way Brandon Road, eastbound approach
Briarwood Avenue and W. Chicago
Boulevard
Briarwood Avenue, northbound
approach
Brinley Road and Allenwood Road Brinley Road, westbound approach
Broad Street and State Route 34 Broad Street, westbound approach
Brooklyn Boulevard and 8th Avenue Brooklyn Boulevard, eastbound
approach
Brooklyn Boulevard and Terrace
Place
Brooklyn Boulevard, westbound
approach
Buchanan Street and Cleveland
Avenue
Buchanan Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
§ 215-40 WALL CODE § 215-40
205:854
Intersection Stop Sign On
Buchanan Street and Lincoln
Avenue
Buchanan Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
Buchanan Street and Monmouth
Boulevard
Buchanan Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
Butler Way and Waterview Way Butler Way, northbound and
westbound approach
Camden Avenue and Atlantic Avenue Camden Avenue, northbound and
southbound approach
Camden Avenue and New Brunswick
Avenue Constitution Way and Colony
Court
New Brunswick Avenue Constitution
Colony Court northbound
Cammar Drive and Randolph Way Cammar Drive, westbound approach
Campbell Road and Allaire Road Campbell Road, southbound
approach
Campmeeting Street and 2nd Avenue Campmeeting Street, southbound
approach
Campmeeting Street and 3rd Avenue Campmeeting Street, northbound
and southbound approach
Campmeeting Street and 4th Avenue 4th Avenue, southbound approach
Campmeeting Street and 4th Avenue Campmeeting Street, northbound
approach
Campmeeting Street and 18th
Avenue
Campmeeting Street, northbound
approach
Campus Parkway and Private Road Private Road, eastbound approach
Campus Parkway and Route 33 Campus Parkway
Candlewood Lane and Old Mill Road Candlewood Lane, westbound
approach
Cardinal Drive and Atlantic Avenue Cardinal Drive, northbound
approach
Carmerville Road and West Hurley
Pond Road
Carmerville Road, northbound
approach
Carriage Hill Drive and 18th Avenue Carriage Hill Drive, northbound
approach
Carriage Hill Drive and Celeste
Drive
Carriage Hill Drive, southbound
approach
Castleton Court and Ramshorn
Drive
Castleton Court, westbound
approach
Catherine Street and State Route 34 Catherine Street, southbound
approach
§ 215-40 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-40
205:855
Intersection Stop Sign On
Cedar Street and Holly Boulevard Cedar Street, northbound and
southbound approach
Cedar Street and Lakewood Road Cedar Street, southbound approach
Cedar Street and Marigold Avenue Cedar Street, southbound approach
Celeste Drive and 18th Avenue Celeste Drive, northbound approach
Central Avenue and 5th Avenue Central Avenue, northbound
approach
Central Avenue and 18th Avenue Central Avenue, northbound
approach
Cherry Street and Holly Boulevard Cherry Street, southbound approach
Cherry Street and Marigold Avenue Cherry Street, northbound approach
Cherry Street and Myrtle Avenue Cherry Street, northbound and
southbound approach
Cherry Street and Ramshorn Drive Cherry Street, eastbound approach
Christie Lane and Sea Girt Avenue Christie Lane, northbound approach
Church Street and Waterview Road Waterview Road, northbound
approach
Clayton Road and Hinck Drive Hinck Drive
Cleveland Avenue and Belmar
Boulevard
Cleveland Avenue, northbound
approach
Clinton Avenue and Belmar
Boulevard
Clinton Avenue, northbound
approach
Club Drive and State Route 138 Club Drive, westbound approach
Club Drive and Tennis Court Club Drive, eastbound approach
Colonial Drive and Bailey's Corner
Drive
Colonial Drive, eastbound approach
Colonial Drive and York Way York Way
Colony Court and Constitution Way Colony Way, northbound approach
Colts Foot Trail and Tamarack Road Colts Foot Trail, southbound
approach
Colts Foot Trail and Waterview Road Colts Foot Trial, northbound
approach
Concord Drive and Bailey's Corner
Road
Concord Drive, eastbound approach
Concord Drive and Celeste Drive Concord Drive, northbound
approach
Concord Drive and Forge Place Forge Place, northbound approach
Concord Drive and Lexington Drive Lexington Drive, northbound
approach
§ 215-40 WALL CODE § 215-40
205:856
Intersection Stop Sign On
Conover Place and River Road Conover Place, eastbound approach
Constance Drive and Nan Street Constance Drive, southbound
approach
Constitution Way and Governours
Crossing
Constitution Way, westbound
approach
Cooper Boulevard and Morningstar
Road
Cooper Boulevard, eastbound
approach
Cooper Boulevard and Sparrowbush
Lane
Sparrowbush Lane, southbound
approach
Coral Way and Bay Plaza Coral Way, eastbound approach
Coral Way and Marconi Road Coral Way, westbound approach
Cottage Place and 6th Avenue Cottage Place, northbound and
southbound approach
Cottage Place and 18th Avenue Cottage Place, northbound approach
Cottonwood Drive and W. Magnolia
Avenue
Cottonwood Drive, southbound
approach
Courtland Drive and Orchard Crest
Drive
Courtland Drive, eastbound
approach
Crabapple Drive and Orchard Crest
Boulevard
Crabapple Drive, eastbound
approach
Crabapple Drive and Pippin Drive Crabapple Drive, northbound
approach
Crabtree Lane and Wall Church
Road
Crabtree Lane, northbound and
southbound approach
Crestview Road and Lenape Trail Crestview Road, northbound and
southbound approach
Curriers Place and Collier Road
(northern intersection)
Curriers Place, westbound approach
Curriers Place and Collier Road
(southern intersection)
Curriers Place, westbound approach
Curtis Avenue and State Route 71 Curtis Avenue, eastbound approach
Cypress Street and Holly Boulevard Cypress Street, northbound and
southbound approach
Cypress Street and Marigold Avenue Cypress Street, northbound and
southbound approach
Cypress Street and Myrtle Avenue Cypress Street, southbound
approach
Dahlia Circle and Kennedy Drive Dahlia Circle, westbound approach
Daniel Court and Dubac Road Daniel Court, southbound approach
§ 215-40 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-40
205:857
Intersection Stop Sign On
Danskin Road and Nowels Road Danskin Road, westbound approach
Deborah Court and Samuel Drive Deborah Court, eastbound approach
Deer Run Drive and Ramshorn Drive Deer Run Drive, westbound
approach
Deuce Drive and Ace Drive Deuce Drive, westbound approach
Deuce Drive and Deuce Drive Deuce Drive, northbound approach
Diana Road and Evans Road Diana Road, westbound approach
Diana Road and Marconi Road Diana Road, eastbound approach
Dogwood Lane and Laurel Avenue Laurel Avenue
Dogwood Lane and Sea Girt Avenue Dogwood Lane, southbound
approach
Doris Street and Belmar Boulevard Doris Street, northbound approach
Doris Street and Broad Street Doris Street, southbound approach
Doris Street and Spring Street Doris Street, northbound approach
Dorsett Drive and Garrett Drive
(northern intersection)
Dorsett Drive, northbound approach
Dorsett Drive and Garrett Drive
(southern intersection)
Dorsett Drive, southbound approach
Drift Road and Carmerville Road Drift Road, westbound approach
Dubac Road and Helen Road Dubac Road, eastbound approach
Dubac Road and Helen Road Helen Road, southbound approach
Dumont Terrace and Belmar
Boulevard
Dumont Terrace, northbound
approach
Dumont Terrace and West Beverly
Street
West Beverly Street, westbound
approach
Dunhill Way and Langdon Road Langdon Road, southbound
approach
Dunhill Way and Windsor Road Dunhill Way, eastbound approach
Dunroamin Road and State Route 34 Dunroamin Road, westbound
approach
East 4th Avenue and State Route 71 E. 4th Avenue, westbound approach
East Court and Bay Shore Court East Court, westbound approach
East Curtis Avenue and State Route
71
East Curtis Avenue, westbound
approach
Easy Street and Herbertsville Road Easy Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
Easy Street and Squankum
Allenwood Road
Easy Street, eastbound approach
§ 215-40 WALL CODE § 215-40
205:858
Intersection Stop Sign On
Edgemere Road and Belmar
Boulevard
Edgemere Road, southbound
approach
Edgemere Road and Shore Drive Edgemere Road, northbound
approach
Ellsworth Street and 17th Avenue Ellsworth Street, southbound
approach
Ellsworth Street and Curtis Avenue Ellsworth Street, northbound
approach
Elm Street and 18th Avenue Elm Street, southbound approach
Elsie Lane and Deborah Court Elsie Lane, westbound approach
Elsie Lane and Garrett Drive Elsie Lane, southbound approach
Emerson Avenue and Hawthorne
Parkway
Emerson Avenue, northbound and
southbound approach
Equestrian Lane and Ramshorn
Drive
Equestrian Lane, westbound
approach
Evans Road and Hadley Court Hadley Court, westbound approach
Evergreen Avenue and W. Chicago
Boulevard
Evergreen Avenue, northbound
approach
Fairview Drive and Church Street Fairview Drive, northbound
approach
Fairview Drive and Minnesink Road Fairview Drive, southbound
approach
Fairway Drive and Warren Avenue Fairway Drive, southbound approach
Fawn Path and Ramshorn Drive Fawn Path, eastbound approach
Fawn Path and River Road Fawn Path, westbound approach
Filmore Street and Lincoln Avenue Filmore Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
Forest Street and Adrienne Road Forest Street, westbound approach
Forest Street and Juliette Drive Forest Street, eastbound approach
Forge Place and Williamsburg Drive Forge Place, southbound approach
Fox Field Circle and Hurley Pond
Road
Fox Field Road, northbound and
southbound approach
Fox Lane and Old Bridge Road Fox Lane, eastbound approach
Francis Avenue and Alicia Drive Alicia Drive
Frances Drive and Brighton Avenue Frances Drive, southbound
approach
Frances Drive and Clayton Drive Frances Drive, northbound approach
Frazee Drive and Ramshorn Drive Frazee Drive, eastbound approach
§ 215-40 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-40
205:859
Intersection Stop Sign On
Frazee Drive and River Road Frazee Drive, westbound approach
Gardinia Court and Allaire Road Gardinia Court, northbound
approach
Gardner Road and New Bedford
Road
Gardner Road, eastbound approach
Garfield Street and Cleveland
Avenue
Cleveland Avenue, eastbound and
westbound approach
Garfield Street and Lincoln Avenue Garfield Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
Garfield Street and Monmouth
Boulevard
Garfield Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
Garfield Street and Washington
Avenue
Garfield Street, westbound approach
Garrett Drive and Bailey's Corner
Road
Garrett Drive, westbound approach
Garrett Drive and Garrett Drive Garrett Drive, northbound approach
George Street and 17th Avenue George Street, southbound
approach
George Street and Curtis Street George Street, northbound
approach
Gladfield Drive and Tiltons Corner
Road
Gladfield Drive, northbound
approach
Glendale Parkway and Emerson
Avenue
Glendale Parkway, eastbound and
westbound approach
Glendale Parkway and Kipling
Avenue
Glendale Parkway, eastbound
approach
Glendola Road and 18th Avenue Glendola Road, southbound
approach
Glendola Road and Belmar
Boulevard
Glendola Road, northbound
approach
Glendola Road and Constitution Way Eastbound on Constitution Way
Glendola Road and Monmouth
Boulevard
Glendola Road, northbound
approach
Glenn Street and 1st Street Glenn Street, eastbound approach
Glenn Street and "J" Street "J" Street
Glenn Street and K Street Glenn Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
Governours Crossing and
Constitution Way
Governours Crossing, southbound
approach
§ 215-40 WALL CODE § 215-40
205:860
Intersection Stop Sign On
Governors Crossing and Liberty
Court
Eastbound on Liberty Court
Grace Street and Belmar Boulevard Grace Street, northbound approach
Grace Street and Broad Street Grace Street, southbound approach
Grace Street and Spring Street Grace Street, northbound and
southbound approach
Grant Street and Cleveland Avenue Grant Street, eastbound approach
Grant Street and Lincoln Avenue Grant Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
Grant Street and Monmouth
Boulevard
Grant Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
Grant Street and Washington
Avenue
Grant Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
Gregory Place and Homestead Road Homestead Road
Gregory Place and W. Chicago
Boulevard
Gregory Place, northbound
approach
Grove Street and 18th Avenue Grove Street, southbound approach
Grove Street and Curtis Avenue Grove Street, northbound and
southbound approach
Hadley Court and Edgemere Road Hadley Court, eastbound approach
Hamilton Avenue and Glendale
Parkway
Hamilton Avenue, northbound
approach
Harrison Street and Lincoln Avenue Harrison Street, eastbound
approach
Harrison Street and Monmouth
Boulevard
Harrison Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
Harrison Street and Morris Lane Harrison Street, northbound
approach
Harrison Street and Washington
Avenue
Harrison Street, northbound and
southbound approach
Harvest Lane and Morningstar Road Harvest Lane, eastbound approach
Harvest Lane and Tanner Avenue Harvest Lane, southbound approach
Hayes Street and Cleveland Avenue Hayes Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
Hayes Street and Lincoln Avenue Hayes Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
Hayes Street and Monmouth
Boulevard
Hayes Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
§ 215-40 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-40
205:861
Intersection Stop Sign On
Hayes Street and Washington
Avenue
Hayes Street, westbound approach
Heather Drive and Ocean Road Heather Drive, southbound
approach
Heathrow Lane and Heathrow Lane
(northern intersection)
Heathrow Lane, westbound
approach
Heathrow Lane and Heathrow Lane
(southern intersection)
Heathrow Lane, westbound
approach
Heathrow Lane and Primrose Place Heathrow Lane, northbound
approach
Helen Street and Dubac Road
(northerly intersection)
Dubac Road (northerly intersection)
Hemlock Avenue and Candlewood
Lane (northern intersection)
Hemlock Avenue, northbound
approach
Heritage Court and Belmar
Boulevard
Heritage Court, southbound
approach
Hidden Brook Drive and Tilton
Corner Road
The south side of Hidden Brook
Drive
Highpoint Road and Ivy Road Highpoint Road, northbound
approach
Highpoint Road and Lenape Trail Highpoint Road, southbound
approach
Hill Avenue and Edgemere Road Hill Avenue, eastbound approach
Hill Avenue and Evans Road Hill Avenue, westbound approach
Hill Boulevard and Belmar
Boulevard
Hill Boulevard, northbound
approach
Hillcrest Path and Algonkin Trail Hillcrest Path, westbound approach
Hilltop Drive and M Street Hilltop Drive, westbound approach
Hilltop Drive and Riverview Terrace Riverview Terrace, southbound
approach
Hilltop Drive and Water Street Water Street, southbound approach
Hilltop Drive and West Maplewood
Road
Hilltop Drive, eastbound approach
Hinck Drive and Clayton Drive Hinck Drive, northbound approach
Hinck Drive and Williams Drive Hinck Drive, eastbound approach
Holly Boulevard and Ramshorn
Drive
Holly Boulevard, eastbound and
westbound approach
Homestead Avenue and 8th Avenue Homestead Road, eastbound
approach
§ 215-40 WALL CODE § 215-40
205:862
Intersection Stop Sign On
Homestead Road and Gregory Place Homestead Road, westbound
approach
Homestead Road and Terrace Place Homestead Road, westbound
approach
Horseshoe Drive and Ramshorn
Drive
Horseshoe Drive, westbound
approach
Horseshoe Drive and Ramshorn
Drive (northern intersection)
Horseshoe Drive, westbound
approach
Hospital Road and Atlantic Avenue Hospital Road, northbound and
southbound approach
Hospital Road and Squankum
Allenwood Road
Hospital Road, westbound approach
Howard Street and 18th Avenue Howard Street, southbound
approach
Howard Street and Leonard Street Leonard Street
Hunter Hill Court and Tiltons
Corner Road
Hunter Hill Court, southbound
approach
Hunters Lane and Liberty Lane Hunters Lane, northbound approach
Industrial Road and State Route 34 Industrial Road, eastbound
approach
I Street and 17th Avenue I Street, northbound approach
I Street and 18th Avenue I Street, southbound approach
"I" Street and Glenn Street Glenn Street
Ivanhoe Path and Algonkin Trail Ivanhoe Path, eastbound and
westbound approach
Ivanhoe Path and Lenape Trail Ivanhoe Trail, eastbound approach
Ivy Road and Algonkin Trail Ivy Road, eastbound and westbound
approach
Ivy Road and Crestview Road Ivy Road, eastbound and westbound
approach
Ivy Road and High Point Road High Point Road
Ivy Road and Summit Road Ivy Road, westbound approach
Janet Place and Pascal Place Janet Place, westbound approach
Jean-Marie Court and Herbertsville
Road
Jean-Marie Court, eastbound
approach
Jefferson Avenue and Camden
Avenue
New York Avenue, eastbound
approach
Jefferson Avenue and Newark
Avenue
Jefferson Avenue, eastbound and
westbound approach
§ 215-40 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-40
205:863
Intersection Stop Sign On
Jefferson Avenue and Philadelphia
Avenue
Jefferson Avenue, eastbound and
westbound approach
Jodi Court and Apple Ridge Circle Apple Ridge Circle, southbound
approach
Johnson Street and Cleveland
Avenue
Johnson Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
Johnson Street and Lincoln Avenue Johnson Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
Johnson Street and Monmouth
Boulevard
Johnson Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
Johnson Street and Washington
Avenue
Johnson Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
Jordan Way and Ramshorn Drive Jordan Way, eastbound approach
Jordan Way and River Road Jordan Way, westbound approach
Joseph Court and State Route 34 Joseph Court, northbound approach
J Street and 18th Avenue J Street, southbound approach
J Street and Glenn Street J Street, northbound approach
Juliette Drive and Slocum Avenue Slocum Avenue
Jusmar Drive and Meeting House
Road
Jusmar Drive, westbound approach
Kennedy Drive and Morris Lane Kennedy Drive, southbound
approach
Kennedy Drive and Reagan Court Reagan Court
Kelly Lane and Marshall Road Marshall Road
Kimberly Drive and 18th Avenue Kimberly Drive, southbound
approach
Kings Court and Constitution Way Kings Court, southbound approach
Kipling Avenue and Hawthorne
Parkway
Kipling Avenue, northbound and
southbound approach
K Street and 17th Street K Street, southbound approach
K Street and 18th Avenue K Street, southbound approach
K Street and Curtis Avenue K Street, northbound approach
K Street and Glenn Street Glenn Street
Lakewood Road and Algonkin Trail Algonkin Trail, northbound
approach
Lakewood Road and Lenape Trail Lenape Trail, northbound approach
Lakewood Road and Ramshorn
Drive
Lakewood Road, eastbound and
westbound approach
§ 215-40 WALL CODE § 215-40
205:864
Intersection Stop Sign On
Landmark Place and Atlantic Avenue Landmark Place, northbound
approach
Langdon Road and Randolph Way Langdon Road, westbound approach
Lantern Light Way and Morningstar
Road
Lantern Light Way, northbound
approach
Lantern Light Way and Sawyer
Avenue
Sawyer Avenue, westbound
approach
Larson Road and Romano Boulevard Larson Road, eastbound approach
Laurel Avenue and Azalea Avenue Laurel Avenue
Laurel Avenue and Dogwood Lane Laurel Avenue, eastbound approach
Laurel Avenue and Old Mill Road Laurel Avenue, eastbound and
westbound approach
Laurel Avenue and State Route 35 Laurel Avenue, westbound approach
Laurel Avenue and Will Drive
(eastern intersection)
Willow Drive, southbound approach
Laurel Avenue and Will Drive
(western intersection)
Willow Drive, southbound approach
Laurel Street and Ramshorn Drive Laurel Street, westbound approach
Lenape Trail and Algonkin Trail Lenape Trail, eastbound and
westbound approach
Lenape Trail and Church Street Lenape Trail, northbound approach
Leonard Street and Bellewood
Avenue
Leonard Street, eastbound approach
Leslie Street and Clinton Avenue Leslie Street, eastbound approach
Leslie Street and Voorhees Avenue Leslie Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
Lexington Drive and Williamsburg
Drive
Lexington Drive, southbound
approach
Liberty Lane and Allenwood Road Liberty Lane, westbound approach
Liberty Lane and Hunters Lane Hunters Lane
Lincoln Avenue and Belmar
Boulevard
Lincoln Avenue, northbound and
southbound approach
Linden Place and Myrtle Avenue Linden Place, southbound approach
Liron Circle and Kelly Lane Liron Lane, westbound approach
Lorraine Court and Birch Place Lorraine, westbound approach
Court
Love Lane and Club Drive Love Lan, westbound approach e
Love Lane and Tennis Court Love Lane, eastbound approach
§ 215-40 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-40
205:865
Intersection Stop Sign On
L Street and 17th Avenue L Street, northbound and
southbound approach
L Street and 18th Avenue L Street, southbound approach
L Street and Curtis Avenue L Street, northbound approach
L Street and Glenn Street L Street, southbound approach
L Street and Glenn Street Glenn Street, eastbound approach
Macintosh Drive and Courtland
Drive
Macintosh Drive, southbound
approach
Macintosh Drive and Orchard Crest
Boulevard
Macintosh Drive, northbound
approach
Madison Avenue and Arthur Street Arthur Street
Madison Avenue and Harrison
Street
Madison Avenue
Magnolia Avenue and Dogwood
Lane
Dogwood Lane, northbound
approach
Magnolia Avenue and Old Mill Road Magnolia Avenue, westbound
approach
Magnolia Avenue and Village Road Magnolia Avenue, eastbound
approach
Mako Drive and Bailey's Corner
Road
Mako Drive, westbound approach
Mako Drive and Tarpon Drive Mako Drive, eastbound approach
Manito Road and Algonkin Trail Manito Road, eastbound and
westbound approach
Manor Drive and Bay Plaza Manor Drive, eastbound approach
Manor Drive and Salem Avenue Manor Drive, westbound approach
Manor Path and Marconi Road Manor Path, westbound approach
Maple Street and Clinton Avenue Maple Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
Maple Street and Voorhees Avenue Maple Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
Maplewood Road and Hilltop Drive Hilltop Drive
Maplewood Road and Woodland
Avenue
Woodland Avenue
Marconi Road and Belmar Boulevard Marconi Road, northbound approach
Marconi Road and Brighton Avenue Marconi Road, northbound and
southbound approach
Marietta Road and Elizabeth Court Marietta Road, westbound approach
Marietta Road and State Route 35 Marietta Road, eastbound approach
§ 215-40 WALL CODE § 215-40
205:866
Intersection Stop Sign On
Marigold Avenue and Ramshorn
Drive
Marigold Avenue, eastbound
approach
Marigold Avenue and Riverside
Terrance
Marigold Avenue, westbound
approach
Marion Street and North Marconi
Road
Marion Street, westbound approach
Marshall Road and Catherine Street Catherine Street, northbound and
southbound approach
Marshall Road and Kelly Lane Marshall Road, westbound approach
Martin Road and Belmar Boulevard Martin Road, northbound approach
Maxwell Drive and Scott Road Scott Road
Maxwell Drive and State Route 138 Maxwell Road, southbound
approach
Mayflower Drive and Quaker Street Quaker Street
Mayo Lane and New Bedford Road Mayo Lane, eastbound approach
McKinley Street and Lincoln Avenue McKinley Street, eastbound
approach
McKinley Street and Monmouth
Boulevard
McKinley Street, eastbound
approach
McKinley Street and Morris Lane McKinley Street, northbound
approach
McKinley Street and Washington
Avenue
McKinley Street, northbound and
southbound approach
Meadow Road and 18th Avenue Meadow Road, northbound
approach
Meeting House Road and State
Route 35
Meeting House Road, eastbound
approach
Megill Road and Belmar Boulevard Megill Road, eastbound approach
Megill Road and State Route 34 Megill Road, eastbound and
westbound approach
Metedeconk Road and Allenwood-
Lakewood Road
Metedeconk Road, northbound
approach
Mica Court and Stonebrook Drive Mica Court, eastbound approach
Mill Pond Court and New Bedford
Road
Mill Pont Court, eastbound approach
Minnehaha Trail and Algonkin Trail Minnehaha Trail, eastbound and
westbound approach
Minnehaha Trail and Manito Road Minnehaha Trail, westbound
approach
§ 215-40 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-40
205:867
Intersection Stop Sign On
Minnesink Road and Algonkin Trail Minnesink Road, eastbound and
westbound approach
Minnesink Road and Lenape Trail Minnesink Road, eastbound and
westbound approach
Misty Hollow Drive and West Hurley
Pond Road
Misty Hollow Drive, southbound
approach
Mohegan Road and Algonkin Trail Mohegan Road, eastbound and
westbound approach
Mohegan Road and Lenape Trail Mohegan Road, eastbound and
westbound approach
Monmouth Boulevard and Belmar
Boulevard
Monmouth Boulevard, northbound
and southbound approach
Monmouth Boulevard and Glendola
Road
Glendola Road, southbound
approach
Morningstar Road and Collier Road Collier Road, westbound approach
Morningstar Road and Lantern Light
Way (western intersection)
Lantern Light Way, northbound
approach
Morningstar Road and Wishing Well
Lane
Wishing Well Lane, westbound
approach
M Street and 17th Street M Street, southbound approach
M Street and 18th Avenue M Street, southbound approach
M Street and Curtis Avenue M Street, northbound and
southbound approach
M Street and Hilltop Drive Hilltop Drive
M Street and Lee Street Lee Street, westbound approach
Mueller Lane and Sea Girt Avenue Mueller Lane, northbound approach
Murray Drive and 18th Avenue Murray Drive, northbound approach
Murray Drive and Celeste Drive Murray Drive, southbound approach
Myrtle Avenue and Cedar Street Cedar Street, northbound and
southbound approach
Myrtle Avenue and Cypress Street Cypress Street, northbound
approach
Myrtle Avenue and Ramshorn Drive Myrtle Avenue, eastbound approach
Myrtle Avenue and Riverside
Terrance
Myrtle Avenue, eastbound approach
Nan Street and Summit Drive Nan Street, eastbound approach
Narrumson Road and Algonkin Trail Narrumson Road, eastbound and
westbound approach
§ 215-40 WALL CODE § 215-40
205:868
Intersection Stop Sign On
Narrumson Road and Lenape Trail Narrumson Road, eastbound
approach
Newark Avenue and Atlantic Avenue Newark Avenue, northbound and
southbound approach
Newark Avenue and Pennsylvania
Avenue
Newark Avenue
Newark Avenue and Wildwood
Avenue
Newark Avenue, northbound
approach
New Bedford Road and Belmar
boulevard
New Bedford Road, northbound
approach
New Bedford Road and State Route
35
New Bedford Road, eastbound
approach
New Brunswick Avenue and Newark
Avenue
New Brunswick Avenue, eastbound
and westbound approach
New Brunswick Avenue and
Philadelphia Avenue
New Brunswick, eastbound and
westbound approach Avenue
New Jersey Avenue and Adams
Street
New Jersey Avenue
New Jersey Avenue and Hurley Pond
Road
New Jersey Avenue, southbound
approach
New York Avenue and Camden
Avenue
New York Avenue, eastbound
approach
New York Avenue and Newark
Avenue
New York Avenue, eastbound and
westbound approach
New York Avenue and Philadelphia
Avenue
New York Avenue, eastbound and
westbound approach
North Hillcrest Path and Church
Street
N. Hillcrest Path, northbound
approach
Oak Road and Algonkin Trail Oak Road, eastbound approach
Oakshire Lane and Ramshorn Drive Oakshire Lane, westbound approach
Oakwood Road and Hilltop Drive Oakwood Road, southbound
approach
Ocean Brook Drive and Benjamin
Circle
Benjamin Circle, southbound
approach
Ocean Brook Drive and Stonebrook
Drive (northern intersection)
Stonebrook Drive
Ocean Brook Drive and Stonebrook
Drive (southern intersection)
Stonebrook Drive, westbound
approach
Ocean Road and Bailey's Corner
Road
Ocean Road, westbound approach
§ 215-40 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-40
205:869
Intersection Stop Sign On
Ohadi Drive and Ocean Road Ohadi Drive, southbound approach
Old Farm Road and Apple Ridge
Circle
Old Farm Road, eastbound approach
Old Mill Road and 18th Avenue Old Mill Road, northbound and
southbound approach
Old Mill Road and Marconi Road Old Mill Road, eastbound approach
Old Mill Road and Sea Girt Avenue Old Mill Road, southbound approach
Old Mill Road and State Route 35 Old Mill Road, southbound approach
Old Mill Road and Sunset Terrace Sunset Terrace, westbound
approach
Old Mill Road and Warren Avenue Old Mill Road, northbound and
southbound approach
Osborn Place and Ramshorn Drive Osborn Place, eastbound approach
Osborn Place and River Road Osborn Place, westbound approach
Osprey Court and Ramshorn Drive Osprey Court, southbound approach
Outlook Drive and Campus Parkway Campus Parkway, southbound
approach
Outlook Drive and Campus Parkway Outlook Drive, eastbound approach
Outlook Drive and Wyckoff Road Outlook Drive, westbound approach
Palmer Way and Ramshorn Drive Palmer Way, eastbound approach
Palmer Way and River Road Palmer Way, westbound approach
Pascal Place and Pascal Place Pascal Place, westbound approach
Patricia Lane and Allenwood Road Patricia Lane, westbound approach
Patrick Place and Woolley Road Patrick Place, southbound approach
Paynters Road and Ramshorn Drive Paynters Road, westbound approach
Pennsylvania Avenue and
Philadelphia Avenue
Pennsylvania Avenue, eastbound and
westbound approach
People Street and 2nd Avenue 2nd Avenue, westbound approach
People Street and 3rd Avenue People Avenue, northbound and
southbound approach
People Street and 4th Avenue People Street, northbound and
southbound approach
People Street and 6th Avenue People Street, northbound approach
People Street and 18th Avenue People Street, northbound approach
Philadelphia Avenue and Atlantic
Avenue
Philadelphia Avenue, eastbound
approach
Pierce Street and Cleveland Avenue Pierce Street, eastbound approach
§ 215-40 WALL CODE § 215-40
205:870
Intersection Stop Sign On
Pierce Street and Lincoln Avenue Pierce Street, eastbound approach
Pierce Street and Monmouth
Boulevard
Pierce Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
Pilgram Road and Brandon Road Pilgram Road, northbound approach
Pilgrim Road and Quaker Street Quaker Street
Pilgram Road and Woodfield Avenue Pilgram Road, westbound approach
Pine Road and Algonkin Trail Pine Road, westbound approach
Pippin Drive and Orchard Crest
Boulevard
Pippin Drive, eastbound and
westbound approach
Plymouth Court and Quaker Street Quaker Street
Pomerton Road and Edgemere Road Pomerton Road, westbound
approach
Pomerton Road and Juliette Drive Pomerton Road, eastbound approach
Pomerton Road and Valley Drive Pomerton Road, westbound
approach
Preakness Court and Wall Church
Road
Preakness Court, southbound
approach
Premier Place and Allenwood Road Premier Place, westbound approach
Primrose Place and Collier Road Primrose Place, northbound
approach
Primrose Place and Morningstar
Road
Primrose Place, westbound
approach
Princeton Court and Ramshorn
Drive
Princeton Court, westbound
approach
Quackenbush Boulevard and 8th
Avenue
Quackenbush Boulevard, eastbound
approach
Quackenbush Boulevard and Terrace
Place
Quackenbush Boulevard, westbound
approach
Quaker Street and Pilgram Road Quaker Street, northbound and
southbound approach
Querns Road and Romano Boulevard Querns Road, eastbound approach
Querns Road and Ruta Boulevard Querns Road, westbound approach
Rabbit Run and Morningstar Road Rabbit Run, westbound approach
Rachel Court and Woodfield Avenue Rachel Court, eastbound approach
Racquet Road and Ace Drive Ace Drive, northbound approach
Racquet Road and Racquet Road Racquet Road, eastbound and
northbound approach
Racquet Road and Tennis Court Racquet Road, westbound approach
§ 215-40 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-40
205:871
Intersection Stop Sign On
Ramshorn Drive and Allenwood
Lakewood Road
Ramshorn Drive, northbound and
southbound approach
Ramshorn Drive and Old Bridge
Road
Ramshorn Drive, eastbound
approach
Randolph Way and Cammer Drive Cammer Drive
Randolph Way and Langdon Road Langdon Road
Randolph Way and Windsor Road Randolph Way, northbound and
southbound approach
Reagan Court and Kennedy Drive Reagan Court, eastbound approach
Red Gate Road and Ramshorn Drive Red Gate Road, westbound
approach
Remsen Mill Road and Gully Road Remsen Mill Road, westbound
approach
Revere Lane and Belmar Boulevard Revere Lane, northbound approach
Ridgewood Road and Allenwood
Road
Ridgewood Road, westbound
approach
Ridgewood Road and Atlantic
Avenue
Ridgewood Avenue, southbound
approach
Ridgewood Road and State Route 34 Ridgewood Road, eastbound and
westbound approach
River Bluff Lane and Birch Place River Bluff Lane, westbound
approach
River Bluff Lane and Ramshorn
Drive
River Bluff Lane, eastbound
approach
River Road and Old Bridge Road River Road, eastbound approach
Rivercrest Lane and Riverside
Terrace
Rivercrest Lane, eastbound
approach
Riverside Terrace and Holly
Boulevard
Holly Boulevard, westbound
approach
Riverside Terrace and Lakewood
Road
Riverside Terrace, southbound
approach
Robin Way and Lakewood Road Robin Way, southbound approach
Rockafeller Drive and Brighton
Avenue
Rockafeller Drive, southbound
approach
Rodgers Court and Belmar
Boulevard
Rodgers Court, northbound
approach
Rogers Court and Beverly Street Eastbound on Beverly Street
Rodgers Court and Rodgers Court Rodgers Court, eastbound approach
Rodgers Road and Belmar Boulevard Rodgers Road, southbound approach
§ 215-40 WALL CODE § 215-40
205:872
Intersection Stop Sign On
Rodgers Road and Pomerton Road Pomerton Road, eastbound and
westbound approach
Romano Boulevard and Brighton
Avenue
Romano Boulevard, northbound
approach
Rome Drive and Orchard Crest
Boulevard
Rome Drive, eastbound approach
Rome Drive and Paynters Road Rome Drive, westbound approach
Roosevelt Street and Monmouth
Boulevard
Roosevelt Street, southbound
approach
Roosevelt Street and Morris Lane Roosevelt Street, northbound
approach
Roosevelt Street and Washington
Avenue
Roosevelt Street, northbound and
southbound approach
Rosewood Drive and Hilltop Drive Rosewood Drive, southbound
approach
Rustic Court and Martin Road Rustic Road, westbound approach
Ruta Boulevard and Brighton
Avenue
Ruta Boulevard, northbound
approach
Ruta Boulevard and Larson Road Larson Road, westbound approach
Salem Avenue and Coral Way Coral Way, westbound approach
Salem Avenue and Diana Road Salem Avenue, northbound
approach
Samuel Court and Ocean Road
(eastern intersection)
Samuel Court, northbound approach
Samuel Court and Ocean Road
(western intersection)
Samuel Court, northbound approach
Sandpiper Road and Allenwood
Lakewood Road
Sandpiper Road, eastbound
approach
Saw Mill Lane and Atlantic Avenue Saw Mill Lane, southbound
approach
Sawyer Avenue and Lantern Light
Way
Sawyer Avenue, eastbound approach
School House Road and Belmar
Boulevard
School House Road, southbound
approach
Scott Road and Maxwell Drive Scott Road, eastbound approach
Scott Road and New Bedford Road Scott Road, westbound approach
Sea Girt Avenue and Meeting House
Road
Sea Girt Avenue, westbound
approach
Shadow Brook Drive and Friar Court Friar Court, westbound approach
§ 215-40 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-40
205:873
Intersection Stop Sign On
Shadow Brook Drive and Tiltons
Corner Road
Shadow Brook Drive, southbound
approach
Sharpe Road and Romano Boulevard Sharpe Road, eastbound approach
Sharpe Road and Ruta Boulevard Ruta Boulevard, southbound
approach
Sheridan Drive and Belmar
Boulevard
Sheridan Drive, northbound
approach
Shore Drive and Bay Plaza Shore Drive, eastbound approach
Shore Drive and Marconi Road Shore Drive, eastbound approach
Shoreline Drive and Allenwood
Lakewood Road (northern
intersection)
Shoreline Drive, eastbound
approach
Shoreline Drive and Allenwood
Lakewood Road (southern
intersection)
Shoreline Drive, eastbound
approach
Silo Court and Heathrow Lane Silo Court, eastbound approach
Silo Court and Morningstar Road Silo Court, westbound approach
Slocum Avenue and Adrienne Road Slocum Avenue, westbound
approach
Sommers Street and Pascal Place Sommers Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
South Manor Court and Allaire Road S. Manor Court, northbound
approach
South Manor Court and New
Bedford Road
S. Manor Court, eastbound
approach
South Manor Court and South
Manor Court
S. Manor Court, westbound
approach
South M Street and 18th Avenue South M Street, northbound
approach
South North Street and 18th Avenue South North Street, northbound
approach
Sparrowbush Lane and Collier Road Sparrowbush Lane, southbound
approach
Spartan Drive and Pippin Drive Spartan Drive, southbound approach
Spartan Drive and Winesap Drive Spartan Drive, northbound approach
Spring Street and Birchwood Lane Spring Street, northbound approach
Spring Street and State Route 34 Spring Street, westbound approach
Squirrel Road and Diana Road Squirrel Road, northbound approach
Stanley Drive and Alicia Drive Stanley Drive, northbound approach
§ 215-40 WALL CODE § 215-40
205:874
Intersection Stop Sign On
State Route 34 and Campus
Parkway
Campus Parkway, westbound
approach
State Route 71 and 2nd Avenue 2nd Avenue, eastbound approach
State Route 71 and Walling Avenue Walling Avenue, westbound
approach
Stearns Drive and Nan Street Stearns Drive, southbound approach
Sterling Drive and Ramshorn Drive Sterling Drive, eastbound and
westbound approach
Sterling Drive and River Road Sterling Drive, westbound approach
Stines Road and Belmar Boulevard Stines Road, westbound approach
Stines Road and Nowels Road Stines Road, eastbound and
westbound approach
Stonebrook Drive and Ocean Road Stonebrook Road, southbound
approach
Stony Point Road and Ramshorn
Drive
Stony Point Road, eastbound
approach
Stony Point Road and River Road Stony Point Road, westbound
approach
Sue Street and Broad Street Sue Street, southbound approach
Sue Street and Megill Road Sue Street, northbound approach
Sue Street and Spring Street Sue Street, northbound approach
Summit Road and Lenape Trail Summit Road, southbound approach
Sunny Pond Court and Glendola
Road
Sunny Pond Court, eastbound
approach
Sunset Terrace and Helen Street Helen Street
Sunset Terrace and Pascal Place Sunset Terrace, eastbound approach
Surrey Lane and New Bedford Road Surrey Lane, westbound approach
Sycamore Street and Holly
Boulevard
Sycamore Street, northbound
approach
Sycamore Street and Lakewood
Road
Sycamore Street, southbound
approach
Sycamore Street and Marigold
Avenue
Sycamore Street, northbound and
southbound approach
Sycamore Street and Myrtle Avenue Sycamore Street, northbound and
southbound approach
Taft Street and Monmouth
Boulevard
Taft Street, southbound approach
Taft Street and Washington Avenue Taft Street, northbound and
southbound approach
§ 215-40 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-40
205:875
Intersection Stop Sign On
Tally Ho Drive and Hunters Lane Tally Ho Drive, northbound
approach
Tally Ho Drive and Hurley Pond
Road
Tally Ho Drive, westbound approach
Tamarack Road and Apple Ridge
Circle (northern intersection)
Tamarack Road, northbound
approach
Tamarack Road and Apple Ridge
Circle (southern intersection)
Tamarack Road, southbound
approach
Tanner Avenue and Morningstar
Road
Tanner Avenue, eastbound approach
Taylor Street and Lincoln Avenue Taylor Street, eastbound and
westbound approach
Tecumseh Place and Algonkin Trail Tecumseh Place, eastbound
approach
Tennis Court and Racquet Road Tennis Court, northbound approach
Terrace Place and Bergen Place Bergen Place
Terrace Place and Brooklyn
Boulevard
Brooklyn Boulevard
Terrace Place and Homestead Road Homestead Road, eastbound
approach
Terrace Place and Quackenbush
Boulevard
Quakenbush Boulevard
Terrace Place and W. Chicago
Boulevard
Terrace Place, northbound approach
Tiltons Corner Road and Bailey's
Corner Road
Tiltons Corner Road, eastbound
approach
Tiltons Corner Road and
Hiddenbrook Drive
Hiddenbrook Drive, southbound
approach
Tiltons Corner Road and Lawrence
Way
Lawrence Way, northbound
approach
Toboggan Run and Ramshorn Drive Toboggan Run, westbound approach
Troy Drive and New Bedford Road Troy Drive, westbound approach
Truman Court and Kennedy Drive Truman Court, southbound
approach
Twin Lakes Drive and Ramshorn
Drive
Twin Lakes Drive, eastbound
approach
Valley Drive and Belmar Boulevard Valley Drive, southbound approach
Valley Drive and Pomerton Road Pomerton Road, eastbound approach
Valley Drive and Shore Drive Valley Drive, northbound approach
Village Road and Sea Girt Road Village Road, southbound approach
§ 215-40 WALL CODE § 215-40
205:876
Intersection Stop Sign On
Volley Court and Ace Drive Volley Court, eastbound approach
Voorhees Avenue and Belmar
Boulevard
Voorhees Avenue, westbound
approach
Wagner Lane and Atlantic Avenue Wagner Lane, southbound approach
Wall Church Road and New Bedford
Road
Wall Church Road, eastbound and
westbound approach
Wall Church Road and State Route
35
Wall Church Road, eastbound and
westbound approach
Walling Street and Vine Street Vine Street, northbound approach
Walnut Street and Belmar Boulevard Walnut Street, southbound approach
Walton Way and Belmar Boulevard Walton Way, northbound approach
Warrant Avenue and Nassau Drive Nassau Drive, southbound approach
Warren Avenue and Allaire Road Warren Avenue, westbound
approach
Washington Avenue and Belmar
Boulevard
Washington Avenue, northbound and
southbound approach
Waterview Road and Apple Ridge
Circle
Waterview Road, eastbound
approach
Watson Avenue and Brighton Avenue Watson Avenue, northbound
approach
Watson Avenue and Monmouth
Boulevard
Watson Avenue, southbound
approach
Wedgewood Road and New Bedford
Road
Wedgewood Road, westbound
approach
West 18th Avenue and Atlantic
Avenue
West 18th Avenue, westbound
approach
West 18th Street and State Route 34 West 18th Street, eastbound
approach
West Beverly Street and Rodgers
Court
West Beverly Street, eastbound
approach
West Chicago Boulevard and 8th
Avenue
W. Chicago Boulevard, northbound
approach
West Chicago Boulevard and Old
Mill Road
W. Chicago Boulevard, westbound
approach
West Chicago Boulevard and Village
Road
Village Road, northbound approach
West Court and Bay Shore Court West Court, eastbound approach
West Hurley Pond Road and
Allenwood Road
West Hurley Pond Road, eastbound
approach
§ 215-40 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-40
205:877
Intersection Stop Sign On
West Magnolia Avenue and Old Mill
Road
W. Magnolia Avenue, eastbound
approach
West Maplewood Road and Curtis
Road
West Maplewood Road, southbound
approach
Westminster Lane and Belmar
Boulevard
Westminster Lane, northbound and
southbound approach
Westminster Lane and Windsor Road Westminster Lane, southbound
approach
West Union Lane and Crestview
Road
Crestview Road, southbound
approach
West Union Lane and Old Bridge
Road
W. Union Lane, eastbound approach
Wight Street and North Marconi
Road
Wight Street, eastbound approach
Williamsburg Drive and Bailey's
Corner Road
Williamsburg Drive, eastbound
approach
Williams Drive and Hinck Drive Hinck Drive
Willow Drive and Begonia Avenue Begonia Avenue, southbound
approach
Windfield Drive and Tiltons Corner
Road
Windfield Drive, northbound
approach
Winding Brook Lane and New
Bedford Road
Winding Brook Lane, eastbound
approach
Windsor Road and Allenwood Road Windsor Road, southbound approach
Winesap Drive and Courtland Drive Courtland Drive, westbound
approach
Winesap Drive and Orchard Crest
Boulevard
Winesap Drive, northbound and
eastbound approach
Winston Drive and Adrienne Road Winston Street, westbound
approach
Winston Drive and Juliette Drive Winston Drive, eastbound approach
Winterview Road and Apple Ridge
Circle
Winterview Road, westbound
approach
Wishing Well Lane and Rabbit Run Rabbit Run, eastbound approach
Woodfield Avenue and Allenwood
Road
Woodfield Avenue, northbound
approach
Woodfield Avenue and Belmar
Boulevard
Woodfield Avenue, northbound
approach
Woodland Avenue and L Street L Street, southbound approach
§ 215-40 WALL CODE § 215-40
205:878
Intersection Stop Sign On
Woodland Avenue and State Route
71
Woodland Avenue, eastbound
approach
Woodland Avenue and West
Maplewood Road
Woodland Avenue, westbound
approach
Woodland Avenue and West Pine
Tree Way
West Pine Tree Way, southbound
approach
Woolley Road and Glendola Road Woolley Road, eastbound approach
Woolley Road and New Bedford
Road
Woolley Road, eastbound approach
Woolley Road and Polk Street Polk Street, eastbound approach
World Street and 2nd Avenue World Street, northbound and
southbound approach
World Street and 3rd Avenue World Street, northbound and
southbound approach
World Street and 4th Avenue World Street, northbound and
southbound approach
World Street and 6th Avenue World Street, northbound approach
World Street and 18th Avenue World Street, westbound approach
Wyckoff Road and Belmar Boulevard Wyckoff Road, northbound and
southbound approach
Wyckoff Road and Megill Road Megill Road, eastbound and
westbound approach
York Way and Colonial Drive York Way, southbound approach
York Way and Williamsburg Drive York Way, northbound approach
§ 215-41. Schedule IX: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-14, the following intersections
are designated as yield intersections. Yield signs having sides 36 inches in
length shall be installed:
Intersection Yield Sign(s) on
(Reserved)
§ 215-42. Schedule X: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-15, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of
Street Time Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 215-40 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-43
205:879
§ 215-43. Schedule XI: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-16, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
Name of Street Location Hours
(Reserved)
§ 215-44. Schedule XII: Bus Stops.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-17, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops.
Name of Street Location Hours
17th Avenue At a point 100 feet east of I
Street for a distance of 115 feet
along the south side of 17th
Avenue
8:00 a.m to 4:00
p.m.
§ 215-45. Schedule XIII: No Left Turn.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-18A, no person shall make a left
turn at any of the following described locations:
Location Direction Prohibited
Allaire Road (County Route
524) and driveway entrance
to Block 151, Lot 10.01
[Added 3-14-2007 by Ord.
No. 7-2007]
Eastbound on Allaire
Road
No left turn into
driveway
Allaire Road and driveway
entrance to Block 741, Lot
16
Eastbound on Allaire
Road
No left turn
Driveway entrance to Block
151, Lot 10.01 and Allaire
Road (County Route 524)
[Added 3-14-2007 by Ord.
No. 7-2007]
Eastbound onto Allaire
Road
No left turn onto
Allaire Road
Driveway exit from Block
741, Lot 16 to Allaire Road
Eastbound on Allaire
Road
No left turn
New Bedford Road and State
Highway 35
From New Bedford
Road to Northbound
Route 35
No left turn
Route NJ 35 and 17th
Avenue [Added 9-12-2012
by Ord. No. 16-2012]
From westbound 17th
Avenue to southbound
onto Route NJ 35
No left turn
§ 215-43 WALL CODE § 215-45
205:880
Location Direction Prohibited
Wyckoff Road and Driveway
entrance81
Northbound on Wyckoff
Road to Block 912, Lots
3 and 4
No left turn
§ 215-46. Schedule XIV: No U-Turn.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-18B, no person shall make a UTurn
at any of the following described locations:
Name of Street Sides Location
Ramshorn Drive Both From the southerly curbline of
Paynters Road to a point 260 feet
south therefrom
§ 215-47. Schedule XV: No Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-18C, no person shall make a turn
at any of the following described locations:
Intersection Direction Movement Prohibited
Allaire Road (County
Route 524) and
driveway entrance to
Block 151, Lot 10.01
[Added 3-14-2007 by
Ord. No. 7-2007]
Westbound on Allaire
Road
No right turn into
driveway
§ 215-48. Schedule XVI: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-19, speed limits on Township
roads shall be as follows:
81.Editor's Note: The prohibition on left hand turns in and out of the Wyckoff Road driveway
into Block 912, Lots 3 and 4 will automatically expire upon the full completion of the
Wyckoff Road improvements including the installation of a left hand turn lane on Wyckoff
Road at the site driveway which will provide a left hand turn lane on Wyckoff Road for
vehicles turning into Lots 3 and 4.
§ 215-45 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-48
205:881
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Limits
Algonquin Trail 25 Along the entire length
Allenwood Road 35 Along the entire length;
notwithstanding the foregoing, it is
hereby established in the area of the
Central School, during recess or
while children are going to or leaving
school, during opening or closing
hours, a speed limit of 25 miles per
hour
Bailey's Corner Road 35 Entire length
Bedford Corner
Lane
25 Along the entire length
Campbell Road
[Amended
8-10-2005 by Ord.
No. 21-2005]
35 Between Allaire ?Road (County Road
524) and Eighteenth Avenue
Church Street
[Amended
2-25-2015 by Ord.
No. 3-2015]
30 From Route 35 to the Township of
Wall/Borough of Manasquan border
Edgemere Road 30 From Belmar Boulevard to Shore
Drive
Frances Drive
[Amended
5-28-2014 by Ord.
No. 11-2014]
25 Entire length
Gully Road
[Amended
8-14-2002 by Ord.
No. 31-2002]
35 From Belmar Boulevard to Remsen
Mills Road
45 From Remsen Mills Road to the
Township of Wall/Neptune Township
border
Hurley Pond Road
East
40 From Route 38 to New Bedford Road
Manito Road-Unamis
Path [Added
5-11-2005 by Ord.
No. 17-2005]
25 Between Algonkin Trail and
Tecumseh Place
§ 215-48 WALL CODE § 215-48
205:882
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Limits
Martin Road
[Amended
12-10-2003 by
Ord. No. 42-2003]
35 Entire length
Megill Road 40 Along the entire length
New Bedford Road 35 From Ocean Road to Belmar
Boulevard; notwithstanding the
foregoing, it is established in the area
of the Wall Primary School, between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m.,
a speed limit of 25 miles per hour
Ocean Road 35 From Bailey's Corner Road to State
Highway No. 35
Old Mill Road 30 Along the entire length;
notwithstanding the foregoing, it is
hereby established in the area of the
Old Mill Elementary School, during
recess or while children are going to
or leaving from school, during
opening or closing hours, a speed
limit of 25 miles per hour
Paynter's Road
[Added 2-24-2016
by Ord. No.
1-2016]
30 miles per
hour
Along the entire length
Ramshorn Drive 35 Along the entire length
River Road 25 From Old Bridge Road in a northerly
direction to the terminus of River
Road
Sea Girt Avenue
[Added 2-28-2018
by Ord. No.
1-2018]
35 Along the entire length
Sea Girt Avenue
[Repealed
2-28-2018 by Ord.
No. 1-2018]
Seventeenth Avenue 25 Between Route 35 and Route 71, as
well as between Route 71 and the
Township of Wall - Borough of South
Belmar corporate line
§ 215-48 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-48
205:883
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Limits
Tilton's Corner Road
[Amended
3-22-2017 by Ord.
No. 1-2017]
35 Entire length
Wall Church Road
[Amended
12-9-2009 by Ord.
No. 28-2009]
30 Entire length
Waterview Way
[Amended
11-24-2009 by
Ord. No. 31-2009]
25 Entire length
Watson Road
[Added 5-11-2005
by Ord. No.
17-2005]
45 Between Monmouth Boulevard and
Brighton Avenue
West Chicago
Boulevard [Added
12-14-2011 by
Ord. No. 31-2011]
30 Entire length
Westside Drive 30 Along the entire length
Woodfield Avenue
[Added 11-25-2014
by Ord. No.
26-2014]
35 Entire length
Wyckoff Road 40 From Belmar Boulevard to New
Jersey State Highway No. 34
35 From New Jersey State Highway No.
34 to New Jersey State Highway No.
33
40 Between Belmar Boulevard and 510
feet south of Megill Road
30 Between 510 feet south of Megill
Road and 690 feet north of Megill
Road
40 Between 690 feet north of Megill
Road and N.J. Route 34
§ 215-48 WALL CODE § 215-49
205:884
§ 215-49. Schedule XVII: Pedestrian Crossings.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-27, pedestrian crossings are
hereby established at the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Schoolhouse Road 470 feet south of the southerly curbline of
Cedarbrook Drive
Schoolhouse Road 1,200 feet south of the southerly curbline of
Cedarbrook Drive.
§ 215-50. Schedule XVIII: No Passing Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-29, the following locations shall
be no-passing zones:
Name of Street Direction Location
Allaire Road Both From Allaire Road - Ridgewood
Road to Gully Road
Gully Road Both From Neptune Township Wall
Township line to Belmar
Boulevard
§ 215-51. Schedule XIX: Lane Reservations.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-18D, no person shall turn or
proceed at any of the following locations, except in accordance with the
following lane reservations:
Location Left Lane Right Lane
New Bedford Road
west side at
intersection with State
Highway 35
Eastbound across State
Highway 35 only
Right turn on State
Highway 35 southbound
only
§ 215-52. Schedule XX: Mid-Block Crosswalks.
In accordance with the provisions of § 215-28, mid-block crosswalks are
hereby established at the following locations:
§ 215-49 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-52
205:885
Name of Street Location
Allaire Road (Monmouth
County Highway No. 524)
[Added 12-8-2004 by Ord.
No. 31-2004]
Beginning at a point 1,231 feet east of the
center line intersection of Baileys Corner
Road and Allaire Road (Monmouth County
Highway No. 524) and extending to a point
15 feet easterly therefrom. Being more
specifically, 10 feet west of utility pole No.
1663 and 15 feet westerly therefrom
Atlantic Avenue (CR 524) Beginning at a point 1,999 feet west of the
westerly curbline of West 18th Avenue (CR
30) and extending to a point 10 feet westerly
therefrom
Atlantic Avenue (CR 524)
[Added 8-11-2004 by Ord.
No. 19-2004]
Beginning at a point 3,349 feet westerly
along the center line of Atlantic Avenue from
the intersection of the center lines of West
18th Avenue (CR 30) and Atlantic Avenue
(CR 524) and extending to a point 10 feet
westerly there from
Atlantic Avenue (Monmouth
County Highway Alternate
No. 524) [Added
12-8-2004 by Ord. No.
31-2004]
Beginning at a point 2,355 feet west of the
westerly curbline of the western curb island
formed by the circular intersection of
Atlantic Avenue (Monmouth County Highway
Alternate No. 524) and State Highway Route
No. 35 and 15 feet westerly therefrom.
Being more specifically, 37 feet east of utility
pole No. JC4062 and 15 feet easterly
therefrom
Baileys Corner Road
[Added 12-8-2004 by Ord.
No. 31-2004]
Beginning at a point 176 feet south of the
center line intersection of Baileys Corner
Road and Ocean Road and extending to a
point 15 feet southerly therefrom. Being
more specifically, 165 feet south of the
center point of a sanitary sewer manhole
located at said intersection and extending to
a point 15 feet southerly therefrom
Lakewood Road Beginning at a point 1,300 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Route N.J. 35 and
extending 10 feet westerly therefrom
Ocean Road [Added
12-8-2004 by Ord. No.
31-2004]
Beginning at a point 181 feet east of the
center line intersection of Baileys Corner
Road and Ocean Road extending to a point
15 feet easterly therefrom. Being more
specifically, 181 feet east of the center point
of a sanitary sewer manhole located at said
intersection and extending to a point 15 feet
easterly therefrom
§ 215-52 WALL CODE § 215-52
205:886
Name of Street Location
Tiltons Corner Road [Added
12-8-2004 by Ord. No.
31-2004; amended
12-13-2006 by Ord. No.
34-2006]
Beginning at a point 137 feet west of the
prolongation of the westerly curbline of
Lawrence Way and extending to a point 15
feet westerly therefrom
Wyckoff Road [Added
7-25-2018 by Ord. No.
12-2018]
Beginning at point 755 feet south of the
westerly curbline of Route NJ 34 and
extending to point 20 feet southerly
therefrom, being more specifically 10 feet
north of the center point of the drainage
inlet located on the westerly curbline of
Wyckoff Road and extending to point 20 feet
northerly therefrom
§ 215-52 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-52
205:887

ARTICLE X
Semi-Public Roads and Lots
[Added 7-12-2006 by Ord. No. 20-2006]
§ 215-53. Application of the provisions of Subtitle 39 to semi-public
roads, streets, driveways and parking lots and regulations thereof.
A. Upon adoption of a resolution by the Township Committee of the
Township of Wall, the provisions of Subtitle One of Title 39 of the
revised statutes of New Jersey shall be applicable to the semi-public
roads, streets, driveways and parking lots located in the Township of
Wall, County of Monmouth and the following regulations shall be
enforceable:
(1) General parking:
(a) All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
(b) No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any roads and
aisles which would obstruct or impede a normal flow of traffic.
(2) Handicapped parking: All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on
the attached site plan and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P
(Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty Plate) in the designated
parking areas for persons who been issued the handicapped
parking permit by the Motor Vehicle Commission.
(3) Reserved parking: All vehicles that are granted specialty parking in
this section, such as police vehicles, ambulances, teachers, etc.,
must be properly identified and the reserved parking spaces must
be shown on the filed site plan.
(4) Through streets and stop intersections.
(a) Through streets: Through streets are so designated on the site
plan. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of each
street intersecting the through street except where yield signs
are provided for in the designation.
(b) Stop intersections. Stop intersections are so designated on the
site plan. Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
(5) One-way streets. One-way streets are so designated on the site plan
in the direction indicated.
(6) Speed limits:
(a) The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking
lot(s) shall be 15 mph.
§ 215-53 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 215-53
205:889
(b) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained
to effect the above-designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
(7) Tow-away zones: Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exitways,
loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area pedestrian walkway, or
present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by
towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
(8) Loading zone(s): The locations described in the site plan are hereby
designated as loading zones. No person shall park a vehicle in said
location during the times indicated other than for the loading or
unloading of goods and materials.
(9) All signs, posts, or other necessary materials are to be installed and
paid for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:4-198 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
B. Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by the New Jersey
statute, every person convicted of a violation of this article or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $1,250
or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 215-53 WALL CODE § 215-53
205:890
Chapter 218
VEHICLES, MOTORIZED
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. II. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 215.
§ 218-1. Operation in certain areas prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorized vehicle.
including automobiles, motorcycles, minibikes or any other motor vehicle
upon any public property in the Township, including but not limited to
sidewalks, school grounds, recreation areas, and the bicycle path on the
former Freehold-Jamesburg Agricultural Railway right-of-way from the
Manasquan-Wall Township boundary to the Howell Township-Wall
Township-Wall boundary.
Chapter 220
VETERANS BENEFITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction fees — See Ch. 90.
Fees — See Ch. 140.
Affordable housing — See Ch. 140.
Water and sewer connection fees — See Ch.
222.
§ 220-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
VETERAN — Individuals who have been honorably discharged with active
wartime service in the United States Armed Forces and who have qualified
for a property tax deduction with the Wall Township Tax Assessor's Office
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.10 et seq., and N.J.A.C. 18:27-1.1 et seq. The
term "veteran" does not include any surviving spouses, civil union partners
or domestic partners.
§ 220-2. Exemption from payment of certain fees.
A. All veterans, as defined herein, shall be entitled to an exemption from
payment of the following:
(1) Township fees for marriage licenses;
(2) Township fees for dog licenses;
§ 215-53 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § 220-2
218:891
§ 220-3. Excluded benefits.
Benefits for veterans exclude the following:
§ 220-4. Enforcement.
The Township Administrator or his designee is hereby authorized to enforce
the provisions of this Code section.
Chapter 222
WATER AND SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Sewerage authorities — See Ch. 47.
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 140.
(3) Township fees for recreation activities; discount of 50% for the
spouse and children of veteran;
(4) Township fees for training programs;
(5) Township certificate of occupancy fees;
(6) The Township portion of all Construction Department permit fees
for a primary residence owned and occupied by the veteran;
(7) The Township land use permit fees for a primary residence owned
and occupied by the veteran.
B. The foregoing exemptions shall apply only to fees established by the
Township Committee which are fully retained by the Township as
revenue.
A. Fees, licenses and permits associated with any for-profit activity.
B. Inclusion in programs when the registration is received after maximum
registration has been reached.
C. Application fees and escrows for Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment applications.
D. Escrows associated with engineering inspections.
E. Posting of performance and maintenance guarantees where required.
F. Wall Township water and sewer connection and tap fees.
G. Mandatory development fees to the Wall Township Affordable Housing
Trust Fund.
§ 220-2 WALL CODE § 220-4
218:892
ARTICLE I
Water
§ 222-1. Public Utilities Department.
The water and sewer system of the Township shall be operated as a utility
under the name of Water/Sewer Utility Department.
§ 222-2. Rules and regulations.
The Township Committee shall adopt rules and regulations with respect to
the distribution and sale of water.
§ 222-3. Application for service connection.
A. Any person desiring service connection for water shall make written
application therefor on the form provided by the Water/Sewer Rent
Collector, and the charges hereinafter fixed for tapping the main and
installing corporation cock, service pipe to the curb, curb stop, and
curb box, as well as the charge for a supply to December 31 next
ensuing such application shall have been paid to the Public Utilities
Water Department before any service connection will be installed. Such
person shall also pay the cost for street opening at the same time.
B. The fee for tapping of the water main, installing corporation cock,
service pipe to the curbs, curb stop and curb box shall be as follows:
[Amended 8-13-2008 by Ord. No. 13-2008; 6-13-2012 by Ord. No.
8-2012; 3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 5-2013]
Size of Tap
(inches) Installation Fee
3/4 $2,024.04
1 $2,333.76
1 1/2 $2,717.34
2 $3,111.89
Larger than 2 To be determined by the Superintendent of
Public Works in an amount sufficient to cover all
costs to the Township
C. Water connection fees shall be charged as follows: [Added 6-11-2008
by Ord. No. 8-2008; amended 2-26-2014 by Ord. No. 2-2014]
Description Connection Fee
Connection fee for existing/new residential
dwelling units
$993
Connection fee for existing/new buildings other
than residential; labor and materials by
developer
$993 per EU
§ 222-1 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § 222-3
218:893
§ 222-4. Temporary connection. [Amended 6-13-2012 by Ord. No.
8-2012; 3-27-2013 by Ord. No. 5-2013]
Any person desiring a temporary supply of water shall make application to
the Water/Sewer Rent Collector, pay the following fee and have a temporary
meter installed therefor:
§ 222-5. (Reserved)82
§ 222-6. Service to defective plumbing prohibited.
No water will be furnished and no person shall apply for water service
where pipes are inferior, the plumbing defective, or the faucets, water
closets or other fixtures leaky or imperfect, and when such conditions are
discovered, the supply of water will be cut off, unless immediate repairs are
made.
§ 222-7. Minimum charges. [Amended 3-13-2002 by Ord. No.
10-2002; 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 1-2009; 11-24-2009 by Ord. No.
32-2009; 4-11-2012 by Ord. No. 6-2012; 12-19-2018 by Ord. No.
25-2018]
There shall be due and payable an annual fee, referred to as a minimum
charge, billed quarterly and payable pursuant to the payment schedule set
forth in § 222-11 hereof, for water service for each building or house, store,
apartment unit in a house or building and each premises, house, trailer, and
mobile home being served by the Township water supply system, as follows:
Description Connection Fee
Calculation of equivalent units (EUs): estimated average water system
consumption (gallons per day) divided by average flow per singlefamily
dwelling unit.
A. Single-family residential structure: $50 plus usage.
B. Multiple-family residential structure: $50 plus usage for the first
residential unit and $50 plus usage for each additional residential unit.
C. All nonresidential buildings: $100 for the first 10,000 square feet of
space and $50 plus usage for each additional 5,000 square feet of
space.
D. Bulk water pickup at Township Water/Sewer Utility Department: $7 for
every 1,000 gallons.
A. For a five-eighths-inch-by-three-quarter-inch meter: $45.43 per quarter
for 6,000 gallons of water per quarterly meter reading cycle.
82.Editor’s Note: Former § 222-5, Use of water hydrant, was repealed 6-13-2012 by Ord. No.
8-2012.
§ 222-3 WALL CODE § 222-7
218:894
§ 222-8. Excess use charges.
B. For a three-quarter-inch meter: $49.97 per quarter for 6,000 gallons of
water per quarterly meter reading cycle.
C. For a one-inch meter: $63.61 per quarter for 6,000 gallons of water per
quarterly meter reading cycle.
D. For a one-and-one-half-inch meter: $81.76 per quarter per 6,000 gallons
of water per quarterly meter reading cycle.
E. For a two-inch meter: $131.73 per quarter for 6,000 gallons of water
per quarterly meter reading cycle.
F. For a three-inch meter: $499.69 per quarter for 6,000 gallons of water
per quarterly meter reading cycle.
G. For a four-inch meter: $635.97 per quarter for 6,000 gallons of water
per quarterly meter reading cycle.
H. For a six-inch meter: $953.95 per quarter for 6,000 gallons of water per
quarterly meter reading cycle.
I. For an eight-inch meter: $1,317.36 per quarter for 6,000 gallons of
water per quarterly meter reading cycle.
J. The cost for meters shall be furnished at the time of application.
K. For multiple purposes such as apartment houses, other multiple-family
structures, assisted-living or congregate-care facilities, trailers, stores
or other similar uses served by a single meter: an additional $45.43 per
apartment, dwelling unit, store, trailer or other use which is served by a
single meter and/or connection; except for owner-occupied premises
with not more than two single-family dwelling units, for which the
quarterly minimum charge shall be $45.43.
L. For single office buildings: charge determined on the basis of the size of
the meter which serves the building, pursuant to Subsections A through
I herein.
M. For office complexes or developments of more than one building:
charge determined on the basis of one quarterly minimum per meter
serving the complex or development, together with one quarterly
minimum of $45.43 for each additional building within the development
not served by a separate meter.
N. For a home with professional office located therein: 1 1/3 the applicable
minimum charge, based on meter size, effective January 1, 1998.
O. Any application for water not specifically set forth herein shall be
considered a special application, and the charges therefor shall be
determined by the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 222-7 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § 222-8
218:895
§ 222-9. Fire sprinkler systems. [Amended 5-12-2004 by Ord. No.
9-2004]
§ 222-10. Service charges. [Amended 6-13-2012 by Ord. No. 8-2012;
7-23-2014 by Ord. No. 16-2014]
When service is discontinued due to lack of occupancy, nonpayment of bills,
violation of this chapter or at the request of the customer, a charge will be
made for both turn on and turn off of water at the curb of $50 each service
call. Payment of the fee shall be made in advance when turn off or turn on
is requested by the customer. Any other service calls shall be billed at $50
per service call unless it is an emergency call during nonbusiness hours, at
which time it shall be billed $125 for the service call.
A. Any water used in excess of the minimum gallonage aforesaid shall be
billed to the owner or customer at the following graduated rates:
[Amended 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 1-2009; 11-24-2009 by Ord. No.
32-2009; 4-11-2012 by Ord. No. 6-2012; 12-19-2018 by Ord. No.
25-2018]
Amount of Water Used in
Quarterly Meter Reading Cycle Charge per 1,000 Gallons
First 6,000 gallons Included with quarterly allowance
6,001 to 13,000 gallons $5.57 per 1,000 gallons or part
thereof
13,001 to 25,000 gallons $7.09 per 1,000 gallons or part
thereof
Over 25,000 gallons $8.30 per 1,000 gallons or part
thereof
B. There shall be an allowance of up to 6,000 gallons per quarter before
excess use charges shall apply. The six-thousand-gallon allowance shall
not accumulate from one quarter to another. However, an adjustment
shall be made on an annual basis to any account where excess use
charges have been incurred, but no more than 24,000 gallons have
been used in the previous calendar year. [Amended 5-12-2004 by
Ord. No. 9-2004]
A. There shall be due and payable an annual minimum charge, to be billed
in equal quarterly installments, to users of the water system with
separate water service lines for operation of automatic sprinkler
systems. [Amended 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 1-2009]
B. The charge for a single unit shall be $400 per year.
C. The charge for a multiple unit complex or building shall be $400 per
building or $100 per separate unit contained therein, whichever
amount is greater.
§ 222-8 WALL CODE § 222-11
218:896
§ 222-11. Billing for charges. [Amended 3-11-2009 by Ord. No.
1-2009]
§ 222-12. Payment of bills.
All bills for furnishing water or rendering service in connection therewith
shall be paid upon the completion of the services rendered and before the
water shall be turned on.
§ 222-13. Liability of owner; lien.
The owner of any house, tenement, building or lot shall be liable for the
payment of the charges hereby fixed for the use of the water by the owner or
occupant of such premises, and such charge shall be a lien upon such house,
tenement, lot or premises until the same shall be paid and satisfied, and
in case prompt payment of any water charges shall not be made when the
same become due the water shall be shut off from such building, place or
premises, and shall not be again supplied until arrears with interest thereon
A. Bills for minimum and excess water and sewer charges shall be
rendered on the first, second and third weeks of every quarter. Bills will
be due and payable within 20 days of receipt and on the date specified
on the bill. Bills not paid within 30 days after the due date specified on
the bill will be assessed interest at the maximum rate provided by law.
B. Each quarterly bill will contain the quarterly minimum water and sewer
charges. In addition, each quarterly bill will contain an adjusted/actual
charge for excess water and sewer usage, on the following schedule:
[Amended 4-11-2012 by Ord. No. 6-2012; 12-19-2018 by Ord. No.
25-2018]
(1) Februrary: minimum/meter reading/adjusted.
(2) May: minimum/meter reading/adjusted.
(3) August: minimum/meter reading/adjusted.
(4) November: minimum/meter reading/adjusted.
C. All estimated quarterly billing will include the minimum charge and an
estimated charge based upon the actual usage of the same quarter of
the previous year. [Amended 6-13-2012 by Ord. No. 8-2012]
D. For new services, the estimated charge in the initial year of service
shall be determined by the Water/Sewer Rent Collector and shall be
based upon 1/4 of the average annual usage of water customers with
the same or similar characteristics of type of use, size of meter and
number and size of units serviced.
E. On each quarterly bill and meter reading cycle, an actual meter reading
by a Township employee assigned to read meters and subsequent
thereto, an adjusted amount payable for water/sewer will be calculated
for the quarter.
§ 222-11 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § 222-13
218:897
shall be fully paid; and the Committee shall also take the proceedings
authorized by law for the enforcement of said water charges as a lien upon
said house, tenement and lot or other premises by a sale of the premises in
the manner provided by law; and in addition to the remedies above provided
the Committee shall take other remedies for the collection of the water
charges as are authorized by law.
§ 222-14. Service lines.
A service line will be used to supply a single building or a single group
of buildings as a group of factory buildings, hospital buildings, or a single
institution having a number of separate buildings. Not more than one
service line shall be run into a building unless by special agreement
between the Water/Sewer Utility Department and the applicant for such
service line.
§ 222-15. Turning off of water.
Water will be turned off from any premises upon written order of the
applicant without in any way affecting the existing agreement for service
or on violation of rules or regulations promulgated by the Township
Committee.
§ 222-16. Discontinuance of service.
A. Service under an application may be discontinued for any of the
following reasons:
(1) For the use of water for any other property than that described in
the application.
(2) For willful waste of water through improper or imperfect pipes,
fixtures, or otherwise.
(3) For failure to maintain in good order, connections, service lines or
fixtures owned by the applicant.
(4) For molesting any service pipe, meter, curb stop lock or seal or any
other appliance of the Water/Sewer Utility Department.
(5) In case of vacancy of premises.
(6) For neglecting to make or renew advance payments or for
nonpayment for water service, or any other charges occurring
under the application.
(7) For refusal of reasonable access to the property for the purposes of
inspecting or for reading, caring for or removing meter.
B. Service shall be discontinued for neglecting or failing to make payment
of any bill for water minimum or excess usage charges rendered under
this chapter within 60 days after the date the charge is due and
payable. A written notice of the proposed discontinuance and the
§ 222-13 WALL CODE § 222-16
218:898
§ 222-17. Removal of service connection.
If it be found that the water has been turned on again without compliance
with this article, the Superintendent of Public Works may cause the service
connection to be removed, and it shall not be restored until the provisions
of this article have been fully complied with, and until all back charges and
expenses have been paid and directions issued for turning on of the water.
§ 222-18. Conditions for resumption of service.
Where the water has been turned off for nonpayment of water charges
or for the violation of any provisions of this article, it shall not be turned
on again without the direction of the Township Committee and until all
expenses attending the turning off and turning on the water, together with
the charges accrued, shall have been paid.
§ 222-19. Inspection of pipes, meters and fixtures.
All pipes, meters and fixtures shall be subject to all reasonable hours of
inspection by employees of the Water/Sewer Utility Department, identified
by proper badges.
§ 222-20. Tampering with meters, pipes or fixtures.
No person shall, without the written permission of the Water/Sewer Rent
Collector, connect or disconnect the meter, pipe or other fixtures, or in any
other manner tamper or interfere, or permit, suffer or allow the tampering
or interference with the meters, pipes, stops, connections or other
instruments used for the purpose of obtaining water.
§ 222-21. Discontinuance of service at vacant premises.
No person shall permit water to be supplied to premises owned or occupied
by him where the premises are vacant or abandoned in freezing weather
but shall make application for discontinuance of service.
§ 222-22. Fire hydrants.
No person, except the Superintendent of Public Works or other authorized
person, shall take water from any public fire hydrant, hose, plug, street
washer or fountain pipe, except for fire purposes or for the use of the
Fire Department in case of fire; and no public fire hydrant shall be used
for sprinkling streets, flushing sewers or gutters or for any other than fire
purposes, except with the approval of the Water/Sewer Utility Department.
reasons therefor shall be mailed to the last known address of the
owner of record of the property at least 10 days prior to the date of
discontinuance. [Amended 4-21-2004 by Ord. No. 7-2004]
§ 222-16 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § 222-23
218:899
§ 222-23. Curbs required for water main or service line.
The installation of any water main or any service line shall not be made until
curbs at the proper grade are installed.
§ 222-24. Location of fire hydrants.
The location of any and all fire hydrants shall be fixed and determined by
the Superintendent of Public Works, subject to the approval of the Township
Committee.
§ 222-25. Prorated service.
New water service shall be charged commencing on the day the service was
turned on and for every day thereafter. No charges shall accrue after water
service is completely disconnected from the property.
§ 222-26. Water meter test. [Amended 6-13-2012 by Ord. No.
8-2012]
The Water/Sewer Utility Department may, at the request of any consumer,
test the meter in the presence of the consumer or the owner of the premises
upon the payment of a fee of $125, payable in advance. If the meter is found
to be fast, bills rendered will be adjusted with the understanding that when
the test is made, the meter or meters will record within 2% of absolute
correctness upon ordinary size flows or openings. In no case shall there be
an adjustment to an amount less than the minimum annual service charge.
If the meter is found to be fast, the consumer or owner shall be refunded
the test fee.
§ 222-27. Restrictions on water use during drought.
In the event that the Township Committee shall determine that a shortage
of water may occur due to prolonged drought or heat or level of any wells
serving the water system of the Township is at a low level, or because of
breakdown of equipment of the water system or the necessity of repair of
same or for any other emergency or reason, the use of the water may be
restricted or prohibited by order of the Mayor.
§ 222-28. Damaged or nonfunctioning meter.
The owner of any premises where a meter is installed shall be responsible
for its care and protection from freezing or hot water or any other injury
thereto. The owner or the consumer shall notify the Water/Sewer Utility
Department of any damage or injury to or of a nonworking meter as soon as
the same comes to his knowledge. The costs for repair or replacement of a
damaged meter will be determined by the Superintendent of Public Works.
Bypass of a meter shall not be permitted. If the consumer does not respond
to a mail or telephone request for a reading within 10 days, an estimated
bill shall be forwarded by the Water/Sewer Rent Collector to the consumer.
§ 222-23 WALL CODE § 222-29
218:900
§ 222-29. Meter readings and current address.
§ 222-30. Damage caused by shutting off water.
No person shall be entitled to any damages for the shutting off of the water
for any cause whatsoever or for accidents affecting the supply of water or
interruption of service for any mechanical, chemical or electrical difficulty
resulting in an interruption or cessation of the water service.
§ 222-31. Refunds and forgiveness; billing complaints. [Amended
7-23-2014 by Ord. No. 16-2014]
§ 222-32. Boilers depending on water pressure.
All consumers having boilers upon their premises depending upon the
pressure of the water meter and pipes of the Water/Sewer Utility
Department to keep them supplied are hereby cautioned against danger of
collapse, and all such damage must be borne exclusively by the consumer.
Under no circumstances shall the Township be responsible for any damage
to pipes, fixtures or property caused by the turning on or off of water for any
cause whatsoever. To provide against such damage to boilers or hot water
heaters, a safety valve shall be installed to relieve excessive steam pressure
A. All meters shall be read quarterly and the quantity recorded shall be
conclusive upon the consumer. If a meter reader is unable to get a
meter reading, a notice shall be left at the place of service. [Amended
3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 1-2009]
B. A customer of the Water/Sewer Utility Department of the Township
shall notify the Water/Sewer Utility Department in writing of any
change in billing address to ensure receipt of all applicable bills. If
written notice is not received, no responsibility shall be assumed by the
Township for the discontinuance of water service.
A. Any complaint concerning a meter reading or charges billed must be
made within 15 days of billing date.
B. The Township of Wall may refund or forgive any water use charge
issued pursuant to §§ 222-7 and 222-8 so long as the Township
determines:
(1) That there has been an overcharge or there is other good and
sufficient cause to refund a portion of, or forgive, a water use
charge; this is a one-time only cancellation and proof of problem
and repair are required;
(2) If the water use charge is forgiven or refunded, the water use
charges that remain shall be uniform and equitable for the same
type and class of use or service;
(3) If there is an underground main break or leak.
§ 222-29 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § 222-32
218:901
or a tank provided so as to maintain a supply of water in such boiler or
heater when the water supply is discontinued at the main.
§ 222-33. Water use restrictions.
§ 222-34. Connection required; time limit.
The owner of every existing house, building or structure and the owner of
every house, building or structure hereafter to be constructed or acquired,
located on a property along the line of any public water supply main now
or hereafter constructed or acquired in the Township shall, within 60 days
of receipt of notice of the mandatory connection date, connect and hook up
the water supply facilities of such house, building or structure to such water
supply system.
§ 222-35. Failure of owner to connect; connection by Township.
Upon the failure by the owner to so connect or hook up to the water supply
system as required by § 222-34, the Township may cause such connection to
be made under its direction and supervision or award one or more contracts
A. Between May 15 and September 15 of each year, the Township
Committee may, by resolution, should it determine it to be in the best
interest of the public health, safety and welfare, restrict the outside use
of water to provide that no person shall use or operate or cause, or
allow to be used or operated, lawn sprinklers or lawn sprinkler systems
connected to the Township's water supply system, except between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., prevailing time, on the same two days
each week that garbage is collected in the area of the Township where
the property is located.
B. In the event that the Township Committee determines that a water
supply emergency exists in the Township, it may by resolution provide
for any restrictions on the outside use of water as it deems necessary to
provide for the public health, safety and welfare until such time as the
water supply emergency is determined to have ended by further
resolution of the Township Committee. A determination of a water
supply emergency may be made by the Township Committee at any
regular, special or emergency public meeting. A violation of any such
water use restriction during the period of water supply emergency shall
be deemed to be a violation of this section.
C. The outside use of water from hand-held hoses with nozzles and from
private wells for which valid New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection permits have been issued is permitted at any time.
D. Any person utilizing a private well for irrigation purposes shall register
any such well with the Water/Sewer Utility Department. The Water/
Sewer Utility Department will verify that the well is the subject of a
valid permit and shall issue a "Private Well" sign for display by the
property owner.
§ 222-32 WALL CODE § 222-35
218:902
for the making of such connection. The cost and expense thereof shall
be filed under oath with the Township Clerk by the appropriate Township
official in charge of the department making said connection. The governing
body shall examine the charges and if properly made shall confirm it and
file the statement with Collector of Taxes who shall record the charge in the
same manner as other assessments.
§ 222-36. Overdue charges to become lien.
The foregoing water charges shall be a lien upon the premises connected
from the date that the charges become due and until paid, and the Township
shall have the same remedies for the collection thereof with interest, costs
and penalties, as it has by law for collection of taxes upon real estate.
§ 222-35 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § 222-36
218:903

ARTICLE II
Sewer
§ 222-37. Water/Sewer Utility Department established; rules and
regulations. [Amended 12-9-2009 by Ord. No. 36-2009]
There is hereby established a Water/Sewer Utility Department. Water and
sewer billing shall be the responsibility of the Utility Tax Collector. In order
to protect the identity of water and sewer customers against identity theft,
the Township hereby authorizes and adopts the identity theft prevention
program attached herein as Exhibit A83 and made a part hereof. All
Township employees and any applicable independent contractor shall abide
by its terms and conditions thereof. The identity theft prevention program
may be supplemented, amended and revised by a resolution duly adopted
by the Township Committee.
§ 222-38. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONNECTION DATE — The day following the service of a notice from the
Township that a sewer is available to serve a house, building or structure
except that in the case of a house, building, or structure completed
subsequent to the availability of a sewer to the premises on which the
house, building or structure is located, "connection date" shall mean the
date of the initial occupancy of said building or the date of the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy therefor, whichever of said dates occurs first.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and disposing of
foods, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
GREASE TRAP — Shall be given its normal definition in the retail food
industry. A device used to collect oil and grease at the entrance of the
wastewater pipe system and preventing the oil and grease from traveling
through the wastewater pipes into the wastewater system of the Township.
A grease trap must be installed in such a manner as to facilitate easy
inspection and cleaning. [Added 3-12-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008]
PERSON — An individual, family unit, firm, partnership, corporation,
association, proprietorship, or any other group or persons or the legal
successors or representatives thereof.
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Shall be given its normal definition in
the industry. "Retail food establishment" includes all retail businesses which
process and/or serve food and food products.[Added 3-12-2008 by Ord.
No. 4-2008]
ROOMING HOUSE — A dwelling unit in which living quarters without
kitchen facilities are available for rent to the general public.
83.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 222-37 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § 222-38
218:905
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage to which storm, surface
and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business and other buildings or structures.
SEWAGE SYSTEM — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
TRASH — Useless waste or rejected matter other than sewage or garbage.
TREATMENT WORKS — Shall have the meaning as set forth in the United
States Environmental Protection Agency regulations published in the Code
of Federal Regulations 40 CFR 35:905.
§ 222-39. Violations and penalties; prohibited discharges.
[Amended 4-21-2004 by Ord. No. 7-2004; 3-12-2008 by Ord. No.
4-2008]
Monetary penalties may be assessed in an amount up to $1,000 for
violations of the following:
A. For neglecting or failing to make payment of any bill for sewer
minimum or excess charges rendered under this chapter within 60 days
after the date the charge is due and payable. A written notice of the
proposed discontinuance and the reasons therefor shall be mailed to
the last known address of the owner of record of the property at least
10 days prior to the date of discontinuance.
B. For refusal of reasonable access to the property for purposes of
inspecting, and for refusal of entry at all reasonable hours to the
premises of any users of the sewer service for the purpose of examining
the pipes, fixtures, and also to check the number of fixtures connected.
C. For fraudulent representation on the part of the consumer or the owner
of the premises.
D. Persistent violation of rules and regulations.
E. For discharging or causing to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes in any portion of the sewer system:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150º F.
(2) Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per
million, by weight, of fat, oil or grease.
(3) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(4) Any garbage or trash, with the exception of garbage that has been
treated by a garbage disposal unit approved by the Construction
Code Official.
§ 222-38 WALL CODE § 222-39
218:906
§ 222-39.1. Grease traps. [Added 3-12-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008]
(5) Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, or any other solid or
viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in
sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the
sewage works.
(6) Any waters or waste having a pH lower than 5.3 or higher than 9.0
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage
or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of sewage works.
"pH" shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of
hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
(7) Any waters or waste containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewer treatment
process, or constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any
hazard in receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
(8) Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is
required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant.
(9) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
(10)No cellar drains, no area drains, no roof leaders, no sump pumps
and no downspouts or any new connections from inflow sources
shall be connected to the sewage system.
A. Installation and maintenance of grease traps.
(1) All food establishments, catering establishments, commercial food
preparation facilities, garage facilities, car wash facilities and other
such businesses which generate sanitary sewage containing oil, fat
or grease shall have and maintain grease removal equipment that
meets the requirements of this article. Grease traps shall be
maintained and inspected to ensure efficient operation. Grease
traps shall be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. The
grease trap shall be in continuous operation at all times.
(2) Grease traps must be maintained and inspected to ensure that they
are never allowed to reach more than 3/4 of their capacity. Grease
trap cleaning shall be done biweekly. A maintenance log, including
the time, date and signature of the person performing the cleaning,
shall be kept on the premises and shall be readily available for
inspection by the Township. If it is determined that the system is
not sufficient, the cleaning shall be increased or a larger unit shall
be installed. Inspection records shall be maintained for a minimum
period of five years.
§ 222-39 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § 222-39.1
218:907
§ 222-40. Sewer rental charges. [Amended 3-13-2002 by Ord. No.
10-2002; 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 1-2009; 11-24-2009 by Ord. No.
32-2009; 5-11-2011 by Ord. No. 11-2011; 4-11-2012 by Ord. No.
6-2012; 6-13-2012 by Ord. No. 8-2012; 12-19-2018 by Ord. No.
25-2018]
The quarterly minimum rental charge for use of the Township's sewer
collection system shall be $110.48 per dwelling unit. Excess sewerage use
shall be charged at the rate of $2.01 per 1,000 gallons of water or any
part thereof over the first 31,250 gallons of water consumed as recorded
on the water meter installed for each house or other building or unit in
each quarterly meter reading cycle. In case of commercial, industrial, public
or multifamily users, the annual charge shall be based upon equivalent
dwelling units. The following schedule shall constitute the basis for said
charge:
Schedule of Equivalent Dwelling Units
Type
Number of Equivalent
Dwelling Units
Single-family dwelling 1
Multipurpose (apartments, multifamily homes, assisted living, congregate
care facilities, trailer, store or other similar use):
First family 1
Each additional family 1
Motel, hotel, rooming or lodging 1
(3) Grease trap additives shall only be used with the approval of the
Township. All removed material shall be disposed of in accordance
with all state and federal regulations. All maintenance logs and
manifests shall be maintained on the premises and made available
upon request at the time of inspection by the Township. These logs
and records shall be maintained for a minimum period of five years.
(4) An inspection fee in the amount of $100 shall be imposed as
follows:
(a) For each inspection carried out pursuant to a complaint when
such inspection results in a determination that said
establishment is in violation of the State Sanitary Code or of
any municipal ordinance or state and federal regulation
relating thereto.
(b) For each reinspection carried out after either a failure of the
regular inspection or failure of an inspection carried out
pursuant to a complaint as set forth in this section.
(5) For all new construction or installation, waste disposals and
commercial dishwashers shall not discharge into the grease trap.
§ 222-39.1 WALL CODE § 222-40
218:908
Schedule of Equivalent Dwelling Units
Type
Number of Equivalent
Dwelling Units
Plus, for each office 1
Plus, for each manager's or owner's
apartment
1
Industrial, commercial, service or office enterprise:
With 20 or fewer employees or occupants 1 per 8-hr. shift
For each additional 20 persons or part
thereof
1/2 per 8-hr. shift
Licensed alcoholic beverage establishment:
For the first 20 permitted occupants 1
For each additional 20 permitted occupants
or part thereof
1/2
Restaurant, luncheonette or soda fountain:
For first 20 seats 1
For each additional 20 seats or part thereof 1/2
Municipal buildings:
With 20 or fewer employees or occupants 1
For each additional 20 persons or part
thereof
1/2
Professional office located in a residential
dwelling
1 1/3
School:
Per 100 students and/or personnel or part
thereof
3 1/2
With food preparation facilities, per 100
students or personnel or part thereof an
additional
1 1/2
With showers per 100 students or
personnel or part thereof an additional
1 1/2
House of worship, fire company, first aid
squad or nonprofit club or organization
1
Hospitals, nursing homes, rest or convalescent homes:
Each bed 1/5
Laundromat:
Each washing machine 1/4
Garage or service station 2
Car wash:
§ 222-40 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § 222-40
218:909
Schedule of Equivalent Dwelling Units
Type
Number of Equivalent
Dwelling Units
Self service, for each station/bay 1
Automatic, for each car washing lane 5
Recreational facilities:
Bowling alley:
For each 10 lanes or part thereof 1
Additional for each 10 lanes or part
thereof it if has a bar
1
Tennis or racquet ball:
For each 10 courts or part thereof 2
Additional for each 10 courts or part
thereof if it has a bar
2
Skating rink:
Per 1,000 square feet of skating area or
part thereof
1
Mobile homes for each permitted trailer 1
§ 222-41. Inspection.
In accordance with the law, authorized officers, agents or employees of the
Township may enter into all premises in the Township in order to determine
the use made or to be made of the sewage system by the owners, tenants or
occupants of the premises.
§ 222-42. Review of charges; toxic pollutants; charges or operation
and maintenance for extraneous flow; notification; new connections.
A. When multiple uses or enterprises exist within a single system user or
on a single property, separate unit user charges shall be applied to each
applicable type or use contained therein as set forth in this schedule,
except for owner-occupied premises with not more than two singlefamily
dwelling units.
B. Any person not covered by the foregoing classifications will be subject
to rates to be determined by the Township Committee after due and
proper investigation of the sewage requirements of the person and as
near as possible in the same ratio as the above classifications.
C. In the event that a use may fall into two or more classifications, the
classifications carrying the highest sewer rental shall apply.
§ 222-40 WALL CODE § 222-42
218:910
§ 222-43. New service prorated. [Amended 3-11-2009 by Ord. No.
1-2009; 11-24-2009 by Ord. No. 32-2009]
Any new sewer connection shall be charged the quarterly minimum charge
for the applicable classification for each quarter or part thereof between the
commencement of service and the date the customer will receive the first
quarterly bill, and shall be allowed a prorated water gallonage allowance
for such period.
§ 222-44. Overdue charges a lien.
The foregoing sewer rental charges shall be a lien upon the premises
connected from the date that the charges become due and until paid, and
the Township shall have the same remedies for the collection thereof with
interest, costs and penalties, as it has by law for collection of taxes upon
real estate.
A. The sewer rental charges shall be reviewed annually and shall be
revised periodically to reflect actual operation and maintenance costs
of the treatment works.
B. Each user which discharges any toxic pollutants which causes an
increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge of the
Township's works shall pay for such increased costs.
C. The cost of operation and maintenance for all flow not directly
attributable to users (i.e., infiltration inflows) shall be distributed
among all users of the Township's treatment works system based upon
either of the following:
(1) In the same manner that the Township distributes the cost of
operation and maintenance among the Township's users (or user
classes) for actual use; or
(2) Under a system which uses one of the combinations of the following
factors on a reasonable basis:
(a) Flow volume of the users;
(b) Land area of the users;
(c) Number of hookups or discharges of the users.
D. Notification. Each user shall be notified at least annually in conjunction
with a regular bill of the rate and that portion of the user charges which
are attributable to waste flow treatment services.
E. New connections. All new sewers and connections to the sewer system
shall be properly designed, constructed and inspected prior to
operation.
§ 222-42 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § 222-45
218:911
§ 222-45. Connection required; time limit.
The owner of every existing house, building or structure and the owner of
every house, building or structure hereafter to be constructed or acquired,
which may be occupied or used by human beings located on a property
along the line of any public sewer now or hereafter constructed or acquired
in Township shall within 60 days of receipt of notice of the mandatory
connection date connect and hook up the sewerage facilities emanating
from such house, building or structure to such sewerage system.
§ 222-46. Failure of owner connect; connection by Township.
[Amended 6-13-2012 by Ord. No. 8-2012]
Upon the failure by the owner to so connect or hook up to the sewerage
system as required by § 222-45, the Township may cause such connection to
be made under its direction and supervision or award one or more contracts
for the making of such connection. The cost and expense thereof shall
be filed under oath with the Township Clerk by the appropriate Township
official in charge of the department making said connection. The governing
body shall examine the charges and if properly made shall confirm it and
file the statement with the collector of taxes who shall record the charge in
the same manner as other assessments. Until such time as a connection is
completed, a fee will be charged every quarter equivalent to the quarterly
sewer minimum in § 222-40 under sewer rental charges.
§ 222-47. Charges to become lien.
Every such charge shall bear interest and penalties at the same rate as
local improvements and from the time of confirmation shall be a first and
paramount lien against the respective property so connected and shall
be enforced and collected in the same manner as assessments for local
improvements, all as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:63-54 et seq.
§ 222-48. Payment of sewer charge and connection fee; permit
required.
A. Application for the use of the sewage system shall be made to the
Township of Wall, upon forms prescribed by the Township, and payment
of the annual sewer rental charge and connection fee shall be made at
the time of the application. A plumbing permit for the installation of a
house connection sewer pipe from the street line to the house or other
building shall be issued by the Construction Official only after payment
of the sewer rental charge and connection fee and compliance with
other ordinances and regulations relating to such installations. The
Construction Official shall have the authority to adopt regulations
relating to the installation of the house connection lines which shall be
enforceable as if fully set forth herein. No sewer connection shall be
made prior to payment of the sewer rental charge and connection fee
and the issuance of a plumbing permit; and, no use thereof shall be
made until final approval by the Construction Official.
§ 222-45 WALL CODE § 222-48
218:912
§ 222-49. Charges for connections with sewer main.
The charge for making a four-inch lateral connection from the sewer main
to the curbline, including street excavation not exceeding 35 lineal feet,
shall be $400 if the connection is made by the Township's sewer contractor
during the course of sewer construction. Otherwise, a minimum fee of
$400 shall be payable, or the actual cost, whichever is greater, for the
above-mentioned four-inch connection. Connections with larger than fourinch
pipes are to be made only on special arrangements with the Sewer
Utility Department and the applicant shall pay the full and actual cost of the
material, labor and equipment for the installation, but in no case less than
a minimum charge of $400 as stated above.
§ 222-50. Owner's responsibility.
Maintenance, cleaning and replacement of the sanitary sewer service line
from the main to the building serviced thereby shall be the responsibility
and at the expense of the property owner.
§ 222-51. Private wells.
A structure in the Township which furnishes its own water from a private
well but which discharges its sewerage and other waste water into the
sanitary sewer system of the Township shall have a meter installed to
measure the sewage entering the sanitary sewer system. The meter shall
be installed by the Wall Township Water/Sewer Utility Department with the
B. Every connection required by this article shall be made in a manner to
discharge into said sewerage system all waste and sanitary sewage
originating in the house, building or structure in accordance with this
article and said connection shall be subject to the right of inspection
and approved by the Township. All connection charges, service charges
and inspection fees imposed by Township shall be paid when due.
C. All delinquent bills, for sewer rental charges, sewer connection fees
and/or inspection fees, which exceed $500 shall be paid in cash or by
certified check.
D. Sewer connection fees shall be charged as follows: [Added 6-11-2008
by Ord. No. 8-2008; amended 2-26-2014 by Ord. No. 2-2014]
Description Connection Fee
Connection fee for existing/new residential
dwelling units
$2,956
Connection fee for existing/new buildings other
than residential; labor and materials by
developer
$2,956 per EU
Calculation of equivalent units (EUs): estimated average water system
consumption (gallons per day) divided by average flow per singlefamily
dwelling unit.
§ 222-48 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § 222-51
218:913
actual costs thereof being charged to the property owner pursuant to the
procedure set forth under §§ 222-46 and 222-47 above.
§ 222-52. Prior arrangements.
The requirements of this article and the rates herein shall take precedent
over and control and govern any other agreements previously entered into
by the Township for the treatment of sewerage by the Township's treatment
works.
§ 222-53. Waiver from sewer connection requirement.
A. The owner of a property required to connect to the Township sewerage
system pursuant to § 222-45 and 222-46 hereof may apply to the
Township Committee, on an application form to be prepared by the
Township Clerk, for a waiver from the mandatory sewer connection
requirement, should the property satisfy one of the following categories
of exemption from the sewer connection requirement:
(1) Distance exemption. An existing single-family dwelling which is
located at a distance from the sewer line greater than twice the
minimum lot width required by Chapter 140, Land Use and
Development Regulations, for the zone in which the property is
located may be exempt from the mandatory connection
requirement. Any property located in the RR-5 or RR-6 Zone which
meets the minimum standards for exemption in the RR Zone may
be exempt from the mandatory connection requirement. This
exemption shall not apply to a new flag lot noted by a subdivision
approval. Any new flag lot noted shall be required to connect to the
sewer system.
(2) Extraordinary circumstances. The owner of an existing house,
building or structure may apply for a mandatory connection waiver
based upon extraordinary circumstances, where a mandatory
connection would require a stream or wetlands crossing or there
exists another similar environmental condition requiring extensive
regulatory permits from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection or other county or state regulatory
agencies.
B. No waiver from the mandatory sewer connection requirement shall be
granted by the Township Committee unless the property in question
contains an individual sewerage disposal system which is operational
and may continue to operate in compliance with all applicable local,
county and state health codes or other regulations.
C. The grant of a waiver from a mandatory sewer connection requirement
by the Township Committee shall not affect in any way the obligation of
the property owner to pay any applicable sewer assessment levied
against the property in question.
§ 222-51 WALL CODE § 222-53
218:914
ARTICLE III
Illicit Connection
[Added 3-8-2006 by Ord. No. 7-2006]
§ 222-54. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township, unless
that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other than the Tier
A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit Number
NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not limited to,
leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including but not limited to
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township or other public body and
is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides, or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate, product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 222-54 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § 222-55
218:915
§ 222-55. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated the
Township any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 222-56. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this article
or of any rule or regulation adopted hereunder shall be subject to the
following penalties:
§ 222-57. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer and Police Department shall be the officials
responsible for the enforcement of this article and the rules and regulations
established hereunder.
A. A fine of not more than $1,250;
B. Imprisonment for a term of not more than 90 days or community service
in the Township's recycling program for a period of not more than 90
days; or
C. Both a fine and imprisonment or community service.
§ 222-55 WALL CODE § 222-57
218:916
ARTICLE IV
Wells
[Added 11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 19-2018]
§ 222-58. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — Is defined as the certified Public Health Officer
acting in concert with the Wall Township Health Advisory Board (§ 6-50 et
seq.).
§ 222-59. Purpose.
Before final certification and operation of a new well, other than an exempt
well as defined in § 222-60, and before the certification of an existing well
for the purpose of obtaining a continued certificate of occupancy (for rent,
transfer, or sale of a property), the person owning the lot upon which a
well is located shall have a sample of the well water collected and analyzed
by a laboratory certified by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection. Tests shall be performed to determine the presence and amount
of individual hazardous contaminants and substances set forth in § 222-61
of this article. The water sample shall be taken as close to the pumping
well as possible. In no case shall treatment equipment be installed on a
new well prior to the first sampling. The results of said laboratory analysis
shall be forwarded directly by the laboratory to the Wall Township Health
Department.
§ 222-60. Exemptions.
The following nonpotable water supply wells shall be exempt from the
sampling and analysis requirements:
§ 222-61. Parameters.
A. Any nonpotable well, the pumps and lines of which do not enter a
building, crawl space or garage and are directly connected to a
sprinkler system manifold;
B. Geothermal groundwater heat pump wells that are constructed and
installed as totally enclosed systems and are incapable of being used as
a potable water supply;
C. Fire protection wells as defined in the State Uniform Construction
Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-1.1 et seq., which are incapable of being used as
potable water supply.
A. Test parameters shall be consistent with those specified in the New
Jersey Private Well Testing Act, N.J.A.C. 7:9E.
§ 222-58 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § 222-61
218:917
§ 222-62. Resamples.
In the event that the laboratory analysis of a water sample collected from
a well reveals that the presence of any of the hazardous contaminants or
substances identified in § 222-61 of this article in an amount exceeding
the maximum contaminant levels set forth or incorporated in this article
for the same, the Wall Township Health Department must be notified prior
to resampling the well for the purpose of determining corrective and
resampling procedures. The Wall Township Health Department may also
require a second confirmation sample to be taken for a contaminant after a
specified number of days, not to exceed two weeks.
§ 222-63. Submission of sample results.
The laboratory collecting the sample and performing the water analysis
required under §§ 222-61 and 222-62 of this article shall submit the results
of its analysis directly to the Wall Township Health Department with the
following information:
§ 222-64. Restrictions.
B. All water samples shall be collected, tested and analyzed in accordance
with criteria and procedures established by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection in N.J.A.C. 7:18-2.1 et seq.
A. The block and lot number and municipality of the property upon which
the well is located and the reason for the sample (i.e., new construction
or resale);
B. The name and mailing address of all persons owning the property upon
which the well is located;
C. The laboratory employee or the laboratory's authorized representative
who physically collected the sample from the well;
D. The date and time that the well sample was collected;
E. The specific point of collection of the water sample;
F. The date and time the sample was analyzed by the laboratory;
G. The type, size and purpose of the treatment unit, if installed.
A. No real property nor any interest in the same shall be granted a
continued certificate of occupancy which utilizes a well for its potable
water supply until:
(1) The well water has been sampled and analyzed in accordance with
the procedures set forth in this article; and
(2) The Wall Township Health Department has certified that the
laboratory analysis of the water sample collected from said well
does not disclose the presence of any of the hazardous
§ 222-61 WALL CODE § 222-64
218:918
§ 222-65. Right of entry.
The Wall Township Health Department shall have access and entry to any
property upon which there is located a well or individual sewage disposal
system for the purpose of inspecting and/or testing the same.
§ 222-66. Closure of wells.
The Wall Township Health Department may order any well which is
determined to be polluted or detrimental to the public health closed until
and unless the water is made potable.
§ 222-67. Permit required.
No person shall drill, construct, install or redesignate the use of any well
until a permit shall have been issued by the Board of Health.
§ 222-68. Fees.
The fee for the filing of an application and plans and issuance of a permit to
drill, construct, install or redesignate the use of any well shall be $50.
§ 222-69. Violations and penalties.
contaminants or substances set forth in § 222-61 of this article
in an amount which exceeds the maximum contaminant level
established under the Act, the Regulations or this article for the
same.
B. The granting of a certificate of compliance for a new well or a continued
certificate of occupancy for sale, transfer or rent shall be valid for a
period of one year.
C. If there is a subsequent sale of the property or need for a continued
certificate of occupancy needed within one year of the original
certificate, the transferor need not obtain a new certification.
A. In addition to any other liability or penalty imposed by law, any person
violating any provision of this article shall be subject to a penalty as
stated in Wall Township Code § 1-1.
B. Each and every day in which a violation of any of the provisions of this
article exists shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 222-64 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § 222-69
218:919
Chapter 223
SEPTIC SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 191. Water and sewers — See Ch. 222.
§ 223-1. Adoption of standards.
A code regulating the location, construction, use, maintenance and method
of emptying or cleaning individual sewage disposal systems; the issuance
of permits to locate, construct, empty or clean the systems; and fixing
penalties for the violation thereof is hereby adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A.
26:3-69.1 et seq. A copy of the statute is annexed to this chapter and made
a part of it without inclusion of the text.
§ 223-2. Permit and certificate required.
§ 223-3. Emptying or cleaning of septic tank.
No person shall engage in the business of emptying or cleaning septic tanks,
cesspools, privies or any place used for the reception or storage of human
excrement who does not have a license to engage in such business issued
by the New Jersey Public Utilities Commission.
§ 223-4. Hearing on denial of license or permit.
In the event a license or permit or certification required by this chapter
is denied by the Health Officer, a hearing shall be held thereon before the
A. Permit required. No person shall locate, construct or alter any
individual sewage disposal system until a permit for the location,
construction or alteration of the sewage disposal system shall have
been issued by the Health Officer. The Health Officer is defined in Wall
Township Code § 6-53C.
B. Issuance of permit. The Health Officer may issue a permit if an
application is accompanied by a certificate made by an engineer
licensed to practice professional engineering in New Jersey stating that
the design of the individual sewage disposal system as proposed follows
the code.
C. Certificate required. New individual disposal systems shall not be
placed in operation, nor shall new dwellings or buildings or additions
thereto be sold or occupied, which must rely on such a system for
sewage disposal, until the Board of Health Officer shall have issued a
certificate indicating that the disposal system has been located and
constructed in compliance with the terms of Subsection A.
§ 222-69 WALL CODE § 223-4
218:920
Board within 15 days after request is made by the applicant, and, upon the
hearing, the Township Committee shall affirm, alter or rescind its previous
determination and take action accordingly within 15 days after the hearing.
§ 223-5. Violations of code; stop order.
The Health Officer may order all further work in and about any individual
sewage disposal system which is being erected or installed in violation of
the code to be stopped forthwith, except such work as shall be necessary
to remedy the violation, and thereafter the work continued without any
violation of any of the provisions of the code, and, after issuance of such
order and the service of a copy upon the person connected with or working
in and about the erection or installation of the disposal system, or any part
thereof, no further work shall be done except as aforesaid.
§ 223-6. Fees and charges.
The following fees and charges shall be established:
§ 223-7. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as per the
provisions of general penalty, § 1-1.
Appendix
Chapter A226
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A226-1. Title.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Cable Television
Franchise Ordinance of the Township of Wall."
§ A226-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the terms defined above shall have the
meanings there indicated,84 and the following additional terms shall have
the following meanings:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — That statute of the State of New Jersey
relating to cable television, known as the "Cable Television Act," N.J.S.A.
48:5A-1 et seq.
A. For the filing of an application and plans and issuance of a permit to
locate, construct or alter an individual sewage disposal system: $350.
84.Editor's Note: This ordinance did not include any definitions other than those included in
this section.
§ 223-4 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § A226-2
218:921
APPLICATION — Cablevision's application for renewal of municipal
consent, which application is on file in the Township Clerk's office and
is incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof, except as
modified, changed, limited or altered by this ordinance.
BOARD — The Board of Public Utilities of the State of New Jersey or its
successor agency.
COMPANY — Cablevision of Monmouth, Inc. ("Cablevision"), the grantee of
rights under this ordinance.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FEDERAL ACT — That federal statute relating to cable communications
commonly known as the "Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984," 47
U.S.C. § 521 et seq., and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, or as those
statutes may be amended.
FEDERAL REGULATIONS — Those federal regulations relating to cable
television services, 47 CFR 76.1 et seq. (and, to the extent applicable, any
other federal rules and regulations relating to cable television, including but
not limited to those described in 47 CFR 76.3), or as such regulations may
be amended.
STATE — The State of New Jersey.
STATE REGULATIONS — Those regulations of the State of New Jersey
Board of Public Utilities relating to cable television, N.J.A.C. 14:17-1.1 et
seq. and N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq., or as such regulations may be amended.
TOWNSHIP — The governing body of the Township of Wall in the County of
Monmouth and the State of New Jersey.
§ A226-3. Findings.
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to the company
was held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions
of the Act. Said hearing having been held and fully open to the public, and
the municipality having received all comments regarding the qualifications
of Cablevision to receive this consent, and after extensive negotiations, the
Township hereby finds Cablevision possesses the necessary legal, technical,
character, financial and other qualifications to support municipal consent,
and that Cablevision's operating and construction arrangements are
adequate and feasible. If Cablevision undertakes the commitments and
performs thereunder, such shall provide a reasonable assurance of meeting
the Township's future cable related needs.
§ A226-4. Grant of authority.
The Township hereby grants to the company its nonexclusive consent to
place in, upon, along, across, above, over and under its highways, streets,
alleys, sidewalks, public ways and public places in the municipality poles,
wires, cables and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in
the Township of a cable television system, and for the provision of any
§ A226-2 WALL CODE § A226-4
218:922
communication service over such system as may be authorized by federal
or state regulatory agencies. Operation and construction, pursuant to said
consent, is conditioned upon prior approval of the Board of Public Utilities.
§ A226-5. Duration of franchise.
§ A226-6. Expiration and subsequent renewal.
If the company seeks successive consent, it shall, prior to the expiration
of this consent, apply for a municipal consent and certificate of approval
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-16 and applicable state and federal rules
and regulations. The company shall also petition the Board for approval
authorizing continued operation during the period following expiration of
the consent granted herein and until such a time that a decision is made by
the Township and the Board relative to the renewal of said consent.
§ A226-7. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance to the company shall apply to the
entirety of the Township and any property hereafter annexed.
§ A226-8. Primary service area.
The company shall be required to proffer video programming service along
any public right-of-way to any person's business or residence within the
portion of the franchise territory, as described in the map attached to
the application for municipal consent, at tariffed rates for standard and
nonstandard installation. Cablevision's system shall be capable of providing
service to all residential units within the Township, whether now in
existence of hereafter to be built.
§ A226-9. Extension of service.
The company shall be required to extend its system to provide service
along any public right-of-way outside of its primary service area to any
person's residence within the franchise territory that are located in areas
with a residential density of 25 homes per mile or greater (measured
A. This consent granted herein shall be nonexclusive and shall be for a
term of five years from the date of issuance of a certificate of approval
by the Board.
B. During the franchise term, the company agrees to meet with the
Township Committee or any representatives from the Township at the
Township's request to discuss implementation of this franchise
agreement and the company's plans for new technologies.
C. If during the term of this franchise the Township finds that the
provisions of this ordinance are not satisfied, the Township may petition
the Board of Public Utilities to commence revocation proceedings in
conformance with applicable statutes and regulations.
§ A226-4 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § A226-9
218:923
from the nearest cable system trunk or feeder cable), or areas with less
than 25 homes per mile where residents agree to share the costs of such
extension in accordance with the Office of Cable Television's line extension
policy attached hereto as Exhibit A.85 Extension of service to commercial
establishments outside the primary service area will be governed in
accordance with the commercial line extension policy as provided in the
company's application for municipal consent.
§ A226-10. Franchise fee.
§ A226-11. Free service.
A. Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Cable Television Act, the
company shall pay to the Township, as an annual franchise fee, a sum
equal to 2% of the actual gross revenues received from all recurring
charges in the nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for its
cable television reception services in the Township. In the event
applicable law hereinafter permits a larger franchise fee to be
collected, but does not fix the amount thereof, the Township and the
company shall negotiate in good faith with respect to the amount
thereof.
B. The company shall, on or before the 25th day of January each year, file
with the Chief Financial Officer of the Township a verified statement
showing the gross subscriber revenues received from the cable
television reception service within the Township and shall at the same
time pay thereon to said Chief Financial Officer the two-percent charge
hereby imposed as a yearly franchise revenue for the use of the streets.
A. The company shall provide, free of charge, upon request, one standard
installation and monthly cable television reception service to all state or
locally accredited elementary and secondary public and private schools
and all municipal public libraries, as well as municipal buildings located
within the Township as set forth in Exhibit B to this ordinance.86
B. The company shall provide to the Township, free of charge, one highspeed
cable modem and monthly Internet access service, including a
standard installation, to the Municipal Building located at 2700 Allaire
Road. The Township shall be permitted, at its own cost, to network up to
three additional personal computer terminals in the designated
building (four computers in total) to the cable modem provided by the
company.
C. The company shall provide, free of charge, upon request, one highspeed
cable modem and monthly Internet access service, including a
standard installation, to each state or locally accredited elementary and
secondary public and private schools and all municipal public libraries
within the Township as set forth in Exhibit C.87 Each school and library
85.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
86.Editor's Note: Exhibit B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ A226-9 WALL CODE § A226-11
218:924
§ A226-12. Construction/system requirements.
The company shall perform construction and installation of its plant and
facilities in accordance with applicable state and federal law. The company
shall be subject to the following additional construction requirements with
respect to the installation of its plant and facilities in the Township:
shall be permitted, at its own cost, to network up to three additional
personal computer terminals in the designated building (four
computers in total) to the cable modem provided by the company.
A. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb any pavement,
street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces, the company
shall, at its sole expense, restore and replace such disturbances in as
good a condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work to
the satisfaction of the Township Engineer.
B. If at any time during the period of this consent the municipality shall
alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place, the
company, upon reasonable notice by the Township, shall remove or
relocate its equipment, at the company 's own expense.
C. Upon request of a person holding a building or moving permit issued by
the Township, the company shall temporarily move or remove
appropriate parts of its facilities so as to permit the moving or erection
of buildings or for the performance of other work. The expense of any
such temporary removal or relocation shall be paid in advance to the
company by the person requesting the same, except when requested by
the Township, in which case the company shall bear the cost. In such
cases, the company shall be given not less than 10 days' prior written
notice in order to arrange for the changes required.
D. During the exercise of its rights and privileges under this consent, the
company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the Township so as to
prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the
wires, cables, conduits and fixtures of the company. Such trimming
shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper clearance for
the company's facilities.
E. The company shall not place or operate any fixtures or equipment in
such locations as will or may interfere with any other public or private
utility system or any part thereof, and the location by the company of its
lines and equipment shall be in the manner as not to unreasonably
interfere with usual travel or use of streets or private ways.
87.Editor's Note: Exhibit C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ A226-11 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § A226-13
218:925
§ A226-13. Technical and customer service standards.
The company shall comply with the technical and customer service
standards established for the cable industry under applicable federal and
state laws, rules and regulations. The company shall comply with any
requirements imposed by the federal or state regulations relating to
technical standards for the transmission of television signals, transmission
quality or facilities and equipment.
§ A226-14. Local office or agent.
§ A226-15. Designation of complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the Township pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26. All
complaints shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.5.
§ A226-16. Liability insurance.
A. The company shall establish and maintain during the entire term of this
consent a local area business office or agent for the purpose of
receiving, investigating and resolving complaints regarding the quality
of service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Said office
shall be open daily during normal business hours, and in no event less
than 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, with the
exception of holidays.
B. Notwithstanding anything contained in its application to the contrary,
the company currently maintains its local office at 1501 18th Avenue,
Wall, New Jersey. In the event that the company will seek to relocate
this office, it must provide notice to the Township in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 14:18-5.1, as may be amended.
C. In addition, the company shall maintain a twenty-four-hour, seven-dayper-
week telephone communications system to receive complaints
regarding quality of service, equipment malfunctions, service outages
and similar matters. Complaints of subscribers shall be addressed by
the company as soon as possible and in accordance all federal and state
rules and regulations.
A. The company agrees to maintain and keep in force and effect at its sole
cost at all times during the term of this consent sufficient liability
insurance naming the Township as an additional insured and insuring
against loss by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand.
The policy shall be in the minimum amounts of $1,000,000 covering
liability for any death, bodily injury, property damages or other liability
resulting from any one accident or occurrence stemming from or
arising out of the company's exercise of its rights hereunder and an
excess liability policy in the amount of $10,000,000.
§ A226-13 WALL CODE § A226-16
218:926
§ A226-17. Indemnification and liability.
The company shall indemnify, protect and save the Township harmless
from and against losses and physical damages to property, including those
properties owned or under the control of the Township, and bodily injury or
death of persons, which may arise out of or be caused by the construction,
location, installation, operation, erection, maintenance, repair,
replacement, removal or use of the cable television system within the
Township contemplated by this franchise or by any act of the company,
its agents or employees. Cablevision is under no obligation to indemnify
the Township of any suits, claims or causes of action arising from any
programming produced or provided by the Township, its employees, officers
or agents on the PEG access channel, or for any suits, claims or cause of
action resulting from the gross negligence of the Township or its employees,
officers or agents.
§ A226-18. Performance bond.
The company shall obtain and maintain, at its sole cost and expense, during
the entire term of this agreement, a bond to the municipality in the amount
of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful performance of its
obligations as provided in this franchise.
§ A226-19. Rates.
B. All insurance required by this ordinance shall be and remain in full
force and effect for the entire life of this franchise. A certificate of
insurance must be submitted to the Township Attorney to review for
compliance with the above mentioned limits of liability. Said certificate
of insurance shall be kept on file with the Township Clerk, and the
Township shall be an additional insured on said policies. The company
shall notify the Township at least 30 days prior of its intention to cancel
or change any policy. All of the aforesaid policies shall contain a
provision requiring the insurance company give to the Township at least
ten-day notice of cancellation.
A. The rates of the company for cable television services shall be subject
to regulation to the extent permitted by federal and state law. As such,
the Township has no jurisdiction over the rates charged by the
company. In the event the federal law or other applicable law is
hereafter amended to permit the exercise of regulatory power over
rates by municipalities, the Township reserves the right to exercise the
maximum power permitted by law.
B. The company shall implement a senior citizen discount in the amount of
a 10% off the monthly rate of the broadcast basic level of cable
television reception service to any person 62 years of age or older who
subscribes to the company's cable television service, subject to the
following:
§ A226-16 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § A226-19
218:927
§ A226-20. Services.
§ A226-21. Emergency uses.
The company shall be required to have the capability to override the audio
portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting of emergency
(1) Such discount shall only be available to eligible senior citizens who
do not share the subscription with more than one person in the
same household who is less than 62 years of age; and
(2) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11.2, subscribers seeking
eligibility for the discount must meet the income and residence
requirements of the Pharmaceutical Assistance to the Aged and
Disabled program pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:4D-21; and
(3) The senior discount herein relates only to the broadcast basic level
of cable television service and shall not apply to any additional
service, feature or equipment offered by the company, including
any premium channel services and pay-per-view services.
(4) Senior citizens who subscribe to a level of cable television service
beyond expanded basic service, including any premium or per
channel a la carte service, shall not be eligible for the discount.
A. The basic service includes those channels which the company is
required to carry by FCC rules and/or applicable federal law. The
company shall include in the video programming it offers subscribers
the following broad programming categories:
(1) Local television broadcast stations.
(2) Education programming.
(3) News, weather and information programming.
(4) Public affairs programming.
(5) Sports programming.
(6) Children and family entertainment programming.
(7) General entertainment (including movies).
B. The company shall not delete any broad category of programming
within its control without the consent and approval of the Township and
the Board of Public Utilities. Should the company seek to delete in its
entirety any broad category of programming provided herein, it may
make such a request by application to the Board, on notice to the
Township, stating the category deleted and the reasons therefore.
Nothing herein shall be construed to extend any right to mandate or
enforce any programming service requirement, except to the extent
permitted by law.
§ A226-19 WALL CODE § A226-21
218:928
messages by the Township pursuant to state and federal requirements.
The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by
the Township or any other person, during an emergency, if for any reason
the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television system
as contemplated herein. The Township shall utilize the state-approved
procedures for such emergency uses.
§ A226-22. Equitable terms.
§ A226-23. Public, educational and governmental access channel.
A. The company agrees that the capabilities of the system shall be
maintained as technologically current throughout the duration of the
franchise, as compared with other systems operated by the company of
comparable size, measured by the number of subscribers in the system
and to the extent economically reasonable.
B. In the event of a change in state law mandating the company to pay
either a higher franchise fee and/or a discount for senior citizens which
is greater than the discount specified in this ordinance, then the
company will implement theses changes in the Township as of the
effective date of the law.
C. In the event that another multichannel video program provider's
service within the Township creates a significant competitive
disadvantage to the company, the company shall have the right to
request from the Township lawful amendments to its franchise that
relieve it of burdens which create the unfair competitive situation.
Should the company seek such amendments to its franchise, the parties
agree to negotiate in good faith appropriate changes to the franchise in
order to relieve the company of such competitive disadvantages. If the
parties can reach an agreement on such terms, the Township agrees to
support the company's petition to the Board for modification of the
consent in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
D. If the parties are unable to reach an agreement on appropriate
amendments to the franchise, the Township acknowledges that the
company shall have the right to petition the Board directly for such
amendments in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.7; provided, however, the Township shall be under no obligation
to support Cablevision's request for such relief from the Board.
E. The company represents and acknowledges that as of the date of its
acceptance of this municipal consent, competition within the Township
has not yet risen to the level of creating a significant competitive
disadvantage sufficient to enable the company to seek relief under this
section.
A. The company shall make available one exclusive noncommercial public,
educational and governmental (PEG) access channel to the Township.
§ A226-21 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § A226-23
218:929
§ A226-24. Cablevision's records and reports.
B. The company shall provide one access return line at the Wall Township
High School or Municipal Building for use by the Township in the
cablecasting of noncommercial public, educational and governmental
(PEG) access for the Township's Cablevision customers.
C. In consideration for the rights granted by this ordinance, the company
shall provide the Township with a one-time grant of $15,000 to be used
by the municipality for cable and/or other telecommunications related
purposes, including to supplement PEG access-related production and
programming efforts in the Township. Training on PEG access
equipment shall be made available by the company, four times a year
for up to 15 hours of training per session, at the request of the
Township. The grant money shall be paid to the Township within 60
days of approval of this ordinance by the Board of Public Utilities.
D. The Township agrees that the company shall retain the right to use the
PEG access channel, or portion thereof, for non-PEG access
programming during times when the Township is not utilizing the
channel for purposes of providing PEG access programming. Said right
is subject to the company obtaining prior written approval from the
Township for said use. In the event that the company uses said PEG
access channel for the presentation of such other programming, the
PEG programming of the Township shall remain the priority use, and
the company's rights with respect to using the channel shall be
subordinate to the Township's provision of PEG access programming on
such channel.
E. The company shall take any steps which are necessary to ensure that
the signals originated on the PEG channel are carried without material
degradation and, to the extent the PEG channel's programming is
originated by Cablevision with a signal whose quality meets accepted
standards, that it is equal to that of other analog channels the company
transmits.
A. Upon request of the Township, the company will provide to the
Township, within 60 days from the date of the request, telephonerelated
records submitted to the Office of Cable Television in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:18-7.6 and 14:18-7.7, as may be amended.
Upon receipt of a request for this information, Cablevision will provide
the records submitted to the Office of Cable Television dating back one
year from the date of the Township's request.
B. Upon request of the Township, the company will provide to the
Township, within 60 days from the date of the request, copies of all
complaints concerning the Township referred to the company by the
Office of Cable Television in its capacity as municipal complaint officer.
Upon receipt of a request for this information, the company will provide
the records submitted to the Office of Cable Television dating back one
year from the date of the Township's request.
§ A226-23 WALL CODE § A226-24
218:930
§ A226-25. Incorporation of application.
All of the commitments contained in the application and any amendment
thereto submitted in writing to the Township by the company, except as
modified herein, are binding upon the company as terms and conditions of
this consent. The application and any other written amendments thereto
submitted by the company in connection with this consent are incorporated
in this ordinance by reference and made a part hereof, except as specifically
modified, changed, limited, or altered by this ordinance, or to the extent
that they conflict with state or federal law.
§ A226-26. Subsequent purchase of company.
If during the franchise period the company is sold, the Board of Public
Utilities may predicate the sale upon the purchaser's obligation to fulfill the
terms of this ordinance.
§ A226-27. Removal of facilities.
Upon expiration, termination or revocation of this ordinance, the company,
at its sole cost and expense and upon direction of the Board, shall remove
the cables and appurtenant devices constructed or maintained in
connection with the services authorized herein, unless the company, its
affiliated entities or assignees should, within six months after such
expiration, termination or revocation, obtain certification from the FCC to
operate an open video system or any other federal or state certification to
provide telecommunications.
§ A226-28. Consistency with applicable laws.
This consent shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable
federal, state and local laws.
§ A226-29. Consistency with future federal and state statutes,
regulations, rules and orders.
Should any of the federal or state statutes, regulations or pronouncements
applicable to the regulation of cable television be modified in any way, such
modifications, to the extent they embody required terms and conditions and
can be incorporated into this ordinance, shall be so incorporated, consistent
with any applicable effective dated specified in such modification.
C. The Township will maintain the confidentiality of the information
provided by the company to the extent permitted by law. The company,
in accordance with applicable federal and state rules and regulations,
shall have the right to delete all personally identifiable information from
the records and complaints it provides to the Township in accordance
with this section.
§ A226-24 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § A226-30
218:931
§ A226-30. Compliance with law.
Notwithstanding any specific mention of applicable federal or state statutes
or regulations, the company shall comply with all of the requirements of the
federal laws and regulations, state statutes and regulations and any other
valid statutes.
§ A226-31. Governmental approval.
Subject to the company's rights under existing federal or state laws or
regulations, the company shall not be relieved from obtaining any and all
required permits for the location and construction of its facilities as may be
required by any governmental agency.
§ A226-32. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portion thereof.
§ A226-33. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon issuance of a certificate of approval as
issued by the Board of Public Utilities.
Chapter A227
GAS FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable television franchise — See Ch. A226.
§ A227-1. Authorization of franchise; terms and conditions.
The New Jersey Natural Gas Company be and is hereby authorized to lay,
maintain and operate its conductors, mains and pipes, together with the
appurtenances thereto, in all the public streets, alleys, squares and public
places in this municipality which are under the control and jurisdiction of
the Township for the purpose of conducting gas, or any mixture of gases of
various types including natural gas and for the purpose of transmitting and
distributing such gas in this municipality for a period of 10 years from the
date hereof, upon the following terms and conditions:
A. The New Jersey Natural Gas Company shall report to the Department of
Public Works and the Township Engineer, yearly, their intentions with
regard to prospective work requiring future street openings in the
§ A226-30 WALL CODE § A227-1
218:932
§ A227-2. Filing of acceptance by franchise required; time frame.
The New Jersey Natural Gas Company shall file with the Clerk of the
Municipality, within 60 days of the date hereof, its acceptance of the terms
and provisions of the franchise consent herein granted and its agreement to
be bound by the terms and provisions thereof.
§ A227-3. Ministerial actions by Township officials authorized.
All Township officials, including, but not limited to, the Mayor, Township
Director of Engineering and Planning, Municipal Clerk and Treasurer are
hereby authorized and directed to take such ministerial actions as are
necessary to effectuate the provisions of this ordinance.
§ A227-4. When effective.
This ordinance shall not become effective until it is approved by the Board
of Public Utilities of the State of New Jersey.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
community for the purpose of coordinating such activity with pavement
projects anticipated by the Township. Except in the case of an
emergency, the Township shall have the right to schedule street
openings in a manner which will create the least disturbance to
pavement courses, in furtherance of which purpose the Department of
Public Works shall provide a schedule of expected street construction
and resurfacing.
B. The New Jersey Natural Gas Company shall agree that, in all cases in
which street openings or excavations are made for the purposes
aforesaid, the pavement and the surface of the streets, alleys, squares
or roadways shall be restored to the same condition as existed prior to
the opening thereof. The restoration shall include milling and repaving
of the area so as to blend uniformly with the adjacent roadway,
including restoration of pavement markings, signage and all other
appurtenances. The Construction Code Official is authorized to demand
a cash escrow or equivalent in an amount not exceeding $10,000 to
insure that any road opening is restored satisfactorily.
C. The New Jersey Natural Gas Company shall conduct the work or the
laying or maintaining of gas pipes therein in a careful and prudent
manner.
§ A227-1 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § DL-1
218:933
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
25-2002 7-10-2002 Police
Department:
establishment
amendment
Ch. 36, Art. I
26-2002 7-10-2002 Street vacation NCM
27-2002 7-10-2002 Acquisition of
easement
NCM
28-2002 7-10-2002 Salaries
amendment
NCM
29-2002 7-10-2002 Inspection and
reproduction of
public records
Ch. 175
30-2002 8-14-2002 Manasquan River
Regional
Sewerage
Authority
amendment
Ch. 47, Art. I
31-2002 8-14-2002 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
32-2002 8-14-2002 Sale of property NCM
33-2002 8-14-2002 Street vacation NCM
34-2002 8-14-2002 Street vacation NCM
35-2002 Tabled
36-2002 8-14-2002 Street vacation NCM
37-2002 8-14-2002 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
38-2002 8-14-2002 Length of service
awards program
for first aid
squads
Ch. 18, Art. III
39-2002 8-14-2002 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
40-2002 9-10-2002 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
41-2002 9-10-2002 Street vacation NCM
42-2002 9-25-2002 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 WALL CODE § DL-1
218:934
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
43-2002 9-25-2002 Bond NCM
44-2002 Defeated
45-2002 10-9-2002 Street vacation NCM
46-2002 11-13-2002 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
47-2002 ? Bond NCM
48-2002 12-11-2002 Key boxes
amendment
Ch. 59, Art. II
49-2002 12-11-2002 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
1-2003 3-12-2003 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. II
2-2003 2-12-2003 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
3-2003 2-12-2003 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
4-2003 2-12-2003 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
5-2003 2-12-2003 Bond amendment NCM
6-2003 3-12-2003 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
7-2003 4-9-2003 Fire companies
and first aid
squads
amendment
Ch. 18
8-2003 Budget cap NCM
9-2003 5-14-2003 Bond NCM
10-2003 5-14-2003 Bond NCM
11-2003 5-14-2003 Bond NCM
12-2003 6-11-2003 Fire companies
and first aid
squads
amendment
Ch. 18
13-2003 5-14-2003 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § DL-1
218:935
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
14-2003 5-14-2003 Bond NCM
15-2003 6-1-2003 Open burning
amendment
Ch. 113
16-2003 6-11-2003 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
17-2003 6-11-2003 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
18-2003 Cable television
franchise
Not yet adopted
19-2003 7-9-2003 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
20-2003 Bond NCM
21-2003 Bond NCM
22-2003 9-17-2003 Street and
sidewalks:
excavations
amendment
Ch. 195, Art. I
23-2003 10-8-2003 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
24-2003 9-17-2003 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
25-2003 Bond NCM
26-2003 9-17-2003 South Monmouth
Regional
Sewerage
Authority
amendment
Ch. 47, Art. II
27-2003 9-17-2003 South Monmouth
Regional
Sewerage
Authority
amendment
Ch. 47, Art. II
28-2003 9-17-2003 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
29-2003 Developer's
agreement
NCM
30-2003 10-8-2003 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 WALL CODE § DL-1
218:936
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
31-2003 10-8-2003 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
32-2003 Salaries
amendment
NCM
33-2003 11-12-2003 Tax exemptions
and abatements
Ch. 203
34-2003 Bond NCM
35-2003 11-12-2003 Alcoholic
beverages
amendment
Ch. 62
36-2003 11-12-2003 Alcoholic
beverages
amendment
Ch. 62
37-2003 12-10-2003 West Belmar
Gateway Area
Redevelopment
Plan
Ch. 141, Art. I
38-2003 12-10-2003 Adoption of Land
Use Volume
Ch. 139
39-2003 12-10-2003 Administrative
offices
amendment
Ch. 2
40-2003 Conveyance of
title
NCM
41-2003 Conveyance of
title
NCM
42-2003 12-10-2003 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
43-2003 Street vacation NCM
1-2004 Salaries NCM
2-2004 3-10-2004 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
3-2004 3-10-2004 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
4-2004 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
5-2004 Bond NCM
6-2004 Budget cap NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § DL-1
218:937
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
7-2004 4-21-2004 Water and sewer
amendment
Ch. 222
8-2004 5-12-2004 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 33
9-2004 5-12-2004 Water and sewer
amendment
Ch. 222
10-2004 5-12-2004 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
11-2004 5-12-2004 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
12-2004 5-12-2004 Zoning Map
amendment
Defeated
13-2004 Salaries NCM
14-2004 6-23-2004 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
15-2004 7-14-2004 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
16-2004 Tabled
17-2004 8-11-2004 Cable television
franchise
amendment
Ch. A226
18-2004 Conveyance of
title
NCM
19-2004 8-11-2004 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
20-2004 Street vacation NCM
21-2004 8-11-2004 Inspection and
reproduction of
records
amendment
Ch. 175
22-2004 Water purchase
contract
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 WALL CODE § DL-1
218:938
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
23-2004 8-11-2004 South Monmouth
Regional
Sewerage
Authority
agreement
addendum
Ch. 47, Art. II
24-2004 Bond NCM
25-2004 10-13-2004 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
26-2004 9-8-2004 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
27-2004 Leasing of
Township
property
NCM
28-2004 Bond NCM
29-2004 11-10-2004 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
30-2004 11-10-2004 Streets and
sidewalks:
excavations
amendment
Ch. 195, Art. I
31-2004 12-8-2004 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
32-2004 12-8-2004 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
33-2004 12-8-2004 Police
Department
establishment
amendment
Ch. 36, Art. I
34-2004 Bond NCM
35-2004 12-8-2004 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 14
36-2004 Street vacation NCM
37-2004 12-8-2004 Alcoholic
beverages
amendment
Ch. 62
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § DL-1
218:939
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
38-2004 12-8-2004 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
39-2004 12-8-2004 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
40-2004 Bond NCM
41-2004 Bond NCM
42-2004 Salaries NCM
1-2005 2-9-2005 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
2-2005 2-9-2005 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
3-2005 Bond NCM
4-2005 Bond NCM
5-2005 2-9-2005 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 113
6-2005 3-9-2005 Personnel policies
and Police
Department
amendments
Chs. 33; 36
7-2005 3-9-2005 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
8-2005 3-9-2005 Hotel and motel
room occupancy
tax amendment
Ch 129
9-2005 3-9-2005 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
10-2005 4-13-2005 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
11-2005 4-13-2005 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
12-2005 4-13-2005 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
13-2005 4-13-2005 Returned check
service fee
Ch. 1
14-2005 4-13-2005 Budget cap NCM
§ DL-1 WALL CODE § DL-1
218:940
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
15-2005 5-11-2005 Street vacation NCM
16-2005 5-11-2005 Street vacation NCM
17-2005 5-11-2005 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
18-2005 6-8-2005 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
19-2005 7-13-2005 Towing and
storage of motor
vehicles
Ch. 206
20-2005 7-13-2005 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
21-2005 8-10-2005 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
22-2005 8-10-2005 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
23-2005 8-10-2005 Street vacation NCM
24-2005 8-10-2005 Property
exchange
NCM
25-2005 8-24-2005 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
26-2005 9-14-2005 Municipal
employees
amendment
Ch. 33, Art. I
27-2005 8-24-2005 Sale of property NCM
28-2005 8-10-2005 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
29-2005 10-12-2005 Bond NCM
30-2005 10-12-2005 Appropriation NCM
31-2005 10-12-2005 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
32-2005 11-22-2005 Zoning Map
amendment
Tabled
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § DL-1
218:941
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
33-2005 11-22-2005 Public
contracting
regulations
Ch. 173
34-2005 11-22-2005 Sale of property NCM
35-2005 12-14-2005 Street vacation NCM
36-2005 12-14-2005 Uniform
construction
codes
amendment
Ch. 90
37-2005 12-14-2005 Bond NCM
38-2005 12-7-2005 Bond NCM
1-2006 2-8-2006 Conveyance of
land
NCM
2-2006 2-8-2006 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
3-2006 3-8-2006 Street vacation NCM
4-2006 3-8-2006 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
5-2006 3-8-2006 Salaries NCM
6-2006 3-8-2006 Street vacation NCM
7-2006 3-8-2006 Storm sewer
systems
Chs. 65, 191,
192, 222
8-2006 4-12-2006 Police rules and
regulations
amendment
Ch. 36, Art. I
9-2006 4-12-2006 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
10-2006 4-12-2006 Budget cap NCM
11-2006 7-12-2006 Lease of property NCM
12-2006 5-10-2006 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
13-2006 Bond NCM
14-2006 Bond NCM
15-2006 Bond NCM
16-2006 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 WALL CODE § DL-1
218:942
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
17-2006 6-14-2006 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
18-2006 6-14-2006 Grant of
easement
NCM
19-2006 6-14-2006 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
20-2006 7-12-2006 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
21-2006 7-12-2006 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
22-2006 7-12-2006 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
23-2006 11-21-2006 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
24-2006 7-26-2006 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
25-2006 Tabled
26-2006 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 113
27-2006 9-13-2006 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
28-2006 9-13-2006 Street vacation NCM
29-2006 11-21-2006 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
30-2006 Bond NCM
31-2006
32-2006 11-21-2006 Solid waste
amendment
Ch. 191
34-2006 12-13-2006 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
1-2007 Refunding bond NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § DL-1
218:943
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
2-2007 2-14-2007 Food
establishments
amendment
Ch. 119
3-2007 Sale of property NCM
4-2007 2-14-2007 Licensing of
mobile home
parks amendment
Ch. 153, Art. I
5-2007 3-14-2007 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
6-2007 3-14-2007 Alcoholic
beverages
amendment
Ch. 62
7-2007 3-14-2007 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
8-2007 5-9-2007 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
9-2007 Sale of property NCM
10-2007 Vacation of
property
NCM
11-2007 5-9-2007 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
12-2007 Exceed budget
cap
NCM
13-2007 Bond NCM
14-2007 Bond NCM
15-2007 Salaries NCM
16-2007 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
17-2007 Sale of property NCM
18-2007 Acquisition of
property
NCM
19-2007 7-18-2007 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
20-2007 7-18-2007 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
§ DL-1 WALL CODE § DL-1
218:944
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
21-2007 8-8-2007 Conveyance of
title
NCM
22-2007 10-10-2007 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
23-2007 11-20-2007 Marconi Park
Complex Advisory
Board
Ch. 6, Art. V
24-2007 12-12-2007 Police
Department:
establishment
amendment
Ch. 36, Art. I
25-2007 11-20-2007 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
26-2007 12-5-2007 Bond NCM
27-2007 12-5-2007 Bond NCM
28-2007 12-12-2007 Self-Insurance
Fund
Ch. 45
29-2007 12-20-2007 Personnel
policies:
municipal
employees
amendment
Ch. 33, Art. I
30-2007 12-20-2007 Lease agreement NCM
1-2008 2-13-2008 Towing and
storage of motor
vehicles
amendment
Ch. 206
2-2008 2-13-2008 Personnel
policies:
municipal
employees
amendment
Ch. 33, Art. I
3-2008 2-13-2008 Acquisition of
property
NCM
4-2008 3-12-2008 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 222
5-2008 5-14-2008 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
6-2008 8-13-2008 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § DL-1
218:945
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
7-2008 5-14-2008 Marconi Park
Complex Advisory
Board
amendment
Ch. 6, Art. V
8-2008 6-11-2008 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 222
9-2008 6-11-2008 Exceed budget
cap
NCM
10-2008 6-11-2008 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
11-2008 Bond NCM
12-2008 Number not used
13-2008 8-13-2008 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 222
14-2008 8-13-2008 Licensing of
mobile home
parks amendment
Ch 153, Art. I
15-2008 Street vacation NCM
16-2008 9-10-2008 Salaries and
compensation:
Defined
Contribution
Retirement
Program
Ch. 42, Art. II
17-2008 Rescinded
18-2008 Lease of property NCM
19-2008 10-22-2008 Emergency
management:
adoption of
National Incident
Management
System
Ch. 16, Art. I
20-2008 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
21-2008 Salaries NCM
22-2008 11-25-2008 Water authority:
Southeast
Monmouth Utility
Authority
Ch. 53, Art. I
23-2008 12-10-2008 Animals
amendment
Ch. 65
§ DL-1 WALL CODE § DL-1
218:946
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
24-2008 12-10-2008 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
1-2009 3-11-2009 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 222
2-2009 3-11-2009 Citizens
Committee on
Affordable
Housing
Ch. 6, Art. VI
3-2009 4-8-2009 Water purchase
contract
NCM
4-2009 4-8-2009 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
5-2009 4-8-2009 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
6-2009 4-8-2009 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
7-2009 4-8-2009 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
8-2009 4-8-2009 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
9-2009 4-8-2009 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
10-2009 4-8-2009 Purchase of
water treatment
and transmission
facilities
NCM
11-2009 5-13-2009 Peddling and
soliciting: sale of
merchandise on
highways
amendment;
solicitors,
canvassers and
peddlers
amendment
Ch. 167, Arts. I
and II
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § DL-1
218:947
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
12-2009 5-13-2009 Boards,
Committees and
Commissions:
Citizens
Committee on
Affordable
Housing
amendment
Ch. 6, Art. VI
13-2009 5-13-2009 Alcoholic
beverages
amendment
Ch. 62
14-2009 5-26-2009 Exceed budget;
cap bank
NCM
15-2009 6-10-2009 General
provisions:
general penalty
amendment
Ch. 1, Art. I
16-2009 6-10-2009 Bond NCM
17-2009 6-10-2009 Bond NCM
18-2009 7-22-2009 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
19-2009 7-8-2009 Termination of
easement
NCM
20-2009 9-9-2009 Acceptance of
easement
NCM
21-2009 9-9-2009 Acceptance of
right-of-way
NCM
22-2009 9-9-2009 Floodplain
management
amendment
Ch. 116
23-2009 9-9-2009 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
24-2009 10-14-2009 Verizon's use of
streets, roads,
etc.
NCM
25-2009 11-24-2009 Recreation
Advisory
Committee
amendment
Ch. 6, Art. I
26-2009 11-24-2009 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 WALL CODE § DL-1
218:948
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
27-2009 11-24-2009 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
28-2009 12-9-2009 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
29-2009 11-24-2009 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
30-2009 11-24-2009 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
31-2009 11-24-2009 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
32-2009 11-24-2009 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 222
33-2009 11-24-2009 Bond NCM
34-2009 12-22-2009 Mobile homes
and mobile home
parks: licensing
of mobile home
parks
amendment; rent
stabilization
amendment
Ch. 153, Arts. I
and II
35-2009 Tabled
36-2009 12-9-2009 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 222
37-2009 12-9-2009 Salaries NCM
38-2009 11-12-2009 Bond NCM
39-2009 12-9-2009 Purchase of
property
NCM
1-2010 3-10-2010 Sale of property Repealed by Ord.
No. 20-2014
2-2010 3-10-2010 Sale of property NCM
3-2010 3-24-2010 Purchase of
property
NCM
4-2010 5-12-2010 Separation and
collection of
recyclable
materials
Ch. 191, Art. II
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § DL-1
218:949
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
5-2010 5-12-2010 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 113
6-2010 5-12-2010 Streets and
sidewalks:
excavations
amendment
Ch. 195, Art. I
7-2010 5-12-2010 Exceed budget;
cap bank
NCM
8-2010 7-14-2010 Hotels and motels
amendment
Ch. 129
9-2010 7-14-2010 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
10-2010 8-11-2010 Bond NCM
11-2010 8-11-2010 Bond NCM
12-2010 8-11-2010 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
13-2010 9-8-2010 Taxation:
redemption of tax
sale certificates
Ch. 202, Art. II
14-2010 9-8-2010 Right to farm Ch. 105, Art. I
15-2010 Tabled
16-2010 10-13-2010 Bond NCM
17-2010 10-13-2010 Bond NCM
18-2010 10-27-2010 Purchase of
conservation
easement
NCM
19-2010 10-27-2010 Sale of property NCM
20-2010 11-23-2010 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
21-2010 11-23-2010 Food
establishments
amendment
Ch. 119
22-2010 11-23-2010 Inspection and
reproduction of
records
amendment
Ch. 175
23-2010 11-23-2010 Solid waste:
garbage and
refuse collection
amendment
Ch. 191, Art. I
§ DL-1 WALL CODE § DL-1
218:950
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
24-2010 12-15-2010 Parks and
recreation
facilities: hours
amendment
Ch. 161, Art. I
25-2010 Tabled
1-2011 2-9-2011 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
2-2011 2-9-2011 Storm sewer
systems: private
storm drain inlet
retrofitting
Ch. 192, Art. II
3-2011 2-9-2011 Sale of property NCM
4-2011 2-9-2011 Sale of property NCM
5-2011 2-9-2011 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
6-2011 3-9-2011 Bond NCM
7-2011 Animals: wildlife
feeding
amendment
Tabled
8-2011 3-9-2011 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
9-2011 3-9-2011 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
10-2011 4-13-2011 Sale of property NCM
11-2011 5-11-2011 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 222
12-2011 4-13-2011 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
13-2011 4-13-2011 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
14-2011 4-13-2011 Street vacation NCM
15-2011 5-11-2011 Exceed budget;
cap bank
NCM
16-2011 Bond NCM
17-2011 7-13-2011 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § DL-1
218:951
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
18-2011 7-13-2011 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
19-2011 8-10-2011 Alcoholic
beverages
amendment
Ch. 62
20-2011 9-14-2011 Sale of property NCM
21-2011 9-14-2011 Sale of property NCM
22-2011 9-14-2011 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
23-2011 10-12-2011 Bond NCM
24-2011 10-12-2011 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
25-2011 11-22-2011 Donation bins Ch. 96
26-2011 Not adopted
27-2011 11-22-2011 Mobile homes
and mobile home
parks amendment
Ch. 153
28-2011 11-22-2011 Appropriation NCM
29-2011 12-14-2011 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
30-2011 12-14-2011 Inspection and
reproduction of
records
amendment
Ch. 175
31-2011 12-14-2011 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
32-2011 Tabled
33-2011 Tabled
34-2011 Tabled
1-2012 2-8-2012 Acceptance of
donated property
NCM
2-2012 2-8-2012 Salaries NCM
3-2012 3-14-2012 Bond NCM
4-2012 4-11-2012 Exceed budget;
cap bank
NCM
5-2012 5-9-2012 Sale of property NCM
§ DL-1 WALL CODE § DL-1
218:952
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
6-2012 4-11-2012 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 222
7-2012 4-4-2012 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
8-2012 6-13-2012 Dumping of
garbage and
trash
amendment;
water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 171, Art. II;
Ch. 222
9-2012 6-13-2012 Bond NCM
10-2012 8-8-2012 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
11-2012 8-8-2012 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
12-2012 7-11-2012 Gas franchise NCM
13-2012 8-8-2012 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
14-2012 8-8-2012 Police
Department
amendment
Ch. 36
15-2012 9-12-2012 Payment of
claims
amendment
Ch. 9
16-2012 9-12-2012 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
17-2012 11-20-2012 Salaries NCM
18-2012 11-20-2012 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
19-2012 12-12-2012 Salaries NCM
20-2012 12-12-2012 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
21-2012 12-12-2012 Control of
invasive plants
Ch. 171, Art. V
22-2012 Precious metals Tabled
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § DL-1
218:953
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1-2013 2-27-2013 General
provisions
applicable to
boards,
committees and
commissions
Ch. 6, Art. VII
2-2013 2-27-2013 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
3-2013 2-27-2013 Self-insurance
fund amendment
Ch. 45
4-2013 Mobile homes
and mobile home
parks: rent
stabilization
amendment
Tabled
5-2013 3-27-2013 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 222
6-2013 3-27-2013 Uniform
construction
codes
amendment
Ch. 90
7-2013 3-27-2013 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
8-2013 4-24-2013 Exceed budget;
cap bank
NCM
9-2013 4-24-2013 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
10-2013 4-24-2013 Administrative
offices
amendment
Ch. 2
11-2013 4-24-2013 Uniform
construction
codes
amendment
Ch. 90
12-2013 5-22-2013 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
§ DL-1 WALL CODE § DL-1
218:954
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
13-2013 5-22-2013 Personnel
policies:
municipal
employees
amendment
Ch. 33, Art. I
14-2013 5-22-2013 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
15-2013 6-26-2013 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
16-2013 7-24-2013 Police
Department:
establishment
amendment
Ch. 36, Art. I
17-2013 8-28-2013 Bond NCM
18-2013 9-25-2013 Emergency
appropriation
NCM
19-2013 9-25-2013 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
20-2013 10-23-2013 Solicitors,
canvassers and
peddlers
amendment
Ch. 167, Art. II
21-2013 10-23-2013 Salaries NCM
22-2013 10-23-2013 Bond NCM
23-2013 10-23-2013 Bond NCM
24-2013 11-26-2013 Bond NCM
25-2013 Not introduced
26-2013 12-18-2013 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 113
27-2013 Not introduced
28-2013 12-18-2013 Bond NCM
1-2014 2-26-2014 Township
Committee
amendment
Ch. 51
2-2014 2-26-2014 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 222
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § DL-1
218:955
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
3-2014 2-26-2014 Personnel
policies:
municipal
employees
amendment
Ch. 33, Art. I
4-2014 3-26-2014 Personnel
policies:
municipal
employees
amendment
Ch. 33, Art. I
5-2014 3-26-2014 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
6-2014 4-23-2014 Peace and good
order amendment
Ch. 164
7-2014 4-23-2014 Exceed budget;
cap bank
NCM
8-2014 4-23-2014 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
9-2014 4-23-2014 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
10-2014 5-28-2014 Salaries NCM
11-2014 5-28-2014 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
12-2014 6-25-2014 Salaries NCM
13-2014 6-25-2014 Bond NCM
14-2014 Tabled
15-2014 6-25-2014 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
16-2014 7-23-2014 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 222
17-2014 7-23-2014 Bond NCM
18-2014 8-27-2014 Payment of
claims
amendment
Ch. 9
19-2014 9-24-2014 Bond NCM
20-2014 9-24-2014 Repeal of Ord.
No. 1-2010
Repealer only
§ DL-1 WALL CODE § DL-1
218:956
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
21-2014 10-22-2014 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
22-2014 10-22-2014 Peace and good
order amendment
Ch. 164
23-2014 11-25-2014 Peace and good
order amendment
Ch. 164
24-2014 11-25-2014 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
25-2014 11-25-2014 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
26-2014 11-25-2014 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
27-2014 Voided
28-2014 12-23-2014 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
29-2014 12-23-2014 Solid waste:
garbage and
refuse collection
amendment;
separation and
collection of
recyclable
materials
amendment
Ch. 191, Arts. I
and II
30-2014 12-23-2014 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
1-2015 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
2-2015 2-25-2015 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
3-2015 2-25-2015 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
4-2015 3-25-2015 Exceed budget;
cap bank
NCM
5-2015 4-22-2015 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § DL-1
218:957
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
6-2015 4-22-2015 Alcoholic
beverages
amendment
Ch. 62
7-2015 4-22-2015 Bond refund NCM
8-2015 4-22-2015 Bond NCM
9-2015 5-27-2015 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
10-2015 5-27-2015 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
11-2015 6-24-2015 Donation bins
amendment
Ch. 96
12-2015 6-24-2015 Inspection and
reproduction of
records
amendment
Ch. 175
13-2015 6-24-2015 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
14-2015 6-24-2015 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
15-2015 7-22-2015 West Belmar
Gateway Area
Redevelopment
Plan amendment
See Ch. 141
16-2015 7-22-2015 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
17-2015 9-23-2015 Bond NCM
18-2015 11-24-2015 Towing and
storage of motor
vehicles
amendment
Ch. 206
19-2015 9-23-2015 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
20-2015 11-24-2015 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 113
21-2015 11-24-2015 Solid waste:
separation and
collection of
recyclable
materials
amendment
Ch. 191, Art. II
22-2015 11-24-2015 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 WALL CODE § DL-1
218:958
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
23-2015 12-22-2015 Fire companies
and first aid
squads: incentive
benefits
amendment
Ch. 18, Art. II
1-2016 2-24-2016 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
2-2016 4-27-2016 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
3-2016 4-27-2016 Alcoholic
beverages
amendment
Ch. 62
4-2016 4-27-2016 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
5-2016 4-27-2016 Exceed budget;
cap bank
NCM
6-2016 6-22-2016 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
7-2016 6-22-2016 Public
contracting
regulations
amendment
Ch. 173
8-2016 Not adopted
9-2016 7-27-2016 Bond NCM
10-2016 8-24-2016 Dealers of
precious metals
and secondhand
goods
Ch. 169
11-2016 8-24-2016 Peace and good
order amendment
Ch. 164
12-2016 8-24-2016 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
13-2016 11-2-2016 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140,
attachment only
14-2016 12-28-2016 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § DL-1
218:959
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
15-2016 12-28-2016 Payment of
claims
amendment
Ch. 9
16-2016 12-28-2016 Salaries NCM
17-2016 12-28-2016 Personnel
policies:
municipal
employees
amendment
Ch. 33, Art. I
18-2016 12-28-2016 Bond NCM
1-2017 3-22-2017 Vehicles and
traffic
amendment
Ch. 215
2-2017 3-22-2017 Veterans benefits Ch. 220
3-2017 4-26-2017 Exceed budget;
cap bank
NCM
4-2017 5-24-2017 Street vacation NCM
5-2017 6-28-2017 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140
6-2017 7-26-2017 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 140,
attachment only
7-2017 7-26-2017 Bond NCM
8-2017 Pending Adoption
9-2017 9-27-2017 Personnel
Policies:
Municipal
Employees
Amendment
Ch. 33, Art. I
10-2017 9-27-2017 Sale of Property NCM
11-2017 Pending Adoption
12-2017 Pending Adoption
13-2017 Number Not
Used
14-2017 10-25-2017 Uniform
Construction
Codes
Amendment
Ch. 90
§ DL-1 WALL CODE § DL-1
218:960
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1-2018 2-28-2018 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215
2-2018 2-28-2018 Farming: Right to
Farm
Amendment;
Land Use and
Development
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 105, Art. I;
Ch. 140
3-2018 2-28-2018 Salaries NCM
4-2018 3-28-2018 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215
5-2018 3-28-2018 Smoking
Amendment
Ch. 184
6-2018 4-25-2018 Exceed Budget;
Cap Bank
NCM
7-2018 4-25-2018 Bond NCM
8-2018 6-27-2018 Bond NCM
9-2018 6-27-2018 Bond NCM
10-2018 8-22-2018 Land Use and
Development
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 140
11-2018 8-22-2018 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM
12-2018 7-25-2018 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215
13-2018 8-22-2018 Boards,
Committees and
Commissions:
Health Advisory
Board
Ch. 6, Art. VIII
14-2018 10-24-2018 Land Use and
Development
Regulations
Amendment;
Septic Systems
Ch. 140; Ch. 223
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § DL-1
218:961
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
15-2018 10-24-2018 General
Provisions:
General Penalty
Amendment
Ch. 1, Art. I
16-2018 10-24-2018 Boards,
Committees and
Commissions:
Recreation
Advisory
Committee
Amendment
Ch. 6, Art. I
17-2018 12-19-2018 Animals
Amendment
Ch. 65
18-2018 11-20-2018 Tattoo, Body
Piercing and
Body Art
Establishments
Ch. 201
19-2018 11-20-2018 Water and
Sewers
Amendment
Ch. 222
20-2018 11-20-2018 Peace and Good
Order
Amendment
Ch. 164
21-2018 11-20-2018 Public
Recreational
Bathing Facilities
Ch. 174
22-2018 12-19-2018 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 215
23-2018 12-19-2018 Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 113
24-2018 12-19-2018 Donation of
Property
NCM
25-2018 12-19-2018 Water and
Sewers
Amendment
Ch. 222
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
1-2019 2-27-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 28
2-2019 2-27-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 28
§ DL-1 WALL CODE § DL-1
218:962
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
4-2019 4-24-2019 Land Use and
Development
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 140 28
5-2019 Exceed
Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 28
7-2019 7-24-2019 Land Use and
Development
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 140 28
8-2019 Employee
Salary
NCM 28
9-2019 7-24-2019 Land Use and
Development
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 140 28
10-2019 8-28-2019 Land Use and
Development
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 140 28
11-2019 Bond NCM 28
12-2019 Bond NCM 28
13-2019 Bond NCM 28
14-2019 9-25-2019 Land Use and
Development
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 140 28
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, MOTORIZED § DL-1
218:963

LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
140 Attachment 1
Township of Wall
Schedule of Zone Requirements
January 2004
[Amended 5-12-2004 by Ord. No. 11-2004]
Maximum Gross Minimum Lot Dimensions Maximum Lot Coverage Minimum Yard Depths Maximum
Principal Buildings Height
Zone
Density for Major
Subdivisions
(dwelling
units/acres)
Minimum
Lot Area
(square feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Frontage
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Depth
(feet)
All
Buildings
(percentage)
All
Impervious
Surfaces
(percentage)
Front
Yard
(feet)
Side
Yard
(feet)
Rear
Yard
(feet) Stories Feet
Residential
RR-6 0.16 6 Ac 400 275 400 5 6 75 50 75 2.5 35
RR-5 0.2 5 Ac 400 275 400 6 7 75 50 75 2.5 35
R-R 0.5 2 Ac 300 165 200 9 15 50 30 50 2.5 35
R-60 0.6 60,000 200 145 200 10 20 50 20 50 2.5 35
R-40 0.9 40,000 150 125 150 12 20 40 20 30 2.5 35
R-30 1.2 30,000 125 100 150 14 25 40 20 25 2.5 35
R-25 1.5 25,000 125 80 150 15 30 35 20 25 2.5 35
R-20 1.7 20,000 100 80 150 17 30 30 15 15 2.5 35
R-15 2.9 15,000 75 75 150 19 35 30 10 15 2.5 35
R-15 corner lot 2.9 18,000 75 75 150 19 35 30 10 15 2.5 35
R-10 4.4 10,000 75 75 100 22 40 30 10 15 2.5 35
R-10 corner lot 4.4 12,000 75 75 100 22 40 30 10 15 2.5 35
R-7.5 5.8 7,500 65 65 100 25 40 25 7.5 15 2.5 35
R-7.5 corner lot 5.8 9,000 65 65 100 25 40 25 7.5 15 2.5 35
Residential Multifamily
MH/MHP 7 10 Ac 400 300 500 30 50 50 40 40 1 15
HD-8 8
3
10 Ac 400 300 500 30 50 100 50 50 2 30
HD-12 123
10 Ac 400 300 500 30 60 75 50 50 2 30
Highway Business
HB-200 200,000 350 350 350 20 60 125 50 75 2 40
HB-120 120,000 250 250 250 20 65 75 30 50 2 35
HB-80 80,000 200 150 200 20 65 50 20 25 2 35
HB-40 40,000 150 150 150 20 65 50 20 25 2 30
HB-20 20,000 100 100 100 20 65 50 20 25 2 30
NOTES:
1
Individual site plans shall comply with GI-2 requirements, except sites fronting Route 34 or Hurley Pond Road shall have a one-hundred-foot front setback.
2 Hangers and airport towers may have a height of 50 feet.
3 The maximum gross density for townhouses shall be six units per acre.
4 See § 140-192.1.
5 See § 140-197I.
140 Attachment 1:1 07 - 01 - 2009
WALL CODE
Township of Wall
Schedule of Zone Requirements
January 2004
Maximum Gross Minimum Lot Dimensions Maximum Lot Coverage Minimum Yard Depths Maximum
Principal Buildings Height
Zone
Density for Major
Subdivisions
(dwelling
units/acres)
Minimum
Lot Area
(square feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Frontage
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Depth
(feet)
All
Buildings
(percentage)
All
Impervious
Surfaces
(percentage)
Front
Yard
(feet)
Side
Yard
(feet)
Rear
Yard
(feet) Stories Feet
Office Business
OB-120 120,000 250 250 350 20 65 100 30 50 3 40
OB-40 40,000 150 150 200 20 65 100 20 25 2 30
OB-20 20,000 100 100 150 20 65 50 20 25 2 30
Neighborhood Business
NB 20,000 100 100 100 20 65 50 20 25 1.5 50
Commercial Recreation
CR-40 40 Ac 1,000 1,000 1,000 15 40 100 100 100 3 35
CR-10 10 Ac 500 500 500 20 55 100 100 100 3 35
Office Research
OR-10 10 Ac 500 500 500 20 55 150 50 50 3
5
405
OR-5 5 Ac 350 350 350 20 60 100 40 40 3
5
405
OR-2 2 Ac 200 200 200 20 65 100 25 25 3
5
605
Office Park
OP-104
10 Ac 500 500 500 20 50 150 65 75 3 40
OP-24
2 Ac 200 200 200 20 60 75 50 75 3 40
General Industrial
GI-10 10 Ac 500 350 500 25 55 100 50 75 3 40
GI-5 5 Ac 350 300 350 25 65 100 40 50 3 40
GI-2 2 Ac 200 200 200 20 65 75 25 25 3 40
Airport Industrial
AI1
10 Ac 1,600 1,600 1,600 5 15 150 150 150 2 352
NOTES:
1
Individual site plans shall comply with GI-2 requirements, except sites fronting Route 34 or Hurley Pond Road shall have a one-hundred-foot front setback.
2 Hangers and airport towers may have a height of 50 feet.
3 The maximum gross density for townhouses shall be six units per acre.
4 See § 140-192.1.
5 See § 140-197I.
140 Attachment 1:2 07 - 01 - 2009

LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
140 Attachment 2
Township of Wall
Schedule of Permitted and Conditional Uses for Residential Zone Districts1,2
January 2004
[Amended 5-9-2007 by Ord. No. 8-2007; 2-27-2013 by Ord. No. 2-2013; 12-28-2016 by Ord. No. 14-2016]
NAICS
Code3
Single-Family Residential
Multifamily
Residential
Use RR-6 RR-5 R-R R-60 R-40 R-30 R-25 R-20 R-15 R-10 R-7.5 R-5
MH/
MHP HD-12 HD-8
Residential4
Single-family attached dwellings
Single-family detached dwellings P P P P P P P P P P P P
Home professional offices C C C C C C C C C
Multifamily dwellings P P
Townhouses P
Quadplexes
Manufactured homes P
Agriculture, forestry and finishing5
111 Agricultural production – crops P P P P P P P
11211 Beef cattle P P P P P
1124 Sheep and goats P P P P P
11299 General livestock P P P P P
11212 Dairy farms P P P P P
11293 Fur-bearing animals P P P P P
11292 Horses and other equines P P P P P
113 Forestry P P P P P
115112 Crop planting; cultivating P P P P P
115113 Crop harvesting P P P P P
Services
22112 Electric utilities C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
221210 Gas utilities C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
513 Communications (except 513322) C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
623312 Assisted living facilities
Group homes4 P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
71391 Public golf courses C C C C C C C C
71391 Private golf courses and country clubs C C C C C C C C
81311 Religious organizations6 C C C C C C C C C C C C
NOTES:
1 P = permitted use. C = conditional use. Specific NAICS codes listed for a zone indicate
the only permitted use within the applicable NAICS classification.
2 Air Hazard Zone supersedes uses in the underlying zones. (See § 140-163.)
3 NAICS code refers to the North American Industry Classification System Manual,
prepared by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget,
1997 Edition.
4 Uses not classified by NAICS code.
5 Agricultural uses are permitted only on lots larger than five acres, as per § 140-164B.
6 Churches and other places of worship must have a minimum lot size of five acres, as
per § 140-156.
7 Solar system contractors only.
8 Except solar system contractors.
9 Except NAICS 72241 Drinking places with entertainment.
10 Gross floor area of a building or any part thereof is limited to a maximum of 55,000
square feet.
140 Attachment 2:1 05 - 01 - 2017