Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Township Committee
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of Westampton,
of a general and permanent nature, adopted by the Township Committee
of the Township of Westampton, as revised, codified and consolidated into
chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp. and consisting of
Chapters 1 through 58, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved,
adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Township of
Westampton," hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
All provisions of this ordinance and the Code shall be in full force and effect
on and after December 15, 1973.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Township Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Township Committee
of the Township of Westampton by impressing thereon the seal of the
township, as provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in
the office of the Township Clerk, to be made available to persons desiring to
examine the same during all times while the said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of Westampton"
shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing the said Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Township Clerk of the Township of Westampton, pursuant to law, shall
cause to be published, in the manner required, a copy of this adopting
ordinance in a newspaper of general circulation in the township. Sufficient
copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for
inspection by the public at all times during regular office hours. The
enactment and publication of this adopting ordinance, coupled with
availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be
deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk, or someone authorized and directed by
him, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code
required to be filed in his office for the use of the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification, which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code, shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Township Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the
Township Committee, which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures
for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township of
Westampton to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of
this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more that
$500 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, in the discretion
of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code, and every part of each section, is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or part thereof.
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
§ 1-6 WESTAMPTON CODE § 1-11
1:4
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other section or part thereof.
§ 1-12. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature,
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code, are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to November 21, 1972.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place, or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instrument or evidence of
the township's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as part
of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical changes and
other minor changes were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is
the intention of the Township Committee that all such changes be adopted
as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
K. Ordinances establishing the amount and manner of payment of salaries
or compensation of officers and employees, establishing workdays and
working hours of certain employees, providing for holidays and
vacations for employees and keeping of employment records.
L. Any ordinance making any change or revision in the Zoning Map.
M. Any ordinance regulating traffic or parking.
§ 1-13 WESTAMPTON CODE § 1-14
1:6
ARTICLE II
Adoption of Board of Health Provisions
§ 1-15. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Board of Health of the
Township of Westampton of a general and permanent nature, as revised,
codified and consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code
Publishers Corp. and consisting of Chapter 62, are hereby approved,
adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Township of
Westampton," hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-16. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances of the Board of Health enacted prior to the
enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are expressly saved from
repeal or continued in force and effect hereinafter.
§ 1-17. When effective.
All provisions of this ordinance and the Code shall be in full force and effect
on and after December 15, 1973.
§ 1-18. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Secretary of the Board of Health and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and,
if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to as provided
by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Board of Health, to be made available to persons desiring
to examine the same during all times while the said Code is in effect.
§ 1-19. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Board of
Health to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of Westampton"
shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing the said Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-20. Publication; filing.
The Secretary of the Board of Health, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required, a copy of this adopting ordinance in
a newspaper of general circulation in the township. Sufficient copies of
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:7
the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Secretary for inspection
by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this adopting ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-21. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Secretary, or someone authorized and directed by
him, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code
required to be filed in his office for the use of the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification, which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code, shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-22. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Board of
Health to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not less than $5 nor
more than $500.
§ 1-23. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code, and every part of each section, is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or part thereof.
§ 1-24. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other section or part thereof.
§ 1-25. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, adopted by the Board of
Health and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code, are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-20 WESTAMPTON CODE § 1-26
1:8
§ 1-26. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-25 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 1-27. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Board of Health for
adoption and revision as part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4,
certain grammatical changes and other minor changes were made in one
or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Board of Health that
all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so
changed had been previously formally amended to read as such.
A. Any ordinance of the Board of Health adopted subsequent to May 15,
1958.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
G. Any provisions of an ordinance or resolution of the Board of Health
creating employments, positions or offices and fixing duties therefor
which are not provided in the Code hereby adopted and which are not in
conflict or inconsistent therewith.
§ 1-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-27
1:9

ARTICLE III
Adoption of 1998 Renumbering of Code
[Added 1-26-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
§ 1-28. Adoption of renumbering.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of Westampton
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Township Committee
of the Township of Westampton, on November 20 1973, by Ordinance No.
5-1973, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections by
General Code Publishers Corp., and are renumbered to consist of Chapters
1 through 256, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Township of Westampton,"
hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-28
1:11

ARTICLE IV
Returned Check Fee
[Adopted 6-28-2005 by Ord. No. 18-2005]
§ 1-29. Fee.
A fee of $25 shall be charged for any check issued to the Township of
Westampton which is returned as non-negotiable.
§ 1-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-29
1:13
Chapter 4
ADMINISTRATOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 26. Salaries — See Ch. 63.
§ 4-1. Establishment of office; appointment. [Amended 4-4-2016 by
Ord. No. 8-2016]
The Township Committee hereby establishes the office of Township
Administrator. The Township Committee shall appoint an individual to serve
on a full or part-time basis as set forth in the resolution of appointment of
the Township Committee.
§ 4-2. Powers and duties. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992]
A. The powers and duties of the Township Administrator shall be as
follows: [Amended 4-4-2016 by Ord. No. 8-2016]
(1) To execute administrative policy decisions of the Township
Committee
(2) To supervise the day-to-day administration of non-Police-
Department personnel as permitted by law; to recommend
personnel policies to the Township Committee that include:
(a) An employee evaluation plan.
(b) An employee compensation and benefits plan.
(c) Preparation and publication of an employee handbook.
(d) Staffing changes.
(e) Employee hiring, termination and disciplinary actions.
(3) To assist in the preparation of the budget; to serve as the focal
point for collection and organization of departmental budget
proposals; to ensure that the budget, as adopted, is being properly
adhered to by all departments in conjunction with the Auditor and
Chief Financial Officer.
(4) To supervise purchasing and expenditure accounting procedures as
established by the Township Committee, Township Code and state
law pertinent to Township administration; to serve as approval
authority for purchases prior to assignment of a purchase order
number.
§ 1-29 WESTAMPTON CODE § 4-2
1:14
(5) To serve as a liaison between the Township Committee, other
governmental units of the Township, state and county and the
public.
(6) To establish goals and objectives for subordinate departments (in
accordance with the Westampton Township organizational chart);
to determine standards of performance and resolve work schedule
and project priority issues, when necessary, to ensure the
necessary functioning of Township departments.
(7) To serve as administrative official as follows:
(a) Administer contracts entered into by the Township to ensure
compliance.
(b) Recommend office space allocations as directed by the
Township Committee.
(c) Provide for the purchase, issue and safeguard of non-police
supplies and equipment.
(8) To perform other duties as directed by the Township Committee
and in accordance with N.J.S.A. Titles 19, 40 and 40A.
B. Annex A: Secretary of the Municipal Corporation. The secretary of the
municipal corporation shall:
(1) Maintain custody of the Municipal Seal.
(2) Act as official township signatory; attest municipal officials'
signatures.
(3) Receive and maintain legal documents, bonds and insurance
policies.
C. Annex B: Secretary of the Township Committee. The secretary of the
Township Committee shall attend all regular and special Township
Committee meetings except when prevented by illness, personal
emergency or vacation; and cause the following to be performed:
(1) Preparation and maintenance of Township Committee meeting
official minutes.
(2) Proper handling of municipal correspondence.
(3) Processing, recording, filing and advertising of ordinances, the
municipal budget, bids for municipal equipment and supplies and,
when necessary, resolutions.
(4) Maintenance of official records not specifically handled by other
departments.
D. Annex C: Election Official. The election official shall:
(1) Provide for voter registration.
§ 4-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-2
1:15
§ 4-3. Salary.
The Township Committee hereby declares that the salary of the Township
Clerk/Administrator shall be established by the Township Committee by way
of the Salary Ordinance.1
Chapter 6
AFFORDABLE HOUSING ADMINISTRATION
(2) Receive and maintain nominating petitions and certify local
candidates nominated by petition to the County Clerk.
(3) Select polling places.
(4) Receive and maintain election results.
(5) Certify persons elected to partisan county committee offices in
each election district.
(6) Certify persons elected to local office at the primary and general
elections.
E. Annex D: Administrative Official. The administrative official shall:
(1) Administer contracts entered into by the township to ensure
compliance.
(2) Recommend office space allocations as directed by the Township
Committee.
(3) Provide for the issuance of licenses issued by the township.
(4) Provide for the purchase, issue and safeguard of nonpolice supplies
and equipment.
1. Editor's Note: See Ch. 63, Salaries.
§ 4-2 WESTAMPTON CODE § 4-3
1:16
ARTICLE I
Municipal Housing Liaison and Administrative Agent
[Adopted 9-22-2009 by Ord. No. 11-2009]
§ 6-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to create the administrative mechanisms
needed for the execution of Westampton Township's responsibility to assist
in the provision of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of
1985.
§ 6-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering the
affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program
for Westampton Township to ensure that the restricted units under
administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as applicable,
only to low- and moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the governing
body with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the
affordable housing program for Westampton Township.
§ 6-3. Establishment of Municipal Housing Liaison position and
compensation; powers and duties.
A. Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is hereby
established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison for Westampton
Township.
B. Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH),
the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the governing
body and may be a full- or part-time municipal employee.
C. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for Westampton
Township, including the following responsibilities which may not be
contracted out:
(1) Serving as Westampton Township's primary point of contact for all
inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents, and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in Westampton
Township's Fair Share Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as required by
COAH;
§ 6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-3
1:17
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable;
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH.
D. Subject to approval by COAH, Westampton Township may contract with
or authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency charged
by the governing body, which entity shall have the responsibility of
administering the affordable housing program of Westampton Township
except for those responsibilities which may not be contracted out
pursuant to Subsection C above. If Westampton Township contracts
with another entity to administer all or any part of the affordable
housing program, including the affordability controls and affirmative
marketing plan, the Municipal Housing Liaison shall supervise the
contracting administrative agent.
E. Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the governing body at
the time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
§ 6-3 WESTAMPTON CODE § 6-3
1:18
Chapter 11
CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 26. Salaries — See Ch. 63.
§ 11-1. Establishment; qualification; appointment.
The Township Committee hereby establishes the office of the Chief
Financial Officer. The Township Committee shall appoint a duly qualified
individual to serve on a full- or part-time basis as set forth in the resolution
of appointment of the Township Committee. The individual so appointed
shall be a certified municipal finance officer as defined by law.
§ 11-2. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Chief Financial Officer shall be those powers
and duties prescribed by P.L. 1947, c. 151,2 as the same may be amended
from time to time, and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
§ 11-3. Salary.
The Township Committee hereby declares that the salary of the Chief
Financial Officer shall be established by the Township Committee by way of
the Salary Ordinance.3
Chapter 14
CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER CONTROL
§ 14-1. Department established; Control Board established.
[Amended 2-26-1981 by Ord. No. 3-1981]
There shall be a Department of Civil Defense and Disaster Control, the
head of which shall be the Civil Defense and Disaster Control Director, also
known as the "Municipal Coordinator of Emergency Management." There
is hereby created a Civil Defense and Disaster Control Board to perform
the functions of the Local Defense Council set forth in state law and to
be considered members of the Department of Civil Defense and Disaster
Control. The Disaster Control Director, also known as the "Municipal
Coordinator of Emergency Management," shall be the Chairman of said
Board and shall serve as a member of said Board. The Board shall be
composed of six additional members.
2. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27BB-26 et seq.
3. Editor's Note: See Ch. 63, Salaries.
§ 6-3 CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER § 14-2
11:19
§ 14-2. Appointment. [Amended 2-26-1981 by Ord. No. 3-1981]
The Civil Defense and Disaster Control Director, also known as the
"Municipal Coordinator of Emergency Management," shall be appointed
by the Mayor. The Director shall serve a term of three years. The Board
members shall be appointed by the Mayor to serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor but not for terms to exceed one year.
§ 14-3. Qualifications of Director. [Amended 2-26-1981 by Ord. No.
3-1981]
The Civil Defense and Disaster Control Director, also known as the
"Municipal Coordinator of Emergency Management," shall be a resident
of the Township of Westampton and shall comply with applicable state
regulations and shall receive such compensation as established in the
discretion of the Township Committee by way of the Salary Ordinance.4
§ 14-4. Powers and duties of Director and Board. [Amended
2-26-1981 by Ord. No. 3-1981]
The Civil Defense and Disaster Control Director, also known as the
"Municipal Coordinator of Emergency Management," and Board shall have
the powers, functions and duties prescribed by law.
§ 14-5. Deputy Director. [Amended 2-26-1981 by Ord. No. 3-1981]
The Civil Defense and Disaster Control Director, also known as the
"Municipal Coordinator of Emergency Management," shall appoint a Deputy
Civil Defense and Disaster Control Director with the approval of the Mayor.
Wherever possible, such Deputy shall be appointed from among the salaried
officers or employees of the municipality.
Chapter 17
CLAIMS, PAYMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Chief Financial Officer — See Ch. 11.
§ 17-1. Procedure.
All claims for the payment of money shall be presented, approved and paid
in accordance with the following procedures:
A. Manner of presentation. All claims for the payment of money shall be
made by the claimant upon the appropriate voucher and shall be
4. Editor's Note: See Ch. 63, Salaries.
§ 14-2 WESTAMPTON CODE § 17-1
17:20
approved or disapproved in accordance with the procedures
hereinafter set forth. No claim shall be paid unless the claimant shall
first present a detailed bill of items or demand specifying particularly
how the bill or demand is made up, with the certification of the claimant
that it is correct, said bill or demand and certification to be attached to
the voucher. No claim shall be paid unless the voucher has attached to
it a certification of a department head, or of his or her duly designated
representative having personal knowledge of the facts, that the goods
have been received by or the services rendered to the township and
that those goods or services are consistent with prior authorization
or authorizations. Each voucher shall bear the signature of the Chief
Financial Officer certifying that there exists a line item appropriation
against which the claim shall be charged. The Chief Financial Officer
shall also certify that there are sufficient funds available for the
payment of the voucher. No voucher shall be paid unless the
aforementioned certifications are attached to said voucher or vouchers.
B. Procedure for payment.
(1) A list of claims approved by the Chief Financial Officer shall be
prepared which shall contain the name of the vendor or party
claiming payment, the amount of the claim authorized to be paid, a
brief description of the goods or services received by the township
and a certification by the Chief Financial Officer as follows:
I hereby certify that the attached list of claims has been approved
by me for payment. I further certify that a township officer or
employee has certified that the above-described goods or services
have been received by Westampton Township, and that sufficient
funds are available to pay said claim.
Chief Financial Officer
(2) The certified list of claims approved by the Chief Financial Officer
shall be delivered to each member of the Township Committee on
or before the close of business on the Friday immediately prior to
the next regularly scheduled Township Committee meeting.
(3) At the regularly scheduled Township Committee meeting, the
certified list of claims set forth above shall be approved or
disapproved by a majority vote of no less than three members of the
Township Committee. Any disapproved claims shall be referred
back to the Chief Financial Officer with such instructions as the
governing body may give at the time of disapproval. All vouchers
shall be available for inspection and review at the Committee
meeting.
(4) All claims approved for payment by the governing body shall be
recorded in the minutes of the meeting and shall, upon approval of
the minutes, be open to the public.
§ 17-1 CLAIMS, PAYMENT OF § 17-1
17:21
Chapter 21
COURT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries — See Ch. 63.
§ 21-1. Municipal Court and office of Judge of the Municipal Court
established.
A Municipal Court is hereby established, effective February 1, 1950,
pursuant to Chapter 264 of the Laws of 1948, as amended by Chapter 394
of the Laws of 1948 of the State of New Jersey,5 which Court shall be known
as the "Municipal Court of the Township of Westampton in the County of
Burlington," and the Judge of said Court shall be known as the "Judge of the
Municipal Court."
§ 21-2. Powers, duties and jurisdiction of Court.
Said Court shall have, possess and exercise all the functions, powers, duties
and jurisdiction of a Municipal Court as prescribed by said Chapter 264 of
the Laws of 1948, as amended,6 or as may hereafter be prescribed by law.
§ 21-3. Seal.
The Municipal Court shall have a seal which shall bear the impress of the
name of the Court.
(5) Payment of claims from current, escrow and capital accounts shall
be by check drawn on those accounts signed by the Mayor, Chief
Financial Officer and countersigned by the Clerk/Administrator or
other official to be designated. Payment of claims from all trust
accounts shall be by check drawn on those accounts signed by the
Chief Financial Officer and Clerk/Administrator or other official to
be designated. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992;
8-8-1995 by Ord. No. 13-1995]
(6) The governing body shall by resolution annually designate the
individuals whose signatures shall appear on checks drawn upon
the Treasury of the township.
(7) The governing body shall, by resolution passed by not less than a
majority of the full membership, designate the manner in which
and the time in which salaries, wages or other compensation for
services shall be paid.
5. Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq.
6. Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq.
§ 17-1 WESTAMPTON CODE § 21-4
21:22
§ 21-4. Qualifications, appointment and term of office of Judge.
Said Judge of the Municipal Court shall have the qualifications required by
law, shall be appointed by the Township Committee and shall serve for a
term of three years from the date of his appointment and until his successor
is appointed and qualified.
§ 21-5. Salary of Judge.
The Judge of the Municipal Court shall receive an annual salary to be fixed
in the Salary Ordinance7 and to be paid in the same manner as salaries of
other municipal officers are paid, which salary shall be in lieu of fees, costs
and any other allowances whatsoever.
§ 21-6. Disposition of costs and fees, fines and penalties.
The costs and fees charged against defendants, when collected, shall
become municipal funds and shall be turned over to the custodian of the
funds of the municipality. The fines and penalties imposed in said Municipal
Court shall be disposed of as prescribed by law.
§ 21-7. Sittings of Court.
The Municipal Court shall be held in the Township Hall, and the Judge of the
Municipal Court shall sit during such hours and such times as the business
of the Court may require, subject to the rules applicable to Municipal
Courts.
§ 21-8. Municipal Court Administrator. [Added 5-13-1997 by Ord.
No. 9-1997]
There is hereby created the position of Municipal Court Administrator, who
shall serve on a full-time basis as the Administrator of the Township of
Westampton Municipal Court. The Municipal Court Administrator shall be
appointed by the Township Committee only in the event of such person's
qualification to be such Court Administrator pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq. The Municipal Court Administrator shall perform
such functions and duties as shall be prescribed for him or her by law by the
New Jersey court rules applicable to municipal courts and by the Judge of
the Municipal Court. The Municipal Court Administrator shall receive such
compensation as shall be provided for in the annual Salary Ordinance.8
§ 21-9. Deputy Court Administrator. [Added 8-28-1980 by Ord. No.
7-1980; amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 9-1997]
There shall be a Deputy Court Administrator of the Municipal Court of
the Township of Westampton who shall be appointed by the Township
Committee.
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 63, Salaries.
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. 63, Salaries.
§ 21-4 COURT § 21-10
21:23
§ 21-10. Authority and duties. [Added 4-25-1995 by Ord. No.
7-1995; amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 9-1997]
The Municipal Court Administrator shall exercise those powers assigned
to said Administrator by the Municipal Court Judge and may also proceed
with the powers to the Municipal Court Administrator by the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 2B:12-13.
§ 21-11. Municipal Prosecutor. [Added 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
9-1997]
The Township of Westampton hereby creates the position of Municipal
Prosecutor who shall be appointed annually by the Township Committee and
whose salary shall be established annually by the Township Committee.9
§ 21-12. Prosecutor responsibilities. [Added 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
9-1997]
The Municipal Prosecutor shall serve under the supervision of the Attorney
General or County Prosecutor, and said Municipal Prosecutor may
represent this state, county or municipality in any matter within the
jurisdiction of the Municipal Court.
§ 21-13. Municipal Public Defender. [Added 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
9-1997]
There shall be a Municipal Public Defender of the Township of Westampton
who shall be an attorney-at-law of the State of New Jersey and shall be
appointed for a one-year term to expire December 31 of the year of his
appointment or until his successor has been duly appointed and qualified.
The appointment of the Municipal Public Defender shall be by resolution
duly adopted pursuant to the Local Public Contracts Law. 10 The Municipal
Public Defender shall be appointed by the Township Committee.
§ 21-14. Public Defender; powers and duties. [Added 5-13-1997 by
Ord. No. 9-1997]
The Municipal Public Defender shall represent those defendants in the
Municipal Court of the Township of Westampton whom the Judge of the
Municipal Court has determined are indigent and constitutionally or
otherwise entitled by law to have counsel furnished without cost. The
Municipal Public Defender shall not represent those defendants who are
indigent and are constitutionally or otherwise entitled by law to counsel
if such defendants affirmatively and with an understanding of the waiver
of such right to counsel, state an intention to proceed without counsel.
The representation of the defendant by the Municipal Public Defender shall
continue through trial and, in the event of a conviction, shall continue
through sentencing and shall include advising the defendant with respect
9. Editor's Note: See Ch. 63, Salaries.
10.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A § 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 21-10 WESTAMPTON CODE § 21-14
21:24
to his right of appeal but shall not include the preparation and filing of the
notice of appeal or any other application for postconviction relief.
§ 21-15. Cost for representation by Public Defender. [Added
5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 9-1997]
Chapter 26
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
§ 26-1. Indemnification and legal defense.
Except as hereinafter provided, the Township of Westampton, hereinafter
known as "the Township," shall, upon the request of any present or former
official, employee or appointee of the Township, provide for indemnification
and legal defense of any civil action brought against said person or persons
arising from an act or omission falling within the scope of their public
duties.
§ 26-2. Definition of terms.
The terms of this chapter and the definition of "official," "employee" and
"appointee" are to be construed liberally in order to effectuate the purposes
of this chapter, except that these terms shall not mean: a) any person who
is not a natural person; b) any person while providing goods or services
of any kind under any contract with the Township except an employment
contract; c) any person while providing legal or engineering services for
compensation unless said person is a full-time employee of the Township;
and d) any person who as a condition of his or her appointment or contract
is required to indemnify and defend the Township and/or secure insurance.
§ 26-3. Limits on protection.
The Township shall provide for defense of and indemnify any present or
former official, employee or appointee of the Township who becomes a
defendant in a civil action if the person or persons involved: a) acted or
failed to act in a matter in which the Township has or had an interest; b)
acted or failed to act in the discharge of a duty imposed or authorized by
law; and c) acted or failed to take action in good faith. For purposes of this
chapter, the duty and authority of the Township to defend and indemnify
shall extend to a cross-claim or counterclaim against said person.
A. Any person applying for representation by a Municipal Public Defender
shall pay an application fee of not more than $200. [Amended
4-23-2002 by Ord. No. 5-2002]
B. The Municipal Court may waive any required application fee, in whole
or in part, if the court determines in its discretion that the application
fee represents an unreasonable burden on the person seeking
representation.
§ 21-14 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 26-4
26:25
§ 26-4. Exceptions.
The Township shall not indemnify any person against the payment of
punitive damages, penalties or fines, but may provide for the legal defense
of such claims in accord with the standards set forth herein. The Township
may refuse to provide for the defense and indemnification of any civil action
referred to herein if the Westampton Township Committee determines that:
a) the act or omission did not occur within the scope of a duty authorized
or imposed by law; b) the act or failure to act was the result of actual
fraud, willful misconduct or actual malice of the person requesting defense
and indemnification; or c) the defense of the action or proceeding by the
Township would create a conflict of interest between the Township and the
person or persons involved.
§ 26-5. Best interest of Township.
In any other action or proceeding, including criminal proceedings, the
Township may provide for the defense of a present or former official,
employee or appointee, if the Westampton Township Committee concludes
that such representation is in the best interest of the Township and that the
person to be defended acted or failed to act in accord with the standards set
forth in this chapter.
§ 26-6. Control of defense.
Whenever the Township provides for the defense of any action set forth
herein and as a condition of such defense, the Township may assume
exclusive control over the representation of such persons defended and
such person shall cooperate fully with the Township.
§ 26-7. Means of defense.
The Township may provide for the defense pursuant to this chapter by
authorizing its Attorney to act in behalf of the person being defended or by
employing other counsel for this purpose or by asserting the right of the
Township under any appropriate insurance policy that requires the insurer
to provide defense.
§ 26-8. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication as
required by law.
Chapter 32
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
§ 32-1. Establishment; membership; terms.
A. There is hereby established a Commission to be known as the
"Economic Development Commission for the Township of Westampton."
§ 26-4 WESTAMPTON CODE § 32-1
32:26
§ 32-2. Appointments; qualifications.
§ 32-3. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall be strictly an advisory committee and shall perform
the functions and exercise the powers hereinafter enumerated:
Chapter 32A
EMERGENCY SERVICES DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 54.
B. The Commission shall consist of seven members, including the Deputy
Mayor, three lay people and three business people. The Commission
shall select its Chairman.
C. The Deputy Mayor shall serve a term concurrent with his position as
Deputy Mayor. The other members shall serve three-year staggered
terms.
A. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Committee, shall make
the appointments to the Commission. The Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the Committee, shall designate the first appointed members
to serve for one-, two- and three-year terms.
B. To be eligible to serve on the Commission, a person must be 18 years of
age or older and must reside in the township, work in the township or
have a place of business in the township.
A. It will develop ways and means of promoting Westampton Township's
economic development and attracting industry, transportation and
other potential economic interests.
B. It will make recommendations to attract industry and forward the same
to the Township Committee for consideration, and upon approval it
shall implement such programs.
C. The Commission shall not exercise any power of condemnation or
eminent domain and shall not be authorized to pledge the credit of the
Township of Westampton or to create any debt against it or in any
manner act as the agent of said Township of Westampton.
D. It shall classify vacant lands and commercial and industrial sites
according to their adaptability for the settlement thereon of various
types of industrial enterprises.
E. The Commission shall make an annual report to the Township
Committee at the first meeting in December.
§ 32-1 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 32-3
32:27
§ 32A-1. Establishment.
An Emergency Services Department shall be and the same is hereby created
and established in the Township of Westampton, County of Burlington and
State of New Jersey.
§ 32A-2. Title of Department.
The official name of said Department shall be "Westampton Township
Emergency Services Department."
§ 32A-3. Word usage.
The words "he" and "his" shall be taken to also mean and include the words
"she" and "hers," and said words shall, for purposes of this chapter, be
interchangeable with each other.
§ 32A-4. Organization; supervision.
§ 32A-5. Purpose.
The work and functions of said Emergency Services Department shall be to
protect lives and property within said Township and, subject to law, rules
and regulations, and standard operating procedures, within neighboring
municipalities against fire or other disasters. Said work and functions are
hereby declared to be and constitute a public purpose.
§ 32A-6. Administration.
The Emergency Services Department shall at all times be and remain under
the supervision and control of the Fire Chief, as set forth herein and as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 43:17-1 et seq. and shall render firefighting and emergency
services to the Township as needed. Said company shall be governed in
accordance with state law, rules and regulations, and standard operating
procedures.
A. The Emergency Services Department shall consist of career and
volunteer personnel, which shall consist of the positions of Fire Chief,
Captain, Lieutenant, Senior Firefighter/EMT and Firefighter/EMTs
(both full-time and part-time), Emergency Medical Technician (both
full-time and part-time) in a quantity designated by the Township
Committee and appointed by the appointing authority. The Emergency
Services Department will also consist of a volunteer section, which shall
be governed in accordance with state law, rules and regulations and
standard operating procedures adopted by the appropriate authority.
B. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the appointment of any
volunteer personnel to a senior supervisory position.
§ 32-3 WESTAMPTON CODE § 32A-7
32:28
§ 32A-7. Fire Chief
The Fire Chief of the firefighter/EMTs shall be the head of the Emergency
Services Department and shall report to the Township Administrator for its
efficiency and day-to-day operations pursuant to policies established by the
Township Committee. The Fire Chief shall:
§ 32A-8. Removal; suspension; fines; reduction in office.
No member of the Emergency Services Department shall be suspended,
removed, fined or reduced in rank for any cause other than for incapacity,
misconduct or disobedience, as provided in New Jersey statutes and the
Emergency Services Department's rules and regulations.
§ 32A-9. Qualifications for appointment/promotion.
No person shall be appointed to the Emergency Services Department who
is not qualified as provided in New Jersey statutes and the Emergency
Services Division's rules and regulations. No person shall be promoted
who is not qualified as provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-29. The Fire Chief
may also require that an applicant for appointment to the Emergency
Services Department shall successfully complete a physical, medical and
psychological examination. All applicants, either volunteer or otherwise,
must undergo a criminal background check.
A. Administer and enforce the rules and regulations of the Emergency
Services Department and special emergency directives for disposition
and discipline of the Department and its members;
B. Exercise and discharge the functions and duties of the Emergency
Services Department;
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members of the
Department;
D. Delegate such authority as may be necessary for the efficient operation
of the Emergency Services Department, to be exercised under the Fire
Chief's direction and control; and
E. Report at least monthly to the Township Committee in such form as
shall be prescribed on the operation of the Emergency Services
Department during the preceding month, and make such other reports
as may be requested by the Township Committee.
F. Be the Supervisor for the Township Fire Official and oversee prescribed
duties to the Fire Official and all employees, officers or agents of the
Westampton Township Bureau of Fire Prevention as set forth in the
Westampton Township Code § 128-1 et. seq.
§ 32A-7 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 32A-9
32:29
Chapter 33
ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 26.
Ethics standards — See Ch. 35.
Building construction — See Ch. 99.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 131.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 149.
Site plan review — See Ch. 196.
Soil removal — See Ch. 199.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 209.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 215.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 33-1. Purpose; name.
§ 33-2. Members; terms of office; vacancies.
A. The purpose of the Environmental Advisory Committee is to advise and
assist the Township Committee, Land Development Board and any
other municipal department, committee or officials on environmental
issues.
B. The Committee established by this chapter shall be known as the
"Environmental Advisory Committee."
C. The Environmental Advisory Committee shall act only in an advisory
capacity and may make recommendations on development proposals as
provided in this chapter.
A. There is hereby established the Environmental Advisory Committee of
the Township, which shall consist of up to seven members, who shall be
appointed by the Township Committee, shall be residents of the
Township of Westampton, shall serve without salary or other
compensation and shall each be removable from office by the Township
Committee at any time without cause, upon a vote of a majority of all
the members of Township Committee, except that the absence of a
Committee member from three consecutive Committee meetings shall
constitute an automatic forfeiture of that Committee member's office
without need of any action.
B. Appointments.
(1) Six Committee members shall be appointed for three-year terms,
except for the first terms of appointment, which shall be staggered
as follows:
(a) Two members shall be appointed for terms to expire December
31, 2007.
§ 32A-9 WESTAMPTON CODE § 33-2
32:30
§ 33-3. Organization; officers; meetings.
§ 33-4. Powers and duties.
The Committee is established to assist in the protection, development and
use of natural resources. In order to carry out these purposes, the
Committee shall have the following functions:
(b) Two members shall be appointed for terms to expire December
31, 2008.
(c) Two member shall be appointed for terms to expire December
31, 2009.
(2) One member shall be a member of the Land Development Board
and shall be appointed for a term of one year.
C. Alternates. The Township Committee may appoint two alternate
members. Alternate members shall be designated by the Mayor at the
time of their appointment as “Alternate No. 1” and “Alternate No. 2.”
The terms of the alternate members shall be for two years commencing
January 1 of the year of their appointment, except that the terms of the
alternate members shall be such that the term of not more than one
alternate member shall expire in any one year; provided, however, that
in no instance shall the term of the alternate member first appointed
exceed two years. Alternate members may participate in discussions of
the proceedings, but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. [Added 6-24-2008 by Ord. No.
8-2008]
A. An organization meeting shall be held annually during January. At such
meeting, the Committee shall elect a Chairman and a Secretary from
the Committee. The Committee shall hold at least one regular meeting
quarterly. Committee procedures shall comply with the Open Public
Meetings Act. A majority of all members shall constitute a quorum.
B. The Committee shall keep minutes of all its proceedings.
A. Promoting the conservation and careful management of the natural
resources of the Township.
B. Planning and implementing programs to educate the public about local
conservation programs and issues.
C. Maintaining an up-to-date inventory of the Township natural resources,
including all relevant mapping and documentation.
D. Assisting the Township Committee in maintaining an up-to-date
inventory of all open space and recreation areas, both publicly and
privately owned; investigating possible appropriate use for publicly
owned open space.
§ 33-2 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION § 33-4
32:31
Chapter 35
ETHICS STANDARDS
E. Assisting the Land Development Board in the latter's duties and
responsibilities, including input to the Master Plan and long-range
planning.
F. Rendering nonbinding opinions with respect to any matter referred for
review by the land Development Board within 30 calendar days of such
referral.
G. Reviewing and making recommendations with respect to all
Environmental I Impact Reports filed by a developer with the Land
Development Board.
H. Acting as a clearinghouse and resource for the community on local
environmental issues.
I. Performing such other duties as directed by the Township Committee.
§ 33-4 WESTAMPTON CODE § 33-4
35:32
ARTICLE I
Local Government Ethics Law
[Adopted 9-27-2005 by Ord. No. 21-2005]
§ 35-1. Adoption of state provisions.
The provisions of the New Jersey Local Government Ethics Law, found at
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq., are incorporated herein by reference as if set
forth at length.
§ 35-2. Adjudication body.
To fairly adjudicate any purported or actual violation of either the
Westampton Code of Ethics or the New Jersey State Local Government
Ethics Law, the Township hereby determines that any such purported
violation shall be referred to the Local Finance Board in the Division of
Local Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs of the
State of New Jersey, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et
seq., and resolved in the said Local Finance Board.
§ 35-1 ETHICS STANDARDS § 35-2
35:33

ARTICLE II
Dual Office Holding Ban
[Adopted 9-27-2005 by Ord. No. 22-2005]
§ 35-3. Dual office holding policy.
§ 35-4. Incorporated in Township's Ethics Policy.
This dual office holding policy shall be incorporated as part of the Township
of Westampton's Ethics Policy.
A. It is hereby determined to be the policy of the Township Committee of
the Township of Westampton that no member of the Township
governing body of the Township of Westampton shall serve as a
Township Committeeperson in the event that such Committeeperson
shall stand and be elected to either the Burlington County Board of
Chosen Freeholders or a seat within the New Jersey Legislature.
B. In the event that a Westampton Township Committeeperson stands for
and wins election to a county or state elective position, it is the policy of
the Township of Westampton that said Committeeperson shall not run
again for re-election to the Township Committee if the person is still
serving as either a County Freeholder or a State Legislator.
C. In the event of an election to the Burlington County Board of Chosen
Freeholders or to a state legislative position, the Township
Committeeperson shall surrender his/her current seat on the
Westampton Township Committee no later than the end of the calendar
year in which such Committeeperson has been elected to a superior
office.
§ 35-3 ETHICS STANDARDS § 35-4
35:35

ARTICLE III
Pay for Play
[Adopted 9-27-2005 by Ord. No. 23-2005]
§ 35-5. Process for awarding contracts.
All contracts for professional services and for services defined in the law
as extraordinary and unspecifiable services shall be entered into when
necessary or appropriate by the Township of Westampton and such
contracts will only be awarded after a competitive, quality-based, fair and
open process. A competitive, quality-based, fair and open process shall
require, at a minimum, that any necessary or appropriate professional
service contract or contract for extraordinary unspecifiable services be:
§ 35-6. Exception.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the award
of a professional services contract when an emergency exists requiring
the immediate performance of services, with such award being made in
accordance with the Rules of the Township and the New Jersey Local Public
Contracts Law.
§ 35-7. Responsibility for implementation.
The Township Administrator and the Township Solicitor are directed and
authorized to take all action necessary to prepare and arrange for the
implementation of policies and procedures in accordance with this article.
A. Publicly advertised in newspapers in sufficient time to give notice in
advance of the contract;
B. Awarded under a process that provides for public solicitation of
proposals and/or qualifications;
C. Awarded and disclosed under criteria established in writing by the
Township of Westampton prior to the solicitation of proposals or
qualifications;
D. Publicly opened; and
E. Announced when awarded.
§ 35-5 ETHICS STANDARDS § 35-7
35:37

ARTICLE IV
Gift/Honoraria Ban
[Adopted 9-27-2005 by Ord. No. 24-2005]
§ 35-8. Prohibition of solicitation or acceptance of gifts.
§ 35-9. Prohibition of acceptance of honoraria.
No elected official, department head, or employee of the Township of
Westampton shall accept any compensation, honorarium, or gift from any
person or entity in consideration of an appearance, speech, or article unless
the appearance, speech, or article is wholly unrelated to the elected
official's, department head's, or employee's service with the Township of
Westampton.
§ 35-10. Prohibition on offering of honoraria.
No person or entity, business entity, professional corporation, professional
association or professional partnership shall offer any compensation,
honorarium, or gift of tickets to any venue of entertainment or to sporting
events.
§ 35-11. Incorporation in Township Ethics Policy.
These policies shall be incorporated as part of the existing Township Ethics
Policy.
§ 35-12. Violations and penalties.
A. No elected official, department head, or employee of the Township of
Westampton, member of their immediate family, or business
organization in which such official, department head or employee has
an interest, shall accept or solicit any gift, favor, loan, service, promise
of future employment or any other thing of value from any person or
entity which has a municipal contract or the elected official,
department head or employee has reason to believe may be awarded a
contract, whether awarded through a bid process or otherwise, with the
Township of Westampton.
B. Excluded from this provision are the following:
(1) Gifts accepted on behalf of the Township and transferred
immediately to the Township for its perpetual possession;
(2) Nonmonetary awards presented in recognition of public service;
and
(3) Gifts conferred on account of kinship, if these gifts are otherwise
legally permissible and are not bartered for another benefit to
influence the performance of an official duty by the elected official,
department head, or employee.
§ 35-8 ETHICS STANDARDS § 35-12
35:39
A. Any person who accepts such prohibited gift or honoraria as set forth
herein shall be subject to discipline, including a fine in the amount of
$500 for each such violation, and/or suspension or removal.
B. Any person who offers a prohibited gift or honoraria as set forth herein
shall be subject to a fine of $500 and shall not be awarded any contract
by the Township of Westampton for a period of 24 months after such
finding of violation.
§ 35-12 WESTAMPTON CODE § 35-12
35:40
ARTICLE V
Private/Personal Use of Government Property or Personnel
[Adopted 9-27-2005 by Ord. No. 25-2005]
§ 35-13. Prohibition of private use of Township property, equipment
and personnel.
No elected official, department head, or employee of the Township of
Westampton shall use or permit the use of any Township property,
equipment, or personnel for the private use of any person or entity, unless:
A. The use is specifically authorized by the New Jersey State Law or
existing Township policy and procedure;
B. The use is available to the general public, and then, only to the extent
and upon the terms that such use is available to the general public; and
C. This policy shall be incorporated as part of the existing Township Ethics
Policy.
§ 35-13 ETHICS STANDARDS § 35-13
35:41

ARTICLE VI
Nepotism Ban
[Adopted 9-27-2005 by Ord. No. 26-2005]
§ 35-14. Elected officials, department heads, managerial executives
and unclassified supervisory employees.
Any person who is a relative of an elected official, department head or
managerial executive shall not be appointed, hired, employed or permitted
to work in a permanent position for the Township of Westampton.
§ 35-15. Existing employees.
§ 35-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RELATIVE — A parent, spouse, child, sibling, grandparent, grandchild,
aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, first or second cousin, in-law or step-relative,
domestic partner, cohabitant, or a person with whom a significant
committed relationship exists.
A. If an existing employee of the Township becomes subject to this policy
as a result of the election of a relative, or because of changes in marital,
domestic partner/cohabitant or relationship status, one of the related
persons must resign their unclassified position within 90 days.
B. It shall be the affirmative duty of a related elected official, department
head or managerial executive to immediately disclose any
circumstances which may constitute a violation of this policy. Failure to
do so will result in appropriate disciplinary and/or legal action.
§ 35-14 ETHICS STANDARDS § 35-16
35:43
Chapter 37
(RESERVED)
Chapter 39
GOVERNMENT EQUIPMENT AND VEHICLES
§ 39-1. Equipment and vehicles generally.
Equipment and supplies assigned to employees are the responsibility of
those employees and are to be used for Township business only.
Unauthorized use, removal or loss of Township equipment and/or supplies
shall be cause for disciplinary action and/or termination of employment.
§ 39-2. Township business and vehicles.
Township-owned vehicles shall be used only on official business and when
employees are on duty or on call. An employee who is also employed
by another governmental entity may use a Township vehicle for that
employment only if the employment is pursuant to an interlocal agreement
between the Township and the other jurisdiction.
§ 39-3. Lawful operation of Township-owned vehicles.
A. Any employee whose work requires the operation of Township vehicles
must hold a valid New Jersey state driver's license.
B. All new employees who will be assigned work entailing the operating of
a Township vehicle will be required to submit to a Department of Motor
Vehicles driving records check as a condition of employment. A report
indicating a suspended or revoked license status may be cause to deny
or terminate employment.
C. Periodic checks of employees' drivers' licenses through visual and
formal Department of Motor Vehicles review checks may be made by
department directors or division heads. Any employee who does not
hold a valid driver's license will not be allowed to operate a Township
vehicle until such time as a valid license is obtained.
D. Any employee performing work which requires the operation of a
Township vehicle must notify the immediate supervisor in those cases
where a license is expired, suspended or revoked and/or who is unable
to obtain an occupational permit from the State Department of
Licensing or is not otherwise authorized by the State of New Jersey to
operate a motor vehicle. An employee that fails to report such an
instance is subject to disciplinary action, including demotion or
termination. An employee who fails to immediately report such
revocation or suspension to his or her supervisor and continues to
operate a Township vehicle shall be subject to possible termination.
§ 35-16 WESTAMPTON CODE § 39-4
37:44
§ 39-4. After-hours usage of Township vehicles.
Vehicles may be taken home only with the advanced approval of the
Administrator except a department director may also grant temporary
approval to facilitate responses to after-hours emergency calls. When an
employee takes home a Township vehicle, it may only be used for official
Township business; any other use is not permitted. Any violation of this
policy constitutes cause for disciplinary action.
Chapter 43
HEALTH, BOARD OF
§ 43-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-1, a Board of Health is hereby established in the
Township of Westampton and shall be known as the "Westampton Township
Board of Health."
§ 43-2. Adoption of standards; composition; membership; terms of
office.
The Township Committee, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-9b, hereby adopts the
provisions of Subdivision B of Article 1 of the Local Boards of Health Act,
N.J.S.A. 26:3-1 et seq. The aforesaid Board of Health shall consist of five
residents of the township appointed by the governing body to serve for
terms of two years from January 1 of the year of their appointment. The
terms of the members first appointed may be up to two years in duration
and shall be so determined that to the greatest extent practicable, the
expiration of such terms shall be distributed evenly over the first two years
after their appointments, provided that the initial term of no member shall
exceed two years. Thereafter, the term of each member shall be two years.
A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled for
the unexpired term only.
§ 43-3. Alternate members.
The governing body may appoint up to two alternate members who must
be residents of the Township of Westampton. Alternate members shall be
designated by the Mayor at the time of their appointment as "Alternate No.
1" and as "Alternate No. 2." The terms of any such alternate members shall
not exceed two years. Alternate members may participate in discussions of
the proceedings but may not vote, except in the absence or disqualification
of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular
member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall
vote.
§ 39-4 HEALTH, BOARD OF § 43-4
43:45
§ 43-4. Powers and duties.
The aforesaid Board of Health shall have, possess and exercise all of the
functions, powers, duties and jurisdiction of a Board of Health as prescribed
by N.J.S.A. 26:3-1 et seq. or other applicable law.
§ 43-5. Meetings.
Chapter 53
(RESERVED)
Chapter 54
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency Services Department — See Ch.
32A.
§ 54-1. Establishment.
A Police Department shall be and the same is hereby created and
established in the Township of Westampton, County of Burlington and State
of New Jersey.
§ 54-2. Title of department.
The official name of said Police Department shall be "Westampton Township
Police Department."
A. At least one regular meeting shall be held in each year. Special
meetings may be called at any time on the request of any two Board
members.
B. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
C. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum.
D. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
Open Public Meeting Act, P.L. 1975, c. 231.11
11.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 43-4 WESTAMPTON CODE § 54-3
53:46
§ 54-3. Word usage.
The words "he" and "his" shall be taken to also mean and include the words
"she" and "hers," and said words shall, for the purposes of this chapter, be
interchangeable with each other, and the words "special policeman" shall
also be taken to mean and include the words "special policewoman," and
said words shall, for the purposes of this chapter, be interchangeable with
each other.
§ 54-4. Organization; supervision. [Amended 5-16-2016 by Ord. No.
13-2016]
The Westampton Township Police Department shall consist of a Chief of
Police, who shall be the head of the Department; up to one Captain; up
to three Lieutenants of Police; up to five Sergeants of Police; a Detective
Sergeant; up to four Detectives; and a number of patrol officers not to
exceed 20, to be appointed by the Township Committee. In addition, up
to four special officers (Class II) may be appointed on an annual basis in
accordance with the provisions of state statute.
§ 54-5. Purpose.
The Police Department shall preserve the public peace; protect life and
property; detect, arrest and prosecute offenders of the laws of the State
of New Jersey and the ordinances of the Township of Westampton; direct
and control traffic; provide appearances in court; cooperate with all other
law enforcement agencies; and provide training for the efficiency of its
members and offices pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-152.
§ 54-6. Administration.
A. The Township Committee hereby designates the entire Township
Committee as the appropriate authority for the purposes of adopting
rules and regulations for the governing of the Westampton Township
Police Department and the discipline of its members pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, and for all other purposes assigned therein to the
appropriate authority. All rules and regulations for the governing of the
Westampton Township Police Department and the discipline of its
members in effect as of the date of adoption of this chapter are hereby
ratified and adopted, pending their readoption, revision, modification
and/or repeal by the appropriate authority.
B. The appropriate authority shall promulgate and from time to time
revise and enforce rules and regulations for the control, disposition and
discipline of the officers and other employees of the Westampton
Township Police Department. The appropriate authority will provide for
the Department's training and efficiency and for use and care of
Department equipment and apparatus.
§ 54-3 (RESERVED) § 54-7
53:47
§ 54-7. Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Department and shall
be directly responsible to the appropriate authority for its efficiency and
day-to-day operations. Pursuant to policies established by the appropriate
authority, the Chief of Police shall:
§ 54-8. Removal; suspension; fines; reduction in office.
No member or officer of the Police Department shall be suspended,
removed, fined or reduced in rank for any cause other than for incapacity,
misconduct or disobedience as provided in the New Jersey statutes and the
Police Department's rules and regulations.
§ 54-9. Qualifications for appointment.
No person shall be appointed to the Police Department who is not qualified
as provided in the New Jersey statutes. The appropriate authority may
also require that an applicant for appointment to the Police Department
successfully complete a physical, mental and psychological examination.
§ 54-10. Special patrolmen.
The Township Committee of the Township of Westampton may appoint from
time to time special law enforcement officers in accordance with New
Jersey statutes for terms not exceeding one year. They shall possess and
exercise all the powers and duties provided by said statutes during their
term in office. The Chief of Police may authorize special law enforcement
officers when on duty to exercise the same powers and authority as regular
members of the Police Department, including the carrying of firearms and
the power of arrest.
§ 54-11. Probationary period. [Added 12-18-2018 by Ord. No.
10-2018]
A. Administer and enforce the rules and regulations of the Police
Department and special emergency directives for the disposition and
discipline of the Department and its members and officers;
B. Exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the Police
Department;
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members and officers;
D. Delegate such authority as may be deemed necessary for the efficient
operation of the Police Department to be exercised under the Chief's
direction and control; and
E. Report at least monthly to the appropriate authority in such form as
shall be prescribed on the operation of the Police Department during
the preceding month and make such other reports as may be requested
by the appropriate authority.
§ 54-7 WESTAMPTON CODE § 54-11
53:48
Chapter 56
PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF
§ 56-1. Establishment; Director.
The Township Committee hereby establishes the Department of Public
Works. The Township Committee shall appoint, by resolution, individuals
to positions in the Department of Public Works to serve in a full- or parttime
capacity as determined by the Township Committee by way of the
resolution of appointment for the purpose of fulfilling the responsibilities of
the Department of Public Works as set forth herein. There shall also be a
Director of the Department of Public Works, who shall be responsible for
the functioning of the Department as hereinafter set forth and who shall be
appointed by the Township Committee by way of resolution. All members of
the Department and the Director shall serve at the pleasure of the Township
Committee.
§ 56-2. Responsibilities.
A. Sworn police officers.
(1) Each police officer shall be required to serve a probationary period
prior to permanent appointment to the Department. The
probationary period is one year from the date of completion of the
police training course, or if already holding a valid New Jersey
Police Training Commission Certification, one year from date of
appointment, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:17B-66 et seq.
(2) During such probationary period such officers shall be known as
"probationary officers," and they may be discharged prior to or at
the termination of said probationary period at the pleasure of the
Chief of Police with the concurrence of the appropriate authority.
(3) Until such officer is permanently appointed to the Department or
rejected, the Township may continue to employ him for a further
probationary period not to exceed six months.
(4) Upon the permanent appointment to the Department, all time
served by any member during such probationary period shall be
considered as service within the Department and shall be applied
toward any required tenure and promotion period.
A. Department. The Department of Public Works shall be responsible for
the following items:
(1) The repair, operation and maintenance of all public buildings,
grounds, streets, storm sewers and other public facilities.
(2) The cutting of brush and weeds, the mowing of grass and the
removal of snow and debris from public places.
§ 54-11 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 56-2
56:49
§ 56-3. Rules and regulations.
The township may, by resolution, establish suitable rules and regulations
necessary for the proper regulation of the Department of Public Works, said
regulations to be adopted by way of resolution and to be kept on file in the
office of the Township Clerk.
Chapter 59
RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 59-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established within the Township of Westampton an advisory
council which shall be known as the "Westampton Township Recreation
Advisory Committee."
§ 59-2. Statutory authority.
The governing body of the Township of Westampton relies upon the
authority set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:63-7d, which permits a Township
Committee to create such advisory councils to the municipality as it may
choose.
(3) The cleaning of public ditches and the care of all other public works
and property in the Township of Westampton.
(4) The maintenance and repair of municipal vehicles and equipment.
B. Director. The Director shall have the following responsibilities:
(1) Establish and maintain an adequate inventory of equipment and
vehicles and parts and the control thereof necessary for the
maintenance and repair of all public buildings, equipment and
works.
(2) Keep accurate records and books of accounts of the Department,
including the preparation of daily reports of the work of the
Department.
(3) Submit to the Township Committee a monthly report of all work
performed and services furnished and the costs thereof.
(4) Recommend the need for repairs and replacement to township
equipment, structures, buildings and grounds.
(5) Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Township
Committee.
§ 56-2 WESTAMPTON CODE § 59-3
59:50
§ 59-3. Purpose.
The purpose of the Westampton Township Recreation Advisory Committee
shall be to advise and recommend to the governing body such recreation
programs and policies, and modifications of existing programs and policies,
as it deems appropriate.
§ 59-4. Membership; terms of office.
§ 59-5. Appointments.
All members of the Recreation Advisory Committee shall be appointed
by resolution duly adopted by the governing body of the Township of
Westampton.
§ 59-6. Subsequent appointments.
Appointments to the Recreation Advisory Committee which are made due
to the expiration of term shall be made by resolution duly adopted by the
Township Committee at its annual reorganization meeting or at such other
times as may be necessary to fill any vacancies that may occur prior to the
expiration of the term of a member or by resignation of a member.
§ 59-7. Recreation Director.
There is hereby established within the Township of Westampton the position
of Recreation Director. The Township Committee shall appoint a Recreation
Director who shall serve for a term of one year at a salary to be fixed
and determined by ordinance duly adopted by the governing body. The
Recreation Director shall be responsible for the review of all reports and
studies developed by standing committee formulated by the Recreation
Advisory Committee. The Recreation Director shall sign all memoranda
and reports submitted on behalf of the Recreation Advisory Committee.
The Recreation Director shall submit, as required, reports to the Township
A. Membership. The Recreation Advisory Committee shall be composed of
no fewer than six and no more than 10 citizens who shall be residents of
the Township of Westampton, plus the Recreation Director, who need
not be a resident of the Township of Westampton. The Township
Committee shall annually appoint its liaison, who shall also be a
member of the Recreation Advisory Committee.
B. Terms of office. The initial Recreation Advisory Committee shall be
composed of four individuals who shall be appointed for terms ending
December 31, 1994; three individuals who shall be appointed for terms
ending December 31, 1995; and three individuals who shall be
appointed for terms ending December 31, 1996. Thereafter, all terms to
the Recreation Advisory Committee shall be for three-year periods. In
the event that a vacancy arises, appointment to fill that vacancy shall be
for the balance of the unexpired term of the member whose position has
been vacated.
§ 59-3 RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 59-7
59:51
Committee concerning the activities and functions of the Recreation
Advisory Committee and shall perform such other duties as outlined in his
or her job description.
§ 59-8. Chairman; Vice Chairman.
§ 59-9. Meetings; quorum; attendance.
§ 59-10. Implementation and administration.
All recreational programs and policies shall be implemented and
administered through the Recreation Director.
§ 59-11. Personnel.
Chapter 63
SALARIES
A. The Chairman. The Chairman shall be appointed annually by the
membership of the Recreation Advisory Committee. The Chairman shall
preside at all meetings of the Recreation Advisory Committee. The
Chairman shall timely submit minutes of all meetings of the Recreation
Advisory Committee to the governing body.
B. The Vice Chairman. The Chairman shall designate a Vice Chairman,
subject to approval of a majority of the Recreation Advisory Committee.
The Vice Chairman shall, in the absence of the Recreation Advisory
Committee Chairman, carry on the duties of the Chairman until the
return of or the appointment of a new Chairman.
A. Meetings; quorum. The Recreation Advisory Committee shall hold
meetings throughout the calendar year. Whenever approval by the
Committee is required, a majority of those attending the meeting shall
be sufficient to take action. A quorum of one more than half the total
membership shall be required in order to constitute a duly authorized
meeting.
B. Attendance. Any Board member missing four meetings in a calendar
year without valid excuse acceptable to the Township Committee may
forfeit his or her appointment.
A. All recreation personnel employed will be interviewed and
recommended by the Recreation Director.
B. All personnel will only be employed after acceptance of the
recommendation of the Recreation Director and approval of the
Westampton Township Committee.
C. No member of the Westampton Township Recreation Advisory
Committee may incur any obligation or expense without the express
written approval from the Westampton Township Committee.
§ 59-7 WESTAMPTON CODE § 59-11
59:52
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 5-18-1971 by Ord. No. 2-1971]
§ 63-1. Annual Salary Ordinance.
The salaries and compensation of all officers and employees of the Township
of Westampton shall be as set forth in the Annual Salary Ordinance.
§ 63-2. Public copy to be filed.
A copy of the current Salary Ordinance shall be kept on file by the Township
Clerk for examination and inspection by the public.
§ 63-3. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon its final passage and publication
according to law.
§ 63-1 RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 63-3
59:53

ARTICLE II
Attendance Requirements for Township Committee
[Adopted 1-23-1996 by Ord. No. 2-1996]
§ 63-4. Requirements enumerated.
The members of the Township Committee of the Township of Westampton
shall be compensated at the rate of salary set forth in the Annual Salary
Ordinance, contingent upon each member's attendance at at least 75% of
the regular and special meetings of the Township Committee.
§ 63-5. Noncompliance.
In the event that any member shall not attend 75% of the regular and
special meetings of the Township Committee within any quarter, said
member shall not receive his or her salary for that quarter.
§ 63-4 RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 63-5
59:55

ARTICLE III
Overtime, Flex-Time and Compensatory Time
[Adopted 6-19-2018 by Ord. No. 4-2018]
§ 63-6. Overtime and compensatory time.
§ 63-7. Flex-time.
A. Overtime is time worked in excess of an employee's standard
workweek.
B. Under the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act,12 certain employees in
managerial, supervisory, administrative, computer, or professional
positions are exempt from the provisions of the Act.
C. Overtime in the amount of time and one-half shall be paid to all
nonexempt employees for time worked in excess of the employee's
standard workweek, in accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act.
D. Pyramiding of overtime shall be prohibited.
E. Exempt employees may be eligible for overtime compensation when
such compensation is required pursuant to the terms of a duly approved
collective bargaining agreement or an individual employment
agreement, or is otherwise authorized pursuant to the Township's
personnel policies and procedures.
F. Where applicable, compensatory time shall accrue and be granted in
lieu of overtime when such time is consistent with the Fair Labor
Standards Act and/or is permitted by the terms of a duly approved
collective bargaining agreement.
A. Flex-time is time that is worked in addition to an employee's regularly
scheduled hours during a workweek for unique or extraordinary
circumstances that can be used as paid time off.
B. Flex-time shall not be provided to nonexempt employees in a manner
that limits or contravenes the employee's rights under the Fair Labor
Standards Act.
C. Flex-time in the amount of time worked may be accrued by exempt
employees for future paid time off, e.g., hour-for-hour.
D. Except in emergency situations and unless otherwise provided under
the terms of a duly approved collective bargaining agreement or
individual contract, flex-time must be approved by the Township
Administrator or her designee prior to being worked, or in the case of
public safety employees, by the Chief of Police or the Fire Chief.
12.Editor's Note: See 29 U.S.C. § 201 et seq.
§ 63-6 RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE § 63-7
59:57
E. The Township Committee shall develop and implement policies and
procedures consistent with this subsection governing the accrual and
use of flex-time, which shall be incorporated into the Employee
Handbook. Additionally, the Chief of Police shall provide, on an annual
basis, a report to the Township Committee detailing the amount of flextime
awarded to and used by eligible employees.
F. Eligible employees may accrue a maximum amount of 200 hours of flextime.
G. Flex-time must be used within the calendar year in which it is earned,
or if earned in the last four months of the calendar year, by the
following June 30; otherwise, it is forfeited.
H. Accrued, unused flex-time is not compensable upon retirement,
resignation, or discharge, cannot be used to extend an employee's
termination date, and cannot be converted into any other form of leave
time.
I. Accrual and use of flex-time shall be recorded in the time and
attendance system.
J. The Township shall have the discretion to grant or deny an employee's
request for the use of flex-time, based on operational needs. Use of
accrued flex-time must be scheduled and approved in the same manner
as an employee's request for vacation leave. Use of accrued flex-time
shall not be granted when the use of said flex-time will require other
Township employees to work overtime.
§ 63-7 WESTAMPTON CODE § 63-7
59:58
Chapter 66
SEXUAL HARASSMENT
§ 66-1. Statement of policy; violations.
§ 66-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SEXUAL HARASSMENT —
A. It is the policy of Westampton Township to maintain a working
environment that is free from discrimination, including sexual
harassment.
B. Sexual harassment is a form of misconduct that undermines the
integrity of the employment relationship. No employee, either male or
female, should be subjected to unsolicited and unwelcome sexual
overtures or conduct, either verbal or physical. No employee should be
subjected to a hostile or offensive working environment created by
sexual harassment.
C. Sexual harassment does not refer to occasional compliments of a
socially acceptable nature. It refers to behavior that is not welcome,
that is personally offensive, that lowers morale and that, therefore,
interferes with our work effectiveness.
D. Each supervisor has a responsibility to maintain a workplace free of
sexual harassment. This duty includes discussing this policy with all
employees and assuring them that they are not to endure insulting,
degrading or exploitive sexual treatment.
E. It shall be a violation of this policy for any employee of Westampton
Township to harass another employee through conduct or
communications of a sexual nature or because of that employee's
gender. It shall also be a violation of the policy for any supervisor who is
aware that sexual harassment is taking place to fail to promptly report
the matter to the Clerk/Administrator. [Amended 9-21-992 by Ord.
No. 10-1992]
Unwelcome sexual advance, requests for sexual favors and other
inappropriate verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature made by
any employee when:
Submission to sexual harassment is made, whether explicitly or
implicitly, a term or condition of an individual's employment.
(1)
Submission to or rejection of sexual harassment by an individual
is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting that
individual.
(2)
A.
§ 63-7 SEXUAL HARASSMENT § 66-2
66:59
§ 66-3. Procedures. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992]
Because of the nature and seriousness of sexual harassment in the
workplace, the receipt of complaints, investigation and recommendation for
disciplinary action, if necessary, shall be the responsibility of the Clerk/
Administrator.
Sexual harassment has the purpose or effect of unreasonably
interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an
intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment.
(3)
"Sexual harassment" may include but is not limited to the following:
Unwelcome sexual advances, such as offensive sexual flirtations,
repeated requests for dates or love letters after rejection of
overtures.
(1)
(2) Discussing sexual activities.
(3) Pressure or coercion for sexual activity.
Repeated remarks to a person, with a sexual or demeaning
implication.
(4)
Unwelcome intentional touching, such as patting, pinching or
brushing against another's body.
(5)
Suggesting or demanding sexual involvement accompanied by
implied or explicit threats concerning one's evaluation, raise,
promotion, etc.
(6)
Displaying nude or pornographic pictures, lewd or vulgar cartoons,
etc.
(7)
(8) Practical jokes about gender-specific traits.
B.
"Sexual harassment" may also consist of intimidating, abusive or hostile
behavior of a nonsexual nature toward an employee because of his/her
gender. Verbal abuse and hostility that is not sexual in character but is
directed solely at females because they are female, or males because
they are male, for example, is likewise a violation of this policy on the
same level as harassment of a sexual nature.
C.
"Sexual harassment" can also take the form of offensive conduct by
nonemployees, such as vendors, outside contractors, etc., against
employees in the workplace.
D.
A. Reporting violations. Any person who feels he/she is the victim of sexual
harassment as defined herein may file a complaint directly with the
Clerk/Administrator. If any supervisory personnel receives a complaint
regarding sexual harassment, or becomes aware of instances of sexual
harassment, he/she shall promptly report the incident to the Clerk/
§ 66-2 WESTAMPTON CODE § 66-3
66:60
Administrator. There is no chain of command in relation to sexual
harassment complaints.
B. Investigation.
(1) The Clerk/Administrator shall promptly commence an investigation
of the allegations of sexual harassment, which may include
interviews and written statements from the victim, the alleged
harasser and any witnesses. The Clerk/Administrator may request
the assistance of counsel, other supervisory personnel or outside
sources in conducting the investigation. Confidentiality shall be
maintained throughout the investigation process.
(2) A written report of the investigation shall be prepared by the Clerk/
Administrator within three days of the conclusion of the
investigation, with a copy sent to the victim and alleged harasser.
C. Sanctions.
(1) If the allegations of sexual harassment are found to be meritorious,
the Clerk/Administrator shall immediately institute remedial and/or
corrective action, which may include counseling, change in work
assignments or disciplinary action up to and including termination.
Any disciplinary action shall be consistent with applicable
collective bargaining agreements. The victim of sexual harassment
shall be informed of the nature of any disciplinary action taken.
(2) The Clerk/Administrator may monitor future conduct of the parties
involved in order to reasonably ensure that the remedial action
taken has been effective in stopping the harassment and that no
retaliation has occurred.
D. Appeal. If any individual is aggrieved with the investigation, findings
and/or remedies pursuant to this policy, he/she may assert any right of
appeal contained in the applicable collective bargaining agreements,
file a complaint with the New Jersey Division of Civil Rights or pursue
any other civil remedy.
E. Notifications. This policy will be distributed to all employees of the
township. Every employee shall be required to certify that he/she has
received a copy of this policy.
F. Employee responsibility. It is the duty of all employees, including
supervisory personnel, to be familiar with this policy. More importantly,
each employee has a stake in preventing sexual harassment and thus
shares responsibility with the Clerk/Administrator in eliminating sexual
harassment in the workplace. Employees who feel victimized by sexual
harassment are encouraged to come forward with complaints.
Employees should also inform their coworkers or supervisor in no
uncertain terms that conduct is offensive and unwelcome. Often,
disputes arise only because of misconceptions and insensitivity, which
can be corrected simply through communication. If self-help remedies
§ 66-3 SEXUAL HARASSMENT § 66-3
66:61
Chapter 71
TAX COLLECTOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries — See Ch. 63. Taxation — See Ch. 218.
§ 71-1. Establishment of office; appointment; term; powers and
duties; salary.
§ 71-2. Deputy Tax Collector.
There is hereby established the office of Deputy Tax Collector who shall be
appointed by the Township Committee for a term not to exceed one year
and to expire December 31. Said Deputy shall assist the Tax Collector in
the performance of his duties and shall, in the case of absence, disability,
resignation or vacancy in the office of Tax Collector, perform the duties of
do not resolve the dispute, report the matter promptly. All employees
have responsibility to cooperate fully with the investigation of sexual
harassment. Any retaliatory conduct or recurrence of the offensive
behavior should be reported immediately to the Clerk/Administrator.
A. Establishment of office. There is hereby established the office of Tax
Collector as permitted and authorized by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-141.
B. Appointment; term. The Township Committee shall appoint an
individual to serve as Tax Collector for a term of four years from the
first day of January next following his appointment.
C. Powers and duties. The Township Tax Collector shall have, perform and
discharge all the functions, powers and duties prescribed for Tax
Collectors pursuant to the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey,
administrative regulations and municipal ordinance. The Tax Collector
shall:
(1) Receive and collect all moneys assessed or raised by taxes or
assessment for any purpose or by other township ordinance at the
direction of the Township Committee.
(2) Keep proper records and report to the Township Committee at least
once a month all receipts and deposits made by him and in such
report account for all moneys for which the Tax Collector is
responsible.
D. Salary. The Tax Collector shall receive such salary as is set forth in the
Salary Ordinance.13
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 63, Salaries.
§ 66-3 WESTAMPTON CODE § 71-2
71:62
Tax Collector. The Deputy Tax Collector shall receive such salary as is set
forth in the Salary Ordinance.14
Chapter 73
TIMBUCTOO ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 73-1. Purpose and name.
§ 73-2. Members; terms of office; vacancies.
A. The purpose of the Timbuctoo Advisory Committee is to advise and
assist the Township Committee, Land Development Board, Historic
Preservation Committee, all municipal departments, committees and
officials on all issues related to the historic significance of Timbuctoo.
B. The Committee established by this chapter shall be known as the
"Timbuctoo Advisory Committee."
C. The Timbuctoo Advisory Committee shall act only in an advisory
capacity and may make recommendations as it relates to Timbuctoo
and the archaeological sites associated with Timbuctoo, as located
within the Township of Westampton along the North Branch of the
Rancocas Creek.
A. There is hereby established the Timbuctoo Advisory Committee to the
Township of Westampton, which shall consist of up to seven members,
who shall be appointed by the Township Committee, shall serve without
salary or other compensation, and shall each be removable from office
by the Township Committee at any time without cause, upon a vote of a
majority of all members of the Township Committee.
B. Appointments.
(1) Class A. One member of the Timbuctoo Advisory Committee shall
be a member of the Westampton Township Committee. Said
member of the Timbuctoo Advisory Committee shall serve for a
term of one year.
(2) Class B. Two members of the Timbuctoo Advisory Committee shall
be decedents of the Timbuctoo Settlement Village. Said
descendants shall be verified as being descendants of Timbuctoo in
a manner prescribed by the Westampton Township Committee. If a
descendant of the Timbuctoo Settlement Village should not be
available, an additional Class C member shall be appointed for the
term. Said terms for descendant members of the Timbuctoo
Advisory Committee shall be for three-year terms, except that the
initial terms upon creation of the committee and appointment shall
be staggered as follows:
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 63, Salaries.
§ 71-2 TAX COLLECTOR § 73-2
71:63
§ 73-3. Organization; officers and meetings.
§ 73-4. Powers and duties.
The Committee is established to assist in the promotion of Timbuctoo
and its historic significance to the Township of Westampton, Burlington
County, State of New Jersey, and the United States. The Committee is
further established to promote the education of the public as to the historic
significance of Timbuctoo, foster the preservation of Timbuctoo and its
(a) One descendant member shall be appointed for a term with an
initial expiration date of December 31, 2016; and
(b) One descendant member shall be appointed for a term with an
initial expiration date of December 31, 2017.
(3) Class C. Six members of the Timbuctoo Advisory Committee of
which at least four shall be residents of Westampton Township. The
Township Committee shall give preference to residents, veterans,
members of the Westampton Historical Preservation Committee
and individuals who expertise in areas such as archaeology, New
Jersey history, historic preservation, African American studies,
genealogy, press relations, event planning or grant writing. Class C
members shall be appointed to three-year terms, except that the
initial terms upon creation of the three additional committee
members be staggered as follows:
(a) One member shall be appointed for a term with an initial
expiration date of December 31, 2018;
(b) One member shall be appointed for a term with an initial
expiration date of December 31, 2019; and
(c) One member shall be appointed for a term with an initial
expiration date of December 31, 2020.
A. A reorganization meeting shall be held annually during the month of
January, except for an initial reorganizational meeting, which shall
occur no later than 60 days following the adoption of this chapter and
establishment of the Timbuctoo Advisory Committee. At such a
meeting, the Timbuctoo Advisory Committee shall elect a Chairperson,
Vice Chairperson and Secretary from the Committee. The Committee
shall hold at least one regular meeting quarterly. Committee
procedures shall comply with the Open Public Meetings Act.15 A
majority of all members shall constitute a quorum; in the event of any
vacancies on the committee at any time, then a majority of all thenexisting
members shall constitute a quorum.
B. The Timbuctoo Advisory Committee Secretary, to be selected among
Committee members, shall keep minutes of all of its proceedings.
15.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 73-2 WESTAMPTON CODE § 73-4
71:64
location for future generations to enjoy and understand the history of
Timbuctoo. The Committee shall have the following functions:
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 79
ALARMS, FALSE
§ 79-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMATIC ALARM DEVICE — Any alarm system which communicates or
transmits alarms or prerecorded messages of intrusion, fire, smoke, flood or
other peril as a result of the activation of the alarm system.
A. Promotion of the management of the Timbuctoo site, its resources and
archaeological treasures.
B. Foster the Timbuctoo site and encourage the careful preservation of the
archaeological site known as "Timbuctoo."
C. Planning and implementation of programs to educate local residents,
school children, and the public at large regarding Timbuctoo, its history
and heritage.
D. Maintaining an inventory of the Timbuctoo artifacts, including
documenting all artifacts located therein.
E. Assisting the Township Committee in the maintenance of the Timbuctoo
site, and its appropriate use for publicly owned open space within
Timbuctoo and its surrounding areas in the Township of Westampton.
F. Assisting the Township Committee, Land Development Board and other
Township departments and committees in Timbuctoo's historic
significance to the Township of Westampton for the purpose of longrange
planning for Timbuctoo.
G. Reviewing, researching and identifying potential grant opportunities to
be utilized at Timbuctoo in furtherance of the goals as established by
this chapter and committee.
H. Providing advice to the Township Committee concerning the
presentation of literature and other advertisements as to the
significance of Timbuctoo within the Township of Westampton.
I. Appointing special advisors to work pro bono with the Timbuctoo
Advisory Committee and the Township on special projects.
J. Performing such other duties as directed by the Westampton Township
Committee.
§ 73-4 ALARMS, FALSE § 79-1
79:65
FALSE ALARM — Any erroneous or unfounded communication or sound,
whether caused by the malfunction of an automatic alarm device, power
failure or inadvertence, negligence or intentional or unintentional act of
any person, firm or corporation, either directly or indirectly, to the Police
Department of the Township of Westampton or to a commercial alarm
service or to any person causing the communication of peril to the Police
Department of the Township of Westampton.[Amended 11-14-2000 by
Ord. No. 16-2000]
FIRE FALSE ALARM — Any erroneous or unfounded communication or
sound, whether caused by the malfunction of any automatic alarm device,
power failure or inadvertence, negligence or intentional or unintentional
act of any person, firm or corporation, either directly or indirectly, to the
Fire Department of the Township of Westampton or to a commercial alarm
service or to any person causing the communication of peril to the Fire
Department of the Township of Westampton.[Added 11-14-2000 by Ord.
No. 16-2000]
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership or corporation.
§ 79-2. Automatic alarm systems prohibited; exceptions.
§ 79-3. False alarms; silencing of alarms; violations and penalties.
[Amended 4-16-1990 by Ord. No. 5-1990]
A. No person shall install or permit to be maintained in the premises any
automatic alarm system which directly or indirectly transmits an alarm
or sound or prerecorded message of intrusion, fire, smoke, flood or
other peril to the Police Department of the Township of Westampton.
Any person upon conviction in the Municipal Court of the Township of
Westampton of violating this section shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $100.
B. Nothing herein shall prohibit a person from maintaining or operating a
commercial alarm service employing the use of automatic alarm
devices, provided that said device or alarm is not connected to the
Police Department of the Township of Westampton. Furthermore
nothing herein shall prohibit a person from using an automatic alarm
device without connection to a commercial alarm service, provided that
said device or alarm is not connected to the Police Department of the
Township of Westampton.
A. Business properties holding or required to hold a mercantile license as
set forth in Chapter 152. In order to minimize false alarms and the
resultant unproductive time of the Police Department personnel, there
shall be a fine of $25 paid by the owner of the business located upon the
premises where the alarm is situated beginning with the sixth and each
subsequent false alarm thereafter in any calendar year, upon conviction
in the Westampton Township Municipal Court.
B. Residences. In order to minimize false alarms and the resultant
unproductive time of the Police Department personnel, there shall be a
§ 79-1 WESTAMPTON CODE § 79-3
79:66
§ 79-4. Fire false alarms; violations and penalties. [Added
11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 16-2000]
Chapter 82
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Under the influence of alcohol in public — See
Ch. 117.
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 171.
§ 82-1. Annual license fees. [Amended 7-25-1974 by Ord. No.
9-1974; 3-27-1980 by Ord. No. 3-1980; 5-2-1988 by Ord. No. 6-1988;
11-19-1990 by Ord. No. 13-1990; 10-14-2003 by Ord. No. 20-2003]
Annual license fees are hereby fixed as follows:
fine of $25 paid by the homeowner beginning with the ninth and each
subsequent false alarm thereafter in any calendar year, upon conviction
in the Westampton Township Municipal Court. The difference in
number of false alarms is due to less sophisticated alarm systems in
residences.
C. Audible alarms must be silenced by the building, structure or facility
owner, lessee or tenant or someone on behalf of such person(s) within
30 minutes after the same begins to emit an audible signal.
Noncompliance with the above provisions shall be penalized in
accordance with the Westampton Township ordinances.
A. The Fire Marshal or the Fire Department will issue a false fire alarm
warning form to the person on location representing the business. This
form will be reviewed by the Fire Marshal. There shall be a fine as
indicated below to be paid by the owner of the business located upon
the premises where the alarm is situated beginning with the seventh
and each subsequent false alarm thereafter in any calendar year, upon
conviction in Municipal Court.
B. Violations and penalties.
(1) On the seventh alarm a penalty of $100.
(2) On the eighth alarm a penalty of $150.
(3) On the ninth alarm a penalty of $200.
(4) On the tenth and subsequent alarms a penalty of $250.
A. Plenary retail consumption license.
§ 79-3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 82-1
82:67
§ 82-2. Sale of and hours for sale of alcoholic beverages. [Amended
12-19-1966; 9-22-1977 by Ord. No. 14-1977; 2-23-1978 by Ord. No.
4-1978; 3-23-2004 by Ord. No. 6-2004]
Year Fee
1991 $1,243
1992 $1,491
1993 $1,789
1994 $2,000
2004 $2,500
B. Plenary retail distribution license.
Year Fee
1991 $1,243
1992 $1,491
1993 $1,789
1994 $2,000
2004 $2,500
C. Club license: $188.
A. Regulation of hours. The consumption and sale of alcoholic beverages
within any place of business licensed under the provisions of this
chapter shall be prohibited at the times and during the hours
hereinafter set forth:
Days Hours
Weekdays and Saturdays 1:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
Sundays 1:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
B. Sales to certain persons.
(1) No licensee or employee of a licensee shall sell, serve or deliver,
directly or indirectly, any alcoholic beverages to any habitual
drunkard, intoxicated person or person under the legal age.
(2) No holder of a consumption license or a plenary retail consumption
license shall permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on any
licensed premises by any of the persons identified in § 82-2B(1) or
permit any persons to congregate in or about the licensed
premises, including entryways or exits, access walks to or from or
adjacent to the licensed premises, or sidewalks upon the same lots
as the licensed premises, or parking lots or other open space
adjacent to the licensed premises.
§ 82-1 WESTAMPTON CODE § 82-3
82:68
§ 82-3. Consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages. [Added
6-21-1979 by Ord. No. 10-1979]
A. Legal drinking age; possession and consumption.
(1) No person of the legal drinking age shall consume any alcoholic
beverage or have in his possession any open container of an
alcoholic beverage:
(a) While in or on a public street, lane, sidewalk, public parking
lot, public or quasi-public place or in any public conveyance;
(b) In a private motor vehicle while the same is in motion or
parked in any public street, lane or public parking lot or public
or quasi-public place; or
(c) While upon any private property not his own without the
express permission of the owner or other persons having
actual authority to grant such permission.
(2) No person of the legal drinking age shall discard alcoholic
beverage containers upon any public street, lane, sidewalk, public
parking lot, public or quasi-public place or on any private property
not his own without the permission of the owner.
B. Under legal drinking age.
(1) No person under the legal drinking age shall possess or consume
any alcoholic beverages:
(a) While in or on a public street, lane, sidewalk, public parking
lot, public or quasi-public place or in any public conveyance;
(b) In a private motor vehicle while the same is in motion or
parked in any public street, lane or public parking lot or public
or quasi-public place; or
(c) While upon any private property not his own without the
express permission of the owner or other person having
authority to grant such permission.
(2) No person under the legal drinking age shall discard alcoholic
beverage containers upon any public street, lane, sidewalk, public
parking lot, public or quasi-public place or upon any private
property not his own without the express permission of the owner.
C. Purchase of liquor by person under legal drinking age.
(1) Entrance on premises. It shall be unlawful for a person under legal
drinking age to enter any premises licensed for the retail sale of
alcoholic beverages in the Township of Westampton for the purpose
of purchasing alcoholic beverages or having alcoholic beverages
served or delivered to him.
§ 82-3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 82-3
82:69
§ 82-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-28-1974 by Ord. No.
1-1974]
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable, upon conviction thereof
by the Judge of the Municipal Court, by a fine not exceeding $500 or
by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, in the Judge's discretion.
§ 82-5. Number of licenses issued. [Added 4-9-1996 by Ord. No.
4-1996]
Westampton Township, in reliance upon the 1990 census data, hereby
establishes the following maximum number of liquor licenses which may be
created in the township. This chapter does not require the creation of any
license.
Chapter 85
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 85-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine operated
mechanically, electronically, electrically, automatically or otherwise which,
upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disk, may be operated
by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement,
whether or not registering a score. Said mechanical amusement devices
(2) Consumption. It shall be unlawful for a person under the legal
drinking age to consume any alcoholic beverage on premises
licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages or to purchase,
attempt to purchase or have another person purchase for him any
alcoholic beverage.
(3) Misrepresentation of age. It shall be unlawful for a person to
misrepresent his age or the age of any other person for the purpose
of inducing any retail licensee, or any employee of a retail licensee,
to sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic beverage to a person under
the legal drinking age.
(4) Display of ordinance. All holders of plenary retail consumption
licenses issued by the Township of Westampton shall cause at least
one copy of this section to be exhibited in a conspicuous place in
the licensed premises.
A. Plenary retail consumption licenses: two.
B. Plenary retail distribution licenses: one.
§ 82-3 WESTAMPTON CODE § 85-1
85:70
shall include but not be limited to those devices commonly known as
"pinball," "bagatelle," "baseball" or "pin amusement machines" and
"photoelectric shooting" or "target machines." It shall include video-type
games or machines or similar devices that use a display screen for points,
lines and dots of light that can be manipulated to simulate games or other
types of entertainment.
PUBLIC OR QUASI-PUBLIC PLACE — Any building, store or other place
wherein the public is invited or wherein the public may enter, including
premises used as a clubhouse or a clubroom by members of any
organization.
§ 85-2. License required.
The keeping, placing, operation, maintenance or use of all mechanical
amusement devices in any public or quasi-public place without having first
obtained a license for that purpose according to the terms and conditions of
this chapter shall be unlawful.
§ 85-3. License application; fee; required display.
§ 85-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not to exceed the sum of $500,
at the discretion of the court. Each day that the violation shall occur shall
be deemed to be a separate offense.
A. The owner or lessee of any public or quasi-public place in which is to be
located mechanical amusement devices shall apply for a license by
using the application forms to be furnished by the Municipal Clerk. Said
application forms shall set forth the name and address of the owner of
the premises and the owner of the machine, a description of the
machine and the estimated length of service of said machine in said
public or quasi-public place and shall set forth any and all information
necessary to effectuate the terms and conditions of this chapter. Upon
review of said application as to whether said application satisfactorily
conforms to the requirements of the chapter and upon payment of the
requisite fee, the Municipal Clerk shall issue the license in a form to be
determined by the Municipal Clerk. Said licenses shall be issued to and
in the name of the owner or lessee of the machine.
B. The fee for the issuance of such licenses shall be $50 per year for each
machine, and such licenses shall expire on January 31 of each year.
There shall be no proration of the license fee.
C. No mechanical amusement device may be kept, placed, operated,
maintained or used until the license as issued by the Municipal Clerk is
affixed thereto in a conspicuous place so that the same can be easily
and quickly identified.
§ 85-1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 85-4
85:71
Chapter 88
ANIMALS
§ 85-4 WESTAMPTON CODE § 85-4
85:72
ARTICLE I
Licensing of Dogs
[Adopted 3-17-1936]
§ 88-1. License required.
No person or persons shall keep, harbor or maintain any dog or permit
one to be kept, harbored or maintained within the Township of Westampton
unless a license to keep such dog has first been obtained from the Township
Clerk of said Township for such purpose.
§ 88-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOG — Includes all canines, male and female.
OWNER — Any person who shall keep, harbor or maintain any dog shall be
deemed the "owner" thereof.
§ 88-3. Issuance and expiration of license. [Amended 9-22-1977 by
Ord. No. 15-1977]
The Township Clerk of the Township of Westampton is hereby authorized,
in his discretion, to issue any such license to any person or persons upon
proper application therefor, in writing and in the manner and form as
reasonably required by the Township Committee of said Township of
Westampton. Such license, when issued, shall be valid and effective only
until the 31st day of January next following the issuance thereof.
§ 88-4. License fees. [Amended 2-3-1959]
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 et seq., the sum to be paid annually for a
dog license shall be $13.80 and the further sum of $1 for the
registration tag and a surcharge of $0.20 for low-cost spay-neuter
clinic, or a total of $15. However, in the event that the fee for the
registration tag is increased to an amount greater than $1 by the State
of New Jersey, the fee for the registration tag set forth herein shall be
automatically increased to said amount, and the total of the sum to be
paid annually for a dog license shall be increased in a like amount.
Furthermore, state law requires that an additional $3 shall be charged
for any dog of reproductive age which has not had its reproductive
capacity permanently altered through sterilization, to be known as a
"surcharge of $3 for nonspayed and nonneutered dogs." Dog owners
who submit the required veterinarian certificate indicating that the dog
has been spayed shall not be charged the $3. [Amended 11-15-1966;
3-28-1974 by Ord. No. 6-1974; 12-16-1976 by Ord. No. 8-1976;
11-13-1980 by Ord. No. 8-1980; 11-7-1988 by Ord. No. 14-1988;
12-2-1991 by Ord. No. 8-1991; 12-13-1994 by Ord. No. 14-1994;
§ 88-1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 88-4
85:73
§ 88-5. Delinquency fees. [Added 9-22-1977 by Ord. No. 15-1977;
amended 12-9-1997 by Ord. No. 21-1997; 10-28-2008 by Ord. No.
16-2008]
Any owner keeping, harboring, or maintaining any unlicensed dog of
licensing age or who shall permit one to be harbored or maintained within
the Township of Westampton after January 31 shall be required to pay an
additional delinquency fee of $10 for not licensing the dog in January of that
year, plus the required license fee, in addition to any other fines or penalties
required by law. Said delinquency shall not apply to dogs acquired by the
owner after January 31 of the licensing year.
§ 88-6. Statutory provisions incorporated by reference. [Amended
12-18-1956]
All of the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 to and including N.J.S.A. 4:19-16,
and any supplement thereto and amendment thereof, are hereby
incorporated as part of this article.
§ 88-7. Violations and penalties. 16 [Amended 12-18-1956]
Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation who or which shall
violate this article or any portion thereof shall, upon conviction, be subject
to a fine not exceeding $50, in the discretion of the Municipal Judge before
whom the proceedings may be heard, said penalty to be imposed and
collected in accordance with provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.19 and the
supplements thereto or amendments thereof. Each violation may be deemed
a separate offense and not a continuing offense.
10-10-1995 by Ord. No. 16-1995; 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. 4-2007;
10-23-2007 by Ord. No. 14-2007]
B. Whenever it shall have been reasonably certified to the satisfaction of
the Township Committee that the applicant is maintaining, as the owner
thereof, or otherwise responsible therefor, a number of dogs for special
purposes such as breeding, hunting, shows, trials, training or for any
purpose construed to be a kennel, as defined in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1, the
annual fee shall be the sum of $10 for such kennel not exceeding 10
dogs and the sum of $25 for such kennel exceeding 10 dogs.
C. All of the foregoing fees shall be paid to the Township Clerk.
16.Editor's Note: A resolution adopted by the Township Committee on 1-19-1965 recited that
the Committee had entered into a contract with the Contented Warden Service for the
purpose of having the Contented Warden Service impound stray dogs running within the
Township and provided that a named employee of the Contented Warden Service was
empowered to issue process in the nature of a summons on behalf of the Township.
§ 88-4 WESTAMPTON CODE § 88-7
85:74
ARTICLE II
Animals at Large
[Adopted 6-19-1956]
§ 88-8. Running at large and trespassing prohibited.
No person owning or having charge of horses, cattle, sheep, swine, poultry
or other domesticated animals shall suffer them to run at large in the streets
or highways of the Township of Westampton or to trespass upon the lands
of another person within the Township of Westampton.
§ 88-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-28-1974 by Ord. No.
1-1974]
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 88-8 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 88-9
85:75

ARTICLE III
Animal Debris and Cleanup
[Adopted 6-13-1995 by Ord. No. 10-1995]
§ 88-10. Prohibited acts; exceptions.
No person owning, possessing, keeping, harboring or in charge of a dog
shall allow, suffer or permit such dog to do any injury to a person or an
animal or to do any damage to any other person's or any public lawn,
shrubbery, flowers, grounds or property, including but not limited to
depositing any urine or feces thereon, except that any dog on a leash may
deposit urine or feces between the curblines on the roadway of any public
street, provided that:
§ 88-11. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Township of
Westampton.
§ 88-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished on the first offense by a fine not to exceed $25 and on
second and subsequent convictions by a fine not to exceed $500.
A. The person in charge of said dog shall have in his possession
appropriate sanitary means, including but not limited to implements
and plastic bags, to remove any feces so deposited.
B. The person in charge of said dog shall immediately remove all feces so
deposited, by appropriate sanitary means, including but not limited to
implements and plastic bags, and shall dispose of such feces in a
sanitary manner, taking specific care to keep pet waste out of waterway
conveyances. [Amended 9-4-2018 by Ord. No. 6-2018]
C. No blind person in charge of a guide dog shall be subject to Subsections
A and B of this section.
§ 88-10 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 88-12
85:77

ARTICLE IV
Household and Nonhousehold Animals
[Adopted 4-22-2003 by Ord. No. 14-2003]
§ 88-13. Definitions.
The following words or phrases shall have the following meanings when
used in this article:
HOUSEHOLD ANIMALS — Animals kept as pets that reside within the
residence and are customary to residential districts.
NONHOUSEHOLD ANIMALS — Ponies, horses, cows, sheep, swine, poultry
or other farm livestock, exotic or wild animals.
§ 88-14. Nonhousehold animals prohibited on residential lots.
[Amended 6-8-2004 by Ord. No. 11-2004]
Except for the agricultural exception set forth in § 88-16, raising or keeping
of nonhousehold animals on any residential lot is not permitted.
§ 88-15. Where allowed.
Raising or keeping of a nonhousehold animal on any single-family property
in the R1 Zone is permitted if said property has a minimum size of two
acres. An additional 1/2 acre of land is required for each additional
nonhousehold animal. Additional regulations for other size properties are
as set forth hereinafter. Poultry farms must have a minimum of 50 acres of
property to operate. Commercial piggeries are prohibited.
§ 88-16. Exceptions.
Agricultural exception. The raising or keeping of nonhousehold animals
is permitted on any undeveloped property actively used for agriculture
at the time of the adoption of the within ordinance under the following
circumstances:
A. The property that is actively used for agriculture at the time of the
adoption of the within regulation must be at least two acres in size.
B. A property which is two acres in size and actively used for agricultural
purposes may contain one nonhousehold animal, and an additional 1/2
acre of land is required for each additional nonhousehold animal.
C. Existing and established horse or cattle farms are not subject to the
acreage requirements set forth in this article.
D. Current owners of animals not conforming to this article are exempt
from these provisions for only the animals currently on their property.
E. Poultry farms shall not be permitted on less than 50 acres of land.
F. Commercial piggeries are prohibited.
§ 88-13 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 88-16
85:79
Chapter 90
BASKETBALL HOOPS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 85.
Hockey — See Ch. 143.
Noise — See Ch. 166.
§ 90-1. Installation and storage of permanent and portable
basketball hoops.
§ 90-2. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Township of
Westampton.
§ 90-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished on the first offense by a fine not to exceed $25 and on
second and subsequent convictions by a fine not to exceed $500.
Chapter 92
BINGO AND RAFFLES: GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 92-1. Purpose; administration.
This chapter is for the purpose of regulating all games of chance held,
operated or conducted within the Township, pursuant to Acts of the
Legislature of the State of New Jersey known as the "Bingo Licensing Law,"
N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq., and the "Raffles Licensing Law," N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et
seq., and in accordance with the rules and regulations issued or to be
promulgated by the Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission in
the Department of Law and Public Safety of the State of New Jersey. All
A. No person, firm or corporation shall install a permanent basketball
hoop between the curb and sidewalk of any street. A permanent
basketball hoop is one which is affixed into the ground by means of
cement or other materials. A permanent basketball hoop shall also be
one which is not able to be easily removed upon the completion of the
use of that basketball hoop on any particular occasion.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall store or leave unattended a
portable basketball hoop in the street. When not in use a basketball
hoop may be stored between the curb and sidewalk if it does not block
either traffic upon the street or pedestrians upon the sidewalk.
§ 88-16 WESTAMPTON CODE § 92-1
90:80
applications, licenses and proceedings in connection therewith shall be
subject to the provisions of such Acts and the rules and regulations and any
laws, rules and regulations hereafter enacted and shall be further subject
to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 92-2. Issuing authority.
The issuing authority, as the same in defined in N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq. and
N.J.S.A. 5:8- 50 et seq., responsible for approving bingo and raffle licenses
shall be the Municipal Clerk.
§ 92-3. Conduct of games on Sunday.
Licensees authorized by law to conduct any games of chance, including
raffles and bingo, shall be permitted to conduct the same on any day of the
week, including Sundays as provided by N.J.S.A. 5:8-31 and N.J.S.A. 5:8-58.
§ 92-4. Application.
The issuing authority shall approve or deny all applications for bingo or
raffle licenses with due expedition after the filing of the application.
Applications must be filed with the Municipal Clerk together with required
fees pursuant to law. The applicant shall demonstrate in writing compliance
with the provisions of all applicable laws and regulations.
§ 92-5. Organizations eligible for license.
No license to conduct a game of chance as authorized by law shall be issued
to any organization not having a bona fide sites established in good faith
within the State of New Jersey and actively engaged in serving one or more
of the authorized purposes as defined by the rules and regulations of the
Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission.
§ 92-6. Suspension or revocation of license.
The governing body, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 5:8-30 and N.J.S.A. 5:8-57, may
suspend and revoke any issued bingo or raffle license, after a hearing, for
any violation of this chapter or state law. The governing body may suspend
the operation of a bingo or raffle pending hearing, in which case a hearing
must be held within five days after such action. Notice of a hearing shall be
served personally upon an officer of the licensee or the member in charge
of the conduct of the bingo or raffle or sent by registered mail or certified
mail to the licensee at the address shown on the license. All decisions and
findings by the governing body regarding the suspension or revocation of a
bingo or raffle license shall be in writing.
§ 92-7. Fees.
Fees for games of chance shall be as set forth in Chapter 122, Fees.
§ 92-1 BASKETBALL HOOPS § 92-8
90:81
§ 92-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, upon
conviction, shall be subject to the penalties provided in the New Jersey
Administrative Code.
Chapter 95
BRUSH, GRASS, WEEDS AND DEBRIS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 155.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Solid waste — See Ch. 206.
§ 95-1. Definitions; prohibited accumulations. [Amended 9-22-1977
by Ord. No. 12-1977; 1-27-1998 by Ord. No. 4-1998; 4-22-2003 by
Ord. No. 8-2003]
A. Definitions. The following words or phrases shall have the following
meanings when used in this chapter:
EXTERIOR OF PREMISES — Those portions of a building or structure
which are exposed to public view or are visible from adjoining lots,
including all outside surfaces and appurtenances thereto; and the open
land including rights-of-way of any premises outside of any building or
structure erected thereon.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, right-of-way or multiples
thereof, including the building or structures thereon.
B. Nuisances and accumulation of injurious debris. The exterior of the
premises and all structures located on the premises shall be kept free of
all nuisances, injurious debris and any hazards which are injurious to
the public health, safety and general welfare and which constitute a
blighting effect which depreciates adjoining or nearby properties. Any
of the foregoing shall be promptly removed and abated by the owner,
occupant and/or operator. It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant
and/or operator to keep the premises free of hazards, which include but
are not limited to the following:
(1) Brush, weeds, dead or dying trees, stumps, roots, broken glass,
obnoxious growth, filth, garbage, trash and debris.
(2) Hedges, bushes, trees and shrubs on all premises and exterior
premises shall be kept trimmed and kept from becoming
overgrown so that they do not pose a threat to pedestrians or
operators of motor vehicles utilizing the public right of way.
C. Weeds, leaves and branches.
§ 92-8 WESTAMPTON CODE § 95-1
90:82
§ 95-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-28-1974 by Ord. No.
1-1974]
Any owner or owners, occupant or occupants, tenant or tenants who shall
neglect to cut and remove or otherwise destroy such brush, weeds, dead
or dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth, filth, garbage, trash and
debris as directed by this article shall, upon conviction before the Judge of
the Municipal Court of the Township of Westampton, be subject, for each
offense, to a fine not exceeding $500 or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days, or to both such fine and imprisonment.
(1) Weeds. All premises and exterior premises shall be maintained free
from weeds or plant growth in excess of 10 inches. All noxious
weeds shall be prohibited. "Weeds" shall be defined as all grasses,
annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs; provided,
however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens.
(2) Removal of vegetation along curbs. Owner, occupant and/or tenant
of any premises abutting a curb shall keep the curb line between
the curb and the street free of vegetation. [Added 11-20-2017 by
Ord. No. 15-201717]
(3) Removal of leaves. No owner, occupant and/or tenant of a
residential property shall rake, blow, push and/or drag leaves from
his or her property onto the public streets except in the following
manner: leaves may be piled or raked in rows running parallel to
the curb of the premises in question. The outward edge of the rows
shall not extend any further than three feet from the nearest
curbline.
(4) Removal of branches and trees by homeowner. No owner, occupant
and/or tenant of a residential property shall stack branches, trees
or parts of trees in the paved right-of-way. Branches, trees, parts of
trees and stumps must be placed behind the curbline. Such
placement may occur not sooner than the weekend before regularly
scheduled chipping of branches. [Amended 5-28-2013 by Ord.
No. 5-2013]
(5) Removal of branches and trees by a private contractor or person
other than homeowner. All debris generated by trimming or
removing trees by a private contractor, including branches, wood,
stumps, etc., must be removed by the contractor. The Township
does not chip any trees or parts of trees removed by private
contractors. [Added 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 5-2013]
17.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection
C(2) through (4) as Subsection C(3) through (5), respectively.
§ 95-1 BASKETBALL HOOPS § 95-3
90:83
§ 95-3. Failure to remove; assessment of costs.
Upon the failure of any owner or owners, occupant or occupants, tenant or
tenants to cut and remove or otherwise destroy such brush, weeds, dead
or dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth, filth, garbage, trash and
debris within 10 days after notice to remove the same has been received
from said Township of Westampton, which notice may be effected by
personal service or by mail, registered return receipt requested, said
Township shall cause the same to be removed under the direction of an
officer of said Township. Such officer shall certify the cost thereof to the
governing body, which shall examine the certificate and, if found correct,
shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against said land and
premises, and the cost shall be added to and become and form part of the
taxes next to be assessed and levied upon the land, the same to bear interest
at the same rate as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same
officers and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 95-4. Collection of fine not bar to recovery of costs of removal.
The imposition and collection of the fine imposed by this article shall not
constitute any bar to the right of the Township of Westampton to collect the
cost, as certified, for the removal of such growths, in the manner herein
authorized.
§ 95-5. Bamboo planting prohibited; containment and removal.
[Added 5-16-2016 by Ord. No. 12-2016]
It is determined that certain types of the bamboo plant are invasive and
often difficult to control, and can and have caused significant damage
to properties. The purposes of this section are to preserve and protect
private and public property from the damaging spread of bamboo, to protect
indigenous and other plant materials from the invasive spread of bamboo
and to maintain the general welfare of the residents.
A. Prohibition. No owner, tenant or occupant of a property, or person,
corporation or other entity, shall plant, install or cause or permit the
planting or installation of plant species commonly known as "running
bamboo" upon any property. For the purposes of this section, "running
bamboo" means any bamboo in the genus Phyllostachys, including
Phyllostachys aureosulcata.
B. Duty to confine. In the event that any species commonly known as
"running bamboo" is located upon any property prior to the effective
date of this prohibition, the owner and occupant of said property shall
jointly and severally be required to confine such species to prevent the
encroachment, spread, invasion or intrusion of same onto any other
private or public property or public right-of-way. In lieu of confining the
species, the property owner or occupant may elect to totally remove the
bamboo from the property, and all affected properties. Failure to
properly confine such bamboo shall require removal as set forth below.
The cost of said removal shall be at the bamboo property owner's
§ 95-3 WESTAMPTON CODE § 95-5
90:84
expense. This duty to confine shall not apply if the property owner and/
or occupant can establish to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement
Officer that the bamboo which is on his/her property at the time of the
adoption of this section originated on another property.
C. Removal.
(1) In the event that running bamboo is present on the effective date of
this prohibition and a complaint is received by the Township
regarding an encroachment of any bamboo plant or root, and the
Code Enforcement Officer of the Township after observation and/or
inspection determines that there is an encroachment or invasion on
any adjoining/neighboring private or public property or public
right-of-way (hereinafter, "the affected property"), the Township
shall serve notice to the bamboo property owner in writing that the
bamboo has invaded other private or public property(s) or public
rights-of-way and demand remediation of the encroachment of the
bamboo from the affected property, and demand approved
confinement against future encroachment. Notice shall be provided
to the bamboo property owner as well as to the owner of the
affected property by certified return receipt requested mail and
regular mail. Within 45 days of receipt of such notice, the bamboo
property owner shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer, with
a copy to the owner of the affected property, a plan for the
remediation of the encroachment of the bamboo from the affected
property, which plan shall include restoration of the affected
property after remediation of the encroachment. Within 120 days of
receipt of the Code Enforcement Officer's approval of the plan of
remediation and restoration, the remediation and restoration shall
be completed to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer.
(2) If the bamboo property owner does not accomplish the remediation
of the encroachment from such other private or public property or
public right-of-way in accordance herewith, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall cause a citation to be issued with a penalty up to $100
for each day the violation continues, enforceable through the
Municipal court of the Township of Westampton. The
Administrative Officer may request, and the Municipal Court may
grant, a specific performance remedy. The Township may also
institute civil proceedings for injunctive or civil relief.
(3) Nothing herein shall be interpreted as limiting the rights of a
private property owner to seek civil relief through a Court of proper
jurisdiction, nor the institution of civil proceedings against the
property parties.
(4) When an encroachment is upon public property or public right-ofway
and the bamboo property owner and/or occupant has not
complied with the written notice provided as set forth above, the
Township of Westampton, at its discretion, may remove or contract
for the removal of such bamboo from the Township property or
§ 95-5 BASKETBALL HOOPS § 95-5
90:85
Chapter 99
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Buildings unfit for human habitation — See
Ch. 106.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 128.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 131.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 140.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 149.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 152.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Sewers — See Ch. 192.
Soil removal — See Ch. 199.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 215.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
public right-of-way. The cost of such removal shall be the
responsibility of the bamboo property owner and occupant and
shall be paid or assessed as a lien against the property on which
the bamboo growth originated. The cost of said removal from the
Township-owned property and/or public right-of-way shall include
the installation of an appropriate barrier to prevent future bamboo
invasion.
D. Replanting prohibited. Any running bamboo either planted or caused to
be planted or existing on the effective date of this regulation, may not
be replanted or replaced once such bamboo is or has become dead,
destroyed, uprooted or otherwise removed.
§ 95-5 WESTAMPTON CODE § 95-5
90:86
ARTICLE I
Department of Code Enforcement and Inspections
[Amended 2-28-1974 by Ord. No. 1-1974; 2-24-1977 by Ord. No.
2-1977; 10-26-1978 by Ord. No. 14-1978; 3-22-1979 by Ord. No.
3-1979; 3-24-1983 by Ord. No. 2-1983; 12-27-1984 by Ord. No.
17-1984; 12-21-1987 by Ord. No. 17-1987; 10-16-1989 by Ord. No.
11-1989; 3-2-1992 by Ord. No. 2-1992; 10-22-1996 by Ord. No.
18-1996]
§ 99-1. Establishment of enforcing agency; composition;
qualifications; public access.
§ 99-2. Appeals.
All appeals will be handled by the Burlington County Construction Board of
Appeals pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.40.
§ 99-3. Permit required; exception.
A permit shall be required for all general construction work, except for
ordinary repairs as provided for in Section 5:23-2.7 of the State Uniform
Construction Code which do not violate any of the regulations.18
A. There is hereby established in the Township of Westampton a State
Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the
"Department of Code Enforcement and Inspections," consisting of a
Construction Official, Building Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode
Official, Fire Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Elevator
Subcode Official and such other subcode officials for such additional
subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs,
State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform
Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief
administrator of the enforcing agency.
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such a position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c.217, as
amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23; provided that, in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
per P.L. 1975, c.217, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such position.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at the Westampton Township Municipal Building, 710 Rancocas Road,
Westampton, New Jersey, except for emergencies and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances. Office hours are Monday through Friday,
8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
18.Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.7.
§ 99-1 BASKETBALL HOOPS § 99-4
90:87
§ 99-4. Construction permit fees; refunds; prototype processing.
[Amended 3-14-2000 by Ord. No. 3-2000; 12-12-2000 by Ord. No.
22-2000; 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 9-2007; 2-23-2010 by Ord. No.
4-2010; 3-21-2016 by Ord. No. 3-2016; 8-1-2016 by Ord. No.
18-2016; 6-18-2019 by Ord. No. 4-2019]
The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees listed
in Subsections A through I below and shall be paid before the permit is
issued.
A. Building subcode fees.
(1) New construction. Fees for new construction shall be based upon
the volume of the building or structure as computed in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The new construction fee shall be in the
amount of $0.048 per cubic foot of volume for buildings and
structures of all use groups and types of construction as classified
and defined in Articles 3 and 4 of the building subcode; except that
the fee shall be $0.036 per cubic foot of volume for Use Groups A-1,
A-2, A-3, A-4, F-1, F-2, S-1 and S-2, and the fee shall be $0.024 per
cubic foot for structures on farms, including commercial farm
buildings under N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d). The minimum fee shall be $75.
(2) Renovations, alterations and repairs. Fees for renovations,
alterations and repairs shall be based upon the estimated cost of
the work. The fee shall be $46 per $1,000, or a fraction thereof, for
the first $50,000 of estimated cost of construction; from $50,001 to
and including $100,000, the fee shall be $35 per $1,000 of the
estimated cost of construction; and above $100,000, the additional
fee shall be in the amount of $28 per $1,000 of estimated cost
above $100,000, provided that the minimum fee of $75 shall be
paid. For the purpose of determining estimated cost, the applicant
shall submit to the Department cost data produced either by the
architect or engineer of record, or by a recognized estimating firm,
or by the actual contract signed by the owner and the contractor. A
bona fide contractor's bid, if available, shall be submitted. Where
any material or labor is furnished or provided at no cost, its normal
or usual cost shall be included in the estimated cost. The
Department shall make the final decision regarding the estimated
cost.
(3) Minor construction. Fees for minor construction work shall be
based upon the estimated cost of construction. The fee shall be as
listed in the renovations, alterations and repairs Subsection A(2),
above. Minor work shall be as described in the State Uniform
Construction Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.17A.
(4) Exterior additions. For exterior additions, the fee shall be $0.040
per cubic foot of building or structure volume for the added
portion, with a minimum fee of $69.
§ 99-4 WESTAMPTON CODE § 99-4
90:88
(5) Renovations and additions combination. For combinations of
renovations and additions, the fee shall be computed separately as
renovations and additions.
(6) Zoning applications. Pursuant to Chapter 250, Zoning, the fee to
file a zoning application for review shall be charged a flat fee of $50
for Groups R3, R4 and R5. All other use groups shall be charged a
flat fee of $100.
(7) Demolition. The fee for a demolition or removal permit shall be
$100 for a structure of less than 5,000 square feet in area and less
than 30 feet in height, for a one- or two-family dwelling (Use Group
R-3 or R-5 of the building subcode), and structures on farms,
including commercial farm buildings under N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d),
and $151 for all other groups.
(8) Signs. Fees for ground-mount, monument and pylon signs shall be
$6 per square foot for the first 100 square feet, $4.50 per square
foot for the next 400 square feet and $3 per square foot thereafter.
The minimum fee shall be $69.
(9) Asbestos abatement. The administrative fee for an asbestos
abatement permit shall be $176.
(10) Tents. The fee shall be $138 for tents greater than 16,800 square
feet or more than 140 feet in any dimension.
(11) Swimming pools. The fee for an aboveground swimming pool shall
be $150. The fee for an in-ground swimming pool shall be $225.
(12) Solar/photovoltaic systems shall be charged a flat fee of $250 for
Groups R3, R4 and R5.
B. Plumbing subcode fees.
(1) The fee shall be in the amount of $15 per fixture or stack for all
fixtures as listed in the following Subsection B(2).
(2) The fee shall be $97 per special device for the following: grease
traps, oil separators, water-cooled air-conditioning units,
refrigeration units, utility service connections, backflow
preventors, steam boilers, hot-water boilers (excluding those for
domestic water heating), active solar systems, sewer pumps,
interceptors and fuel-oil piping.
(3) The fee shall be $15 per appliance connected to the gas piping.
(4) For the purpose of computing this fee, fixtures or stacks shall
include but not be limited to lavatories, kitchen sinks, slop sinks,
urinals, water closets, bathtubs, floor drains, drinking fountains,
dishwashers, garbage disposals, clothes washers, hot-water
heaters or similar devices.
§ 99-4 BASKETBALL HOOPS § 99-4
90:89
(5) The minimum fee shall be $69.
C. Electrical subcode fees.
(1) For one to 50 receptacles and fixtures, the fee shall be $54; for each
25 additional receptacles or fixtures, the fee shall be $15. For the
purpose of computing this fee, receptacles or fixtures shall include
lighting, outlets, wall switches, fluorescent fixtures, convenience
receptacles, alarm devices, smoke and heat detectors,
communications outlets, light standards, carbon monoxide
detectors, emergency lights, electric signs, exit lights, motors or
similar devices less than one horsepower or one kilowatt.
(2) For each motor or electrical device one horsepower and less than
or equal to 10 horsepower and for transformers and generators
greater than one kilowatt and less than or equal to 10 kilowatts, the
fee shall be $15.
(3) For each motor or electrical device greater than 10 horsepower
and less than or equal to 50 horsepower; for each service panel,
service entrance or subpanel less than or equal to 225 amps; and
for all transformers and generators greater than 10 kilowatts and
less than or equal to 45 kilowatts, the fee shall be $69.
(4) For each motor or electrical device greater than 50 horsepower
and less than or equal to 100 horsepower; for each service panel,
service entrance or subpanel greater than 225 amperes and less
than or equal to 1,000 amperes; and for transformers and
generators greater than 45 kilowatts and less than or equal to
112.5 kilowatts, the fee shall be $138.
(5) For each motor or electrical device greater than 100 horsepower;
for each service panel, service entrance or subpanel greater than
1,000 amperes; and for each transformer or generator greater than
112.5 kilowatts, the fee shall be $685.
(6) For the purpose of computing these fees, all motors except those in
plug-in appliances shall be counted, including control equipment,
generators, transformers and all heat cooking or other devices
consuming or generating electrical current.
(7) Solar/photovoltaic systems: The fee shall be based on the
designated kilowatt rating of the solar/photovoltaic system as
follows:
(a) One to 50 kilowatts: The fee shall be $75.
(b) Fifty-one to 100 kilowatts: The fee shall be $200.
(c) Greater than 100 kilowatts: The fee shall be $576.
(8) Annual swimming pool certification: The fee shall be $150.
§ 99-4 WESTAMPTON CODE § 99-4
90:90
(9) The minimum fee shall be $69.
D. Fire subcode fees. Fire-protection and hazardous equipment shall
include sprinklers, standpipes, smoke and heat detectors, preengineered
fire suppression systems, gas- and oil-fired appliances not
connected to the plumbing system, kitchen exhaust systems,
incinerators and crematoriums.
(1) Sprinkler and detection equipment. In computing fees for sprinkler
heads and smoke/heat detectors, the number of each shall be
counted separately, and two fees, one for sprinkler heads and one
for smoke/heat detectors, shall be charged.
(a) The fee for 20 or fewer sprinkler heads or smoke/heat
detectors shall be $82.
(b) The fee for 21 to and including 100 sprinkler heads or smoke/
heat detectors shall be $151.
(c) The fee for 101 to and including 200 sprinkler heads or smoke/
heat detectors shall be $289.
(d) The fee for 201 to and including 400 sprinkler heads or smoke/
heat detectors shall be $748.
(e) The fee for 401 to and including 1,000 sprinkler heads or
smoke/heat detectors shall be $1,036.
(f) The fee for over 1,000 sprinkler heads or smoke/heat detectors
shall be $1,323.
(2) The fee for each standpipe shall be $289.
(3) The fee for each independent pre-engineered system shall be $138.
(4) The fee for each gas- or oil-fired appliance which is not connected
to the plumbing system shall be $75.
(5) The fee for each kitchen exhaust system shall be $125.
(6) The fee for each incinerator shall be $460.
(7) The fee for the installation or removal of flammable or combustible
liquid tanks shall be $69 per tank.
E. Certificate of occupancy fees.
(1) The fee for a certificate of occupancy be shall be charged a flat fee
of $100 for Groups R3, R4 and R5. All other use groups shall be
charged a flat fee of $200.
(2) The fee for a certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to a change
of use group shall be $150. The fee for a change of ownership/
tenant or certificate of continued occupancy shall be $150.
§ 99-4 BASKETBALL HOOPS § 99-4
90:91
§ 99-5. Private on-site agencies.
When the enforcing agency uses the services of a private on-site inspections
and plan review agency to enforce one or more subcodes, the fees charged
to the municipality by the private on-site agency shall be a percentage of
those fees charged by the Department of Community Affairs' current fee
schedule, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.14(k) and N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20. Such fees
may change and become effective without further notice as provided in
N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20.
§ 99-5.1. Report to Council; surcharge fees; activity report.
(3) The administrative fee for each certificate of occupancy issued
following the successful completion of an asbestos abatement
project shall be $35.
F. Elevator subcode fees: pursuant to the state fees as mandated by
N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20.
G. Refunds. In the event that a building permit becomes null and void, or
when monies are requested to be refunded for permits not used, the
volume of the work actually completed shall be computed. Any excess
for the uncompleted work shall be returned to the permit holder; except
that all penalties that may have been imposed on the permit holder
under the requirements of the regulations shall first be collected. Plan
review fees are not refundable.
H. Prototype. Where a design is used repeatedly at different locations, the
plans attached to the first application for a construction permit may be
designated as prototype or master plans either by the Construction
Official or the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
Subsequent submittals shall consist of a plot plan, including utilities,
floor plan, exterior elevations and a reference to the prototype plan by
application or permit number [N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.15]. The construction
permit fee shall be reduced by 5%.
I. Plan review fees. Twenty percent of the amount of the construction
permit fee shall be deemed to be the plan review fee.
A. The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to Council biannually a report and any other
expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to the enforcement of
the State Uniform Construction Code Act.19
B. In order to provide for the training, certification and technical support
programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and the
regulations, the enforcing agency shall collect in addition to the fees
specified above a surcharge fee of $0.0016 per cubic foot of volume of
new construction and $0.80 per $1,000 value of alteration and
19.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 99-4 WESTAMPTON CODE § 99-5.1
90:92
renovation construction cost. Said surcharge fee shall be remitted to
the Department of Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, on a
quarterly basis.
C. A Municipal Monthly Activity Report (Form R-810) shall be filed with
the Department of Community Affairs on a monthly basis in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:23 4.5(d).
§ 99-5.1 BASKETBALL HOOPS § 99-5.1
90:93

ARTICLE II
Fallout Shelters
§ 99-6. Scope.
The provisions of this article shall govern the materials and construction of
shelters constructed for protection of persons from radioactive fallout from
enemy nuclear bombs.
§ 99-7. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
FAMILY FALLOUT SHELTER — A shelter intended for personal use by the
owner and his immediate family.
GROUP FALLOUT SHELTER — All fallout shelters other than family fallout
shelters.
§ 99-8. Family fallout shelters.
Family fallout shelters shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with the provisions of Publication MP-15, the Family Fall Out Shelter, June
1959 Edition, issued by the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilizations, its
latest amendments, revisions or supplements in effect on the date of
application for the building permit.
§ 99-9. Other fallout shelters; construction standards.
Other fallout shelters shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
Annex 10 of Appendix 2 of the publication Fall Out Shelter Surveys Guide
for Architects and Engineers issued by the Office of Civil and Defense
Mobilizations, its latest amendments, revisions or supplements in effect on
the date of the application for the building permit.
§ 99-10. Fees.
No fee shall be charged under this chapter for permits issued for fallout
shelters of either class.
§ 99-11. Uses.
A. No fallout shelter of either class shall be used for any purpose other
than as a temporary shelter in the event of attack by an enemy of the
United States, or temporary protection from imminent natural disaster.
B. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the aforesaid
publications and the ordinance hereby supplemented, such publications
shall govern; but said ordinance shall govern any matters not covered
by such publications, to the extent that they are not inconsistent with
the intent thereof.
§ 99-6 BASKETBALL HOOPS § 99-12
90:95
§ 99-12. Printed copies of publication standards on file.
A printed copy in book form of each of the publications referred to in Article
II have been annexed to this chapter and made a part thereof as fully as
if set forth herein, each similarly marked so as plainly to indicate what
portions thereof it is intended to adopt, and three printed copies thereof
have been placed on file in the office of the Township Clerk upon the
introduction hereof and shall remain on file there until final action is taken
hereon and shall thereafter remain on file for so long as this chapter is in
effect, for the use and examination of the public.
§ 99-13. Administration and enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Building Inspector of
the Township of Westampton in conjunction with the other departments of
the Township of Westampton.
§ 99-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-28-1974 by Ord. No.
1-1974]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby
adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply
with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any
statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder,
or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal
has been taken, shall severally, for each and every such violation and
noncompliance respectively, be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both,
in the discretion of the court before whom such conviction may be had. The
imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation
nor permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct
or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. When not
otherwise specified, each 10 days that prohibited conditions are maintained
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 99-12 WESTAMPTON CODE § 99-14
90:96
Chapter 103
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 99.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Subdivision of land --See Ch. 215.
§ 103-1. Findings.
The Township Committee hereby finds that there is a need to provide for
a standard display of house numbers on properties within the Township
of Westampton. The Committee further finds that the display of these
numbers will facilitate public safety and will further the protection of life
and property within the Township of Westampton.
§ 103-2. Display of numbers on buildings required.
Every principal house, building or structure erected or located within the
Township of Westampton shall have displayed on the portion of the building
facing the street the number assigned by the township to the building. If
the number on the building is not clearly visible from the street because
of distance or some interference, the number shall also be displayed on a
plaque or post located in a prominent place on the property that is easily
visible from the street. The number shall be a minimum of four inches in
height and clearly visible on the background to which it is attached. The
numbers shall be in numerical and not in script form, and the numbers shall
be procured and affixed and maintained at the expense of the owners of the
property.
§ 103-3. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on August 1, 1989. The delayed date of
effectiveness shall provide the township the time to allow residents
sufficient opportunity to obtain and display the numbers required.
§ 103-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person as defined above who violates any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $50 within
the discretion of the Municipal Judge. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 99-14 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 103-4
103:97
Chapter 106
BUILDINGS, UNFIT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 99.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 128.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Sewers — See Ch. 192.
§ 106-1. Public Officer designated.
The Board of Health of the Township of Westampton is hereby designated
the "Public Officer" pursuant to N.J.S.A 40:48-2.4(b), who shall exercise the
powers hereafter prescribed.
§ 106-2. Preliminary investigation; complaint; notice and hearing.
Whenever a petition is filed with the Public Officer by a public authority or
by at least five residents of the municipality, charging that any building is
unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, or whenever it appears to
the Public Officer (on its own motion) that any building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use, the Public Officer shall, if its preliminary
investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be
served upon the owner or any parties in interest in such building a
complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that
a hearing will be held before the Public Officer (or its designated agent)
at a place therein fixed, not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after
the serving of said complaint; that the owner and parties in interest shall
be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in
person or otherwise and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the
complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in the courts shall not
be controlling in hearings before the Public Officer.
§ 106-3. Findings of fact; order for repair or demolition.
If, after such notice and hearing, the Public Officer determines that the
building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or occupancy
or use, it shall state, in writing, its findings of fact in support of such
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof and parties in interest an order:
A. Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of said building to be
made by the owner within a reasonable time, which time shall be set
forth in the order, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate or have said
building vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order; and
B. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises, and the owner
fails to repair, alter or improve said building within the time specified in
§ 103-4 WESTAMPTON CODE § 106-3
106:98
§ 106-4. Noncompliance with order; posting of notice of
condemnation.
If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the Public
Officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved or to
be vacated and closed; and the Public Officer may cause to be posted on the
main entrance of any building so closed a placard with the following words:
"This building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use; the use or
occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful."
§ 106-5. Removal or demolition of building by Public Officer.
If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the Public Officer may cause such building to be removed or
demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition thereof after
advertisement for and receipt of bids therefor.
§ 106-6. Lien for costs of removal or repair; contesting amount of
costs.
The amount of the cost of the filing and legal papers, expert witnesses'
fees, search fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this act and determined in favor of the municipality,
and such cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating
and closing, or removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of the balance
thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any, realized from the sale
of materials derived from such building, or from any contract for removal or
demolition thereof, shall be a municipal lien against the real property upon
which such cost was incurred. If the building is removed or demolished
by the Public Officer, it shall sell the materials of such building. There
shall be credited against the cost of the removal or demolition thereof
the proceeds of any sale of such materials or any sum derived from any
contract for the removal or demolition of the building. If there are no such
credits or if the sum total of such costs exceeds the total of such credits,
a detailed statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall be
filed with the Municipal Tax Assessor or other custodian of the records of
tax liens, and a copy thereof shall be forthwith forwarded to the owner by
registered mail. If the total of the credits exceeds such costs, the balance
remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the Public Officer,
shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court and
shall be disbursed according to the order or judgment of the court to the
persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or judgment of such
court; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed
to impair or limit in any way the power of the municipality to define and
declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary
proceedings or otherwise. Any owner or party in interest may, within 60
the order, then the owner shall be required to remove or demolish the
building within a reasonable time as specified in the order of removal.
§ 106-3 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 106-6
106:99
days from the date of the filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary
manner in the Superior Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount
or the accuracy of the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
§ 106-7. Conditions constituting unfitness for human habitation.
It is hereby provided that the Public Officer may determine that a building
is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use if it finds that one or more
of the following conditions exists:
§ 106-8. Powers of Public Officer.
The Public Officer is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as may
be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and
provisions of this chapter, including the following powers in addition to
others herein granted:
§ 106-9. Powers reserved to municipality.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers
of the courts or of any department of any municipality to enforce any
provisions of its charter or its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or
A. Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other
calamities;
B. Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities;
C. Dilapidation;
D. Disrepair;
E. Structural defects;
F. Uncleanliness.
A. To investigate the building conditions in the municipality in order to
determine which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use.
B. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination,
provided that such entry shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
D. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as it
deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
E. To delegate any of its functions and powers under this chapter to such
officers and agents as it may designate.
§ 106-6 WESTAMPTON CODE § 106-9
106:100
punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this chapter shall be
in addition and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law.
Chapter 112
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 171.
§ 112-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined to mean:
GUARDIAN — A person, other than a parent, to whom legal custody of the
juvenile has been given by court order or who is acting in the place of the
parent or who is responsible for the care and welfare of the juvenile.
JUVENILE — An individual who is under the age of 17 years.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including but
not limited to a public street, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk, bridge, alley,
plaza, park, recreation, athletic or shopping area, public transportation
facility, vehicle used for public transportation, parking lot or any other
public building, structure or area.
§ 112-2. Curfew established; exceptions.
§ 112-3. Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit, suffer or allow
any juvenile in his or her care to be in any public place without the
accompaniment of a parent or guardian between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
A. It shall be unlawful for juveniles to be in any public place between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Sunday through Thursday and
between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian.
B. This prohibition does not apply if said juvenile is:
(1) Engaged in or traveling to or from a business or occupation which
the laws of the State of New Jersey authorize a juvenile to perform.
(2) Engaged in an errand involving a medical emergency.
(3) Attending religious services, extracurricular school activities,
activities sponsored by a religious or community organization or
other cultural, educational or social events or is in direct transit to
or from such events.
§ 106-9 CURFEW § 112-3
112:101
and 6:00 a.m. on Sunday through Thursday and between 12:00 midnight
and 6:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday.
§ 112-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty of having violated § 112-2 or 112-3 of this chapter
shall perform community service for eight hours for the first offense and not
more than 20 hours for each additional offense, and, if parents or guardians
as well as a juvenile are found guilty of violating this chapter, the parents or
guardians shall perform community service together with the juvenile.
Chapter 117
PROHIBITED CONDUCT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 82.
Curfew — See Ch. 112.
Loitering — See Ch. 158.
Noise — See Ch. 166.
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 171.
§ 117-1. Public assemblages.
It shall be unlawful for any number of persons to assemble at the corners
of streets, alleys or other parts of the township and demean themselves in
a rude, indecent, profane or disorderly manner, or obstruct the footway to
the annoyance of persons or in a manner subversive to the good order of
the township, or for any such person to persist in such conduct after being
notified by any police officer to depart peaceably therefrom or to desist
therefrom.
§ 117-2. Toilet functions.
No person shall perform toilet functions, including but not limited to
urination and defecation, in any public areas, public structures or buildings
or public ways of the Township except in facilities designed for that purpose
and open to the public.
§ 117-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-7-2016 by Ord. No.
1-2016]
A violation of any of the provisions of any section of this chapter shall be
punishable, upon conviction thereof by the Judge of the Municipal Court, by
a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days,
or both such fine and imprisonment, in the Judge's discretion. Each day that
the offense occurs shall be deemed to be a separate occurrence and offense.
Chapter 119
§ 112-3 WESTAMPTON CODE § 117-3
112:102
FARMERS' MARKET
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 43.
§ 119-1. Title.
This chapter shall be cited and referred to as "Farmers' Market."
§ 119-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning, the following definitions shall apply:
AGRICULTURAL VENDORS — Local farmers that produce and/or grow one
or more of the following products: fruit, vegetables, plants (starts, annuals,
perennials, herbs), cut flowers and herbs, dairy products, farm-raised meat,
seafood, and eggs. Also included are value added products, such as jams,
jellies, salsa, honey, soaps, herbal oils, etc., which are made from one or
more of the above referenced items.
CRAFT VENDORS — Vendors that take an active part in the making of the
items they sell.
FARMERS' MARKET — The area set aside for the use of selling agricultural
products, food products and crafts.
FOOD VENDORS — Vendors that take an active part in making/baking the
majority of the items they sell.
§ 119-3. Establishment.
§ 119-4. Supervision.
The Farmers' Market shall be under the supervision of the Township of
Westampton and managed by the Township of Westampton. The Township
shall establish and enforce any rules and regulations relative to the
Farmers' Market, and shall promptly remove or cause to remove any person
who is disorderly who refuses to obey any rules and regulations made for
the management or conduct of the Farmers' Market.
§ 119-5. Time of use.
A. An area to be selected by the Township will be set apart as the Farmers'
Market at specified times during the year for the use of agricultural,
food and craft vendors, subject to the rules and regulations set forth in
this chapter and included in the Farmers' Market application.
B. General parking shall be restricted from the Farmers' Market area
between 2:30 p.m. and at least 8:00 p.m.
§ 117-3 CURFEW § 119-5
112:103
§ 119-6. Market scales and weights.
Vendors who shall offer for sale at the Farmers' Market any article by
weight or measure shall have all scales, weights and measures properly
examined, tested, stamped and sealed.
§ 119-7. Compliance with health regulations.
Vendors selling prepared foods shall prepare and serve foods in accordance
with all applicable federal, state and local health regulations. All foods and
beverages sold or used in food preparation shall be first quality and conform
in all respects to federal, state and local food and other laws, ordinances
and regulations.
§ 119-8. Entry and inspections.
The Township shall have the right and privilege of entering a vendor's
assigned area for the purpose of making inspections. The Burlington County
Health Department shall be contacted prior to operating for a preopening
inspection/approval to determine compliance with all regulations. The
Township and its agents or employees shall have the right and privilege
of inspecting the vendor's farming operation for the purpose of making
inspections to ensure compliance with the producer requirements in the
Farmers' Market rules. The Township will provide at least 48 hours' notice
prior to an inspection. If the vendor is found to be noncompliant with the
requirements set forth in the Farmers' Market rules, the Township reserves
the right to terminate the vendor from participating in the Farmers' Market.
§ 119-9. Indemnification.
Vendors shall indemnify and hold harmless the Township of Westampton
and its officers, employees, agents and servants from and against any
and all claims, demands, suits, actions, recoveries, judgments, costs and
expenses including attorneys fees, incurred or suffered on account of
property damage or loss and/or personal injury, including loss of life, of any
person, agency, corporation or governmental entity which shall arise out of
the course of or in consequence to any acts or omissions of the applicant,
its employees, agents, servants or subcontractors in the performance of
A. The Farmers' Market shall be occupied and operated from June 1 to
October 31 of each year, on Thursdays of each week, at times to be
determined by the Township.
B. Vendors will be allotted an estimated twenty-foot-by-eight-foot vending
area in the parking lot. Parking is prohibited to anyone other than the
holder of the Farmers' Market space as assigned by the Township on
the days and times established by the Township.
C. Removal of any unauthorized vehicle must be made upon a complaint to
the Township's Police Department and shall be enforceable beginning
two hours prior to opening of the Farmers' Market.
§ 119-5 WESTAMPTON CODE § 119-9
112:104
the work described in these specifications. The Vendor further agrees that
this indemnification by the applicant shall continue after completion of
the market season for all claims, demands, suits, actions, recoveries,
judgments, costs and expenses including attorneys fees resulting from acts
or omissions by the applicant, its employees, agents, servants or
subcontractors, which occur prior to the completion of the season.
§ 119-10. Application.
§ 119-11. Removal of vendors.
The Township reserves the right to remove an approved vendor and
substitute another vendor if the approved vendor fails to pay the required
fee or fails to participate on two consecutive Farmers' Market days. If fees
are paid in advance and a market day is subsequently cancelled by the
Township due to inclement weather, the fee will be refunded. If a vendor
chooses not to appear due to inclement weather or any other reason, the
fee will not be refunded. If a vendor is removed for failure to appear, and
the vendor has prepaid, the removed vendor shall be reimbursed for the
prepaid days only.
§ 119-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is
otherwise provided shall be fined not more than $1,000. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation occurs or continues.
A. Application submission. Any vendor interested in participating in the
Farmers' Market shall submit an application on a form provided by the
Township of Westampton. The application must contain all the
requested information and documents to be deemed complete.
Incomplete applications shall be rejected and the fee shall not be
reimbursed. Every vendor is required to execute a defense and
indemnification agreement for the Township of Westampton.
B. Deadline for submission of application. Vendors must file a complete
application no later than April 1 of each year. Applications received
after this deadline will be accepted, and if there are vacancies available
at the market, vendors will be selected at the discretion of the
Township. If there are no vacancies at the time an application is
received, the applicant will be placed on a waiting list for participation
in the market.
C. Application fee. The application must be accompanied with a check
made payable to the Township of Westampton in the amount of $25.
D. Market fees. If a vendor is selected to participate in the Farmers'
Market, a fee of 10% of the total sales up to $25 must be made to the
Township of Westampton for each market day the vendor is present at
the market to sell its goods. A vendor is permitted to pay the permarket-
day fee in advance.
§ 119-9 CURFEW § 119-12
112:105
Chapter 122
FEES
§ 119-12 WESTAMPTON CODE § 119-12
112:106
ARTICLE I
Fee Schedule
[Adopted 2-9-2010 by Ord. No. 3-2010]
§ 122-1. Miscellaneous fees and services.
Miscellaneous fees and service charges are as follows:
A. Assessor:
(1) Certified property owner's list: $10.
B. Township Clerk:
(1) Street, tax or Zoning Map: $2/page.
(2) Solicitor's permit: $50.
(3) Games of chance applications: $20 or in accordance with state
statute.
(4) Reproduction on CD/disc: $5 each.
C. Registrar of Vital Statistics:
(1) Certified copy of death/marriage certificate: $20 first copy; $10
each additional copy.
D. Recycling:
(1) Yellow recycling bucket (bottles, cans): $15.
(2) Blue paper cart: $60.
E. Tax Collector:
(1) Duplicate tax sale certificate: $100.
F. Police: [Added 6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 7-2013]
(1) Outside overtime: $65 per hour.
G. Public Works: [Added 6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 7-2013]
(1) Grass cutting, labor: $50 per hour per man.
(2) Grass cutting, equipment: $50 per hour per mower.
§ 122-1 CURFEW § 122-1
112:107
Chapter 124
FIREARMS
§ 124-1. Definitions.
The following words shall have the following definitions when used in this
chapter:
FIREARM — Any gun, shotgun, rifle, pistol, revolver, bow and arrow, air gun
or other device from which a bullet, shot, ball, slug, pellet, solid projectile or
other missile or any gas, vapor or other noxious thing is propelled, including
but not limited to BB guns or slingshots.
§ 124-2. Discharge restricted.
§ 124-3. Exceptions.
The prohibitions set forth in § 124-2 shall not apply to the following:
§ 124-4. Signs.
The township shall provide for the posting of appropriate signs on all major
roads which provide access to the township advising the general public that
there are areas within the township where firearms shall not be discharged.
A. No person shall fire or discharge any firearm or carry, transport or
possess a loaded firearm within 450 feet of any dwelling, store, garage,
filling station, airport, industrial or commercial establishment or within
1,000 feet of any public or school playground, house or grounds, any
athletic field or church or similar institution or public park.
B. An owner, or any person with his permission, or lessee of property may
fire or discharge any firearm and may transport a loaded firearm or
possess same within 450 feet of his own dwelling or garage and
anywhere else on his property, but not within 450 feet of another
dwelling, store, garage, filling station, airport, industrial or commercial
establishment or within 1,000 feet of any public or school playground or
park, any athletic field during school hours, school grounds, church or
similar institution.
C. No person shall fire or discharge any firearm upon or across any state,
county or municipal road or highway.
A. Members of the Township Police Department and any law enforcement
officer of any municipal, county, state or federal government while in
the performance of their official duties.
B. Hunters complying with the fish and game laws.
§ 122-1 WESTAMPTON CODE § 124-5
124:108
§ 124-5. Violations and penalties.
Each and every person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment in
a county jail for a period of not more six months, or both, in the discretion
of the Judge. Each day that the offense occurs shall be deemed to be a
separate offense.
Chapter 128
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
False alarms — See Ch. 79.
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch. 95.
Building construction — See Ch. 99.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 103.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 106.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Solid waste — See Ch. 206.
§ 124-5 FIREARMS § 124-5
124:109

ARTICLE I
Enforcement of Uniform Fire Safety Act
[Adopted 8-6-1985 by Ord. No. 12-1985]
§ 128-1. Local enforcement. [Amended 2-22-2005 by Ord. No.
2-2005]
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act20 (P.L. 1983, c. 383),
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the Township
of Westampton. Local enforcement will continue within the Township of
Westampton, and the Township shall cause there to be effectuated all
inspections necessary pursuant to the Uniform Fire Code and, specifically,
the Township hereby mandates inspection of all residential dwellings, either
on sale, resale, rental or rerental, for appropriate smoke detectors pursuant
to law and appropriate carbon monoxide detectors as required by law. It
shall be the responsibility of the buyer of residential property to ensure
the inspection prior to transfer of title. It shall be the responsibility of the
landlord in the event of rental or rerental.
§ 128-2. Agency designation. [Amended 12-5-2016 by Ord. No.
25-2016]
The local enforcing agency shall be the Westampton Township Emergency
Services Bureau of Fire Prevention.
§ 128-3. Duties of enforcing agency. [Amended 12-5-2016 by Ord.
No. 25-2016]
The local enforcing agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures and
premises within the established boundaries of the Township of Westampton,
other than owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings, and shall comply
with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, and the Uniform Fire
Code, including the International Fire Code 2006, New Jersey Edition, and
subsequent updates as published.
§ 128-4. Inspections of life hazard uses.
The local enforcing agency established in § 128-2 shall conduct the periodic
inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code on behalf
of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 128-5. Organization. [Amended 7-14-2015 by Ord. No. 10-2015;
12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 25-2016]
The local enforcing agency established in § 128-2 shall be under the direct
supervision and control of the Westampton Township Fire/EMS Chief, who
shall report to the Township Committee on a monthly basis. The Fire Official
20.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202.
§ 128-1 FIREARMS § 128-5
124:111
and employees of the agency as set forth in § 128-6 shall report to the Fire/
EMS Chief. The Fire Official shall submit a monthly report in writing to the
Fire/EMS Chief to be forwarded to the Township Committee.
§ 128-6. Fire Official; Deputy Fire Official; inspectors and
employees. [Amended 5-27-1997 by Ord. No. 11-1997; 12-5-2016 by
Ord. No. 25-2016]
A. Fire Official.
(1) Appointment. The Fire Official shall be appointed by the Township
Committee.
(2) Term of office. The Fire Official shall serve for a term of three
years.
(3) Specific powers and duties of Fire Official. Pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:71-3.3, the Fire Official shall:
(a) Take all actions necessary to enforce the provisions of the
current New Jersey State Uniform Fire Code at the time of the
violation and to make all efforts to correct violations of the
Code;
(b) Take all actions necessary to determine the origin and cause of
fires within the Township;
(c) Prepare policies and procedures for promulgation by the
Township Committee.
B. Deputy Fire Official.
(1) Appointment. The Township Committee may appoint a Deputy Fire
Official who shall be under the supervision and control of the Fire
Official.
(2) Term of office. The Deputy Fire Official shall serve for a term of
three years.
(3) Powers and Duties of Deputy Fire Official. Pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:71-3.3, the Deputy Fire Official shall:
(a) Perform the duties and responsibilities of the Fire Official in his
or her absence;
(b) Perform such duties assigned by the Fire Official; and
(c) Have the authority to issue notices of violation and orders to
correct violations for the current New Jersey State Uniform
Fire Code at the time of the violation, Westampton Township
Fire Prevention Code, and to assist in any legal proceedings
taken against a violator of the Fire Prevention Code.
§ 128-5 WESTAMPTON CODE § 128-6
124:112
§ 128-7. Board of Appeals.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 1721 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, any person
aggrieved by any order of the local enforcing agency shall have the right to
appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of Burlington County.
§ 128-8. Additional required inspections and fees. [Amended
11-21-1988 by Ord. No. 16-1988; 11-19-1990 by Ord. No. 16-1990;
3-16-1992 by Ord. No. 3-1992; 9-24-1996 by Ord. No. 16-1996;
6-9-1998 by Ord. No. 15-1998; 11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 15-2000;
4-22-2003 by Ord. No. 16-2003; 2-22-2005 by Ord. No. 2-2005;
11-22-2005 by Ord. No. 28-2005; 11-24-2009 by Ord. No. 15-2009;
4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 4-2012; 12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 25-2016]
C. Inspectors and employees; appointment. Such inspectors and other
employees as may be necessary in the local enforcing agency shall be
appointed by the Township Committee upon the recommendation of the
Fire Official.
D. Removal from office. The Fire Official, inspectors and other employees
of the enforcing agency shall be subject to removal by the Township
Committee for inefficiency or misconduct. The Fire Official, each
inspector or employee to be so removed shall be afforded an
opportunity to be heard by the Township Committee or a designated
hearing officer.
A. In addition to the inspection and fees required pursuant to the Uniform
Fire Code and the regulations of the Department of Community Affairs,
the following additional inspections and fees shall be required:
(1) All assembly (A), business (B), factory (F), mercantile (M), storage
(S) and utility (U) occupancies as defined by the Uniform
Construction Code, and which are not considered life hazards by
the Uniform Fire Code, shall be inspected every year. The yearly fee
shall be as follows:
Type
Area
(square feet) Fee
1 0 to 1,500 $72
2 1,501 to 2,499 $102
3 2,500 to 3,499 $138
4 3,500 to 4,999 $180
5 5,000 to 7,499 $252
6 7,500 to 9,999 $312
7 10,000 to 14,999 $420
21.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and 52:27D-208.
§ 128-6 FIREARMS § 128-8
124:113
Type
Area
(square feet) Fee
8 15,000 to 24,999 $480
9 25,000 or more $540
10* N/A $100 each building
*NOTE: Type 10 shall be apartment and/or condominium
buildings.
(2) Smoke detector inspections.
(a) For each residential smoke detector/carbon monoxide
detector/fire extinguisher inspection made as required by P.L.
1991, c. 92, and P.L. 1999, c. 15, and for the issuance of a
certificate evidencing compliance with the requirements of the
aforesaid statutes, a fee shall be charged to the owner of the
premises in the sum of $60.
(b) The application for a smoke detector/carbon monoxide
detector/fire extinguisher inspection must be made at least 14
calendar days prior to the settlement date or the date the
certificate of inspection is required. Appointments made within
13 or less calendar days of the settlement or when the
certificate is required will pay a penalty of $60 in addition to
the original fee of $60, for a total of $120.
(c) The Westampton Bureau of Fire Prevention cannot guarantee
that a smoke detector/carbon monoxide detector/fire
extinguisher inspection will be completed on time if less than
four working days' notice is given.
(d) Certificates of inspection shall be valid for 90 days from time of
inspection. After 90 days a new inspection shall be required.
(e) If the first inspection results in failure or the appointment is
missed, a reinspection fee of $25 shall be charged.
(f) All smoke detectors must be less than 10 years old at time of
reinspection.
B. This section does not apply to any life hazard as defined in the Uniform
Fire Safety Code of New Jersey.
C. Businesses not required to register with the New Jersey Division of Fire
Safety under N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.6 shall register with the Westampton
Township Emergency Services Bureau of Fire Prevention, the fees for
which are set forth in Chapter 128, § 128-8.
§ 128-8 WESTAMPTON CODE § 128-9
124:114
§ 128-9. Permits. [Added 11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 15-2000; amended
12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 25-2016]
All permit requirements and fees shall comply with the requirements of the
Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code. Permit fees shall be as
follows:
§ 128-10. Violations and penalties. [Added 2-22-2005 by Ord. No.
2-2005; amended 11-22-2005 by Ord. No. 28-2005]
A failure by any person as set forth in § 128-1 to obtain a smoke detector/
carbon monoxide detector or fire extinguisher inspection shall result in
process being served upon such person to appear in the Westampton
Township Municipal Court. Upon conviction, any person found guilty of
violation of § 128-1 shall be subject to a fine of $500.
A. Type 1: $100.
(1) Type 1 Bonfire: $50.
(2) Type 1 Open Flame: $50.
B. Type 2: $400.
(1) Type 2 Propane Exchange:
(a) Seven hundred twenty pounds or less: $166.
(b) Seven hundred twenty-one pounds to 2,500 pounds: $350.
C. Type 3: $600.
D. Type 4: $800.
§ 128-9 FIREARMS § 128-10
124:115

ARTICLE II
Key Lock Boxes
[Adopted 6-10-2008 by Ord. No. 6-2008]
§ 128-11. Key lock box systems required.
§ 128-12. Lock box type and contents.
The Fire Chief or Fire Official shall approve the type of key lock box and its
location prior to installation. The key lock box, at a minimum, shall contain
two sets of keys and combination access codes shall be provided to the
following areas:
A. The following premises shall be equipped with a key lock box at or near
the main entrance or such other location required by the Fire Chief or
Fire Official (exceptions: owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings
as defined in the Uniform Construction Code):
(1) Premises protected by an automatic fire alarm system, automatic
fire-suppression system, and/or standpipe system;
(2) Premises equipped with an elevator;
(3) Premises, as determined by the Fire Chief or Fire Official, secured
in a manner that restricts access during an emergency;
(4) Premises that are required to prepare and have available material
safety data sheets and/or hazardous chemical inventory forms
under the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986
(SARA Title III);
(5) Premises that are "life hazard uses" as defined in State of New
Jersey Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70, Subchapter 2; and
B. All newly constructed structures subject to this article shall have the
key lock box installed and operational prior to the issuance of an
occupancy permit. All structures for which certificates of occupancy
have been issued as of the effective date of this article and subject to
this article shall have a key lock box installed and operational on a
voluntary basis.
C. The Fire Chief or Fire Official shall designate the type of key lock box
system (such as Knox-Box®) to be implemented within the Township
and shall have the authority to require all structures to use the
designated system. [Amended 12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 25-2016]
A. Locked points of egress, whether in interior or exterior of such
buildings;
B. Mechanical and boiler rooms;
C. Rooms containing fire-protection equipment, sprinkler controls and fire
alarm components;
§ 128-11 FIREARMS § 128-12
124:117
§ 128-13. Security padlocks and key switches.
Premises protected by fences, gates and related barriers presently secured
by a padlock, electronically operated or automatic gates, or other control
circuits that control access to the premises shall be equipped with a highsecurity
padlock or emergency override control device (key switch) that is
master-keyed at a location approved by the Fire Chief or Fire Official.
§ 128-14. Security caps for Fire Department connections.
§ 128-15. Tamper switches.
The key lock box may be required to have a tamper switch wired to the
building's security alarm system in all buildings that are so equipped.
§ 128-16. Additional items within lock box. [Amended 12-5-2016 by
Ord. No. 25-2016]
In addition to the items listed in § 128-12, the following may be required by
the Fire Chief or Fire Official to be stored within the key lock box:
D. All locked fire-protection devices that require restoring;
E. Elevator control rooms;
F. Any fenced or secured areas; and
G. Any other areas difficult to access as determined by the Fire Chief or
Fire Official.
A. When a building is protected by an automatic sprinkler system or
standpipe system and the Fire Department connection(s) is exposed to
undue vandalism, the Fire Chief or Fire Official may require that a Fire
Department connection security cap(s) be installed. The Fire
Department connection security cap shall be a type approved by the
Fire Chief or Fire Official.
B. All structures subject to this provision shall have, in addition to a key
lock box system, locking Fire Department connection caps installed and
operational prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or within the
time frame set forth regarding time for compliance under this article.
A. Card containing the name(s) of building emergency contact personnel
and their telephone numbers in the event of an emergency;
B. Floor plan of premises;
C. Right-to-know records and material safety data sheets (MSDS) listed in
alphabetical order;
D. Locations of all utility and fire-protection controls (electric, gas, water,
sprinkler/fire-suppression control valves); and
§ 128-12 WESTAMPTON CODE § 128-16
124:118
§ 128-17. Time for compliance.
All existing buildings shall comply with this article as set forth in § 128-11B.
All newly constructed buildings not yet occupied or buildings currently
under construction and all buildings or businesses applying for a certificate
of occupancy shall comply prior to obtaining a certificate of occupancy.
§ 128-18. Rules and regulations.
The Fire Chief or Fire Official shall be authorized to implement rules and
regulations for the use of the lock box system.
§ 128-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity violating any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000. Each day the
offense occurs shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
§ 128-20. New plans submitted to Planning Board; catalog cut
sheets.
The lock box system shall be on all new plans submitted to the Planning
Board in support of an application for a proposed building to the extent
such a building falls into the categories set forth in § 128-11 of this article.
Catalog cut sheets of the system shall be supplied for review by the Fire
Chief or Fire Official.
E. Any other contents as may be required by the Fire Chief or Fire Official.
§ 128-16 FIREARMS § 128-20
124:119

ARTICLE III
Outdoor Fires
[Adopted 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 4-2012]
§ 128-21. Barbecues prohibited.
No person shall operate or use or maintain any open fire or any device
commonly known as a “barbecue” in or on any apartment unit, porch,
balcony, covered patio area or any other private area of an apartment,
condominium or other multifamily dwelling unit.
§ 128-22. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BARBECUE — Propane barbecue grill, charcoal fire grill, electric grill and
hibachi-type unit that uses charcoal.
§ 128-23. Exceptions.
A person shall be permitted to operate or use or maintain any "barbecue"
unit (previously defined) on the ground level at a distance of 10 feet away
from any exterior combustible wall of any apartment, condominium or other
multifamily dwelling unit.
§ 128-24. Open burning within Township boundaries; violations and
penalties. [Added 12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 24-2016]
In the best interest of Public Safety, Health, and Air Pollution there shall
be no open burning within the Township Boundaries unless a permit has
been issued by the Fire Official or the State of New Jersey, Division of
Forestry. For permits issued, the permittee must follow all applicable rules
and regulations (New Jersey Uniform Fire Code and/or N.J.A.C. Title 13).
Penalties shall be assessed as follows if property owners or tenants are
found in violation of this section: first offense, $100 and written warning;
second offense, $250 and court appearance required; third offense, $1,000
and charges filed in Municipal Court.
A. Outdoor fire. For the purpose of this section, an approved outdoor fire
shall be classified as any fire taking place on a residential property
within Westampton Township for the sole purpose of providing warmth
or recreation and is contained within an approved device. Approved
outdoor fires shall not be subject to the above required permit process
unless deemed necessary by the Fire Official. Approved devices shall
include commercially manufactured chimnea, outdoor fireplaces, and
fire pits; or those constructed in a similar and approved manner.
Approved devices shall have a total fuel area not exceeding three feet in
diameter and two feet in height and must remain covered by a metal
mesh safety/spark screen cover.
§ 128-21 FIREARMS § 128-24
124:121
§ 128-25. Liability. [Added 12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 24-2016]
A person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor fire shall be responsible for
all fire suppression costs and any other liability including but not limited to
bodily injury, property damage and wrongful death resulting from damage
caused by the fire.
B. Fuel for outdoor fires shall be limited to seasoned fire wood, natural gas
or propane and shall not be ignited using flammable/combustible
liquids.
C. Outdoor fires shall not be located within 20 feet of any property line and
15 feet from a combustible structure. Combustible structures shall
include: dwellings, garages, sheds, decks, and fences.
D. Outdoor fires shall be prohibited at any "Use Group R-2" zones as
defined by N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.5 to include all multiple-family dwellings
having more than two dwelling units as well as all dormitories, rooming
houses, group rentals where the occupants are living independently of
each other and similar buildings arranged for shelter and sleeping
accommodations in which the occupants are primarily not transient in
nature. This use group shall also include attached one- and two-family
dwelling units which do not meet the definition for Use Group R-3.
E. Any outdoor fire not complying with Subsection A through D above is
prohibited and subject to the above listed penalties.
§ 128-24 WESTAMPTON CODE § 128-25
124:122
ARTICLE IV
General Provisions
[Adopted 12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 24-2016]
§ 128-26. Fire lanes.
Fire lanes (aka fire apparatus access roads) shall be designated as follows
for the efficient and effective use of fire apparatus, for firefighting, police
vehicles, and ambulances. Fire lanes shall have a minimum width of 20 feet
except for approved security gates with an unobstructed vertical clearance
of not less than 13 feet six inches
A. Where needed. The Fire Official of the Local Enforcing Agency may
establish fire areas on property devoted to public and private use, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-3, 503.1.1; including, but not by way of
limitation, shopping centers, strip malls, houses of worship, swimming
pools, offices, warehouses, factories, restaurants, nightclubs, etc. and
similar uses within the Township of Westampton as deemed necessary
to protect the public health and safety.
(1) When the markings details cannot be strictly complied with, the
number, location, width, length, and markings shall be at the
discretion of the Fire Official.
(2) Consideration is to be given to the size, type, and location of the
building or buildings, the number of persons using and occupying
the premises, existing means of egress and ingress, the total area
of the property, including the size of the parking lot or lots, and all
other relevant factors.
(3) Definitions. For the purposes of fire lane enforcement, the
following terms are defined as follows:
FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROAD — A road that provides fire
apparatus access from a fire station to a facility, building or portion
thereof. This is a general term inclusive of all other terms such as
fire lane, public street, private street, parking lot lane and access
roadway.
FIRE AREA — The same as "fire lane."
FIRE LANE — A road or other passageway developed to allow the
passage of fire apparatus. A fire lane is not necessarily intended for
vehicular traffic other than fire apparatus.
NO ON-STREET PARKING — A vehicle may not be parked along the
street unless loading or unloading passengers or materials, with a
limit of three minutes.
NO PARKING ANYTIME — A vehicle may not be parked within
the designated area unless loading or unloading passengers or
materials, with a time limit of two minutes.
§ 128-26 FIREARMS § 128-26
124:123
NO STOPPING OR STANDING — No vehicle may be stopped within
the designated zone, whether or not attended or unattended, with
or without the motor running or brakes set.
PARKING IN DESIGNATED STALLS ONLY — A vehicle may only be
parked within an area so designated for parking.
B. Concurrent jurisdiction. The Township of Westampton Police
Department shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the Westampton
Township Emergency Services Bureau of Fire Prevention to enforce the
provisions of this article.
C. Existing fire lanes. Any and all fire lanes created prior to this chapter
are hereby continued in effect, and when repairs or modifications are
made to such fire lanes, they shall be brought into the conformity with
this chapter, as much as shall be practical in the Fire Official's
judgment. The standard for exercise of said judgment shall conform to
those contained in Subsection A above.
D. Markings. The owner shall, within 30 days of being given a notice to do
so by the Fire Official, mark the lane(s) as follows:
(1) Signs, with minimum dimensions of 12 inches by 18 inches,
constructed of metal and with raised red letters a minimum of two
inches in size on a white background, shall be posted at a level of at
least seven feet above grade, indicating NO PARKING ANYTIME,
PARKING IN DESIGNATED STALLS ONLY, or NO STOPPING OR
STANDING, at the Fire Official's discretion after giving due
consideration to the needs of the fire service and the public.
Immediately under these signs shall be another sign, with a
minimum dimension of 12 inches by six inches saying FIRE LANE
VEHICLE TOWED AT OWNER'S EXPENSE or FIRE LANE NO ONSTREET
PARKING VEHICLE TOWED AT OWNER'S EXPENSE.
Spacing of signs shall be even, with a minimum of one sign for
every 50 feet of fire lane or part thereof, or as ordered by the Fire
Official. All signs and marking must be unobstructed and visible for
a distance of at least 100 feet when viewed from a position
approximately five feet above ground while in the fire lane.
(2) The area of a fire lane on improved areas shall be delineated along
its entire length with yellow lines 18 inches in width. Between the
yellow lines shall be marked NO PARKING FIRE LANE in yellow
letters 18 inches in height. The number of times this wording is to
be repeated shall be at the discretion of the appropriate Fire
Official, with the recommended spacing to be at one-hundred-foot
intervals and spaced so as to be between and alternate with the
metal signs required above. If the designated fire lane abuts a curb,
the curbing shall be yellow in color where it abuts the fire lane.
(3) Fire lanes for vehicle access shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width
except for approved security gates with an unobstructed vertical
clearance of not less than 13 feet six inches.
§ 128-26 WESTAMPTON CODE § 128-26
124:124
E. Notification. Once a fire lane has been designated by the Fire Official,
approved as provided above and properly marked by the owner of the
premises, the appropriate Fire Official shall notify the Police
Department, Construction Code Department and Municipal Court
Administrator, in writing, of the existence and location of the
designated fire lane(s).
F. Unpaved areas. Unpaved fire lanes installed on public or private
property shall comply with the "Fire Lane Typical Details" installation
methods and be approved by the Fire Official. Signs and markings shall
be provided as required by the Fire Official and this chapter.
G. Restricted areas. Gates, chains or other approved methods shall be
utilized to prevent unauthorized access to installation, provided that
such restrictions will not impede access by firefighting apparatus or
other emergency vehicles. The Fire Official shall determine whether
any changes or deviations from the appropriate methods may be
utilized.
H. Installation and maintenance. Fire lanes shall be installed and
maintained by the owner of the premises or a designee in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter. Fire lanes in existence prior to the
enactment of this section shall be required to conform to the provisions
herein at the discretion of the Fire Official. Fire lanes must be
accessible for fire apparatus at all times.
I. Parking, standing and obstruction prohibited.
(1) Designated fire lanes shall be maintained free of snow and
obstructions, including vehicles, at all times.
(2) The appropriate Fire Official, designee, or a police officer of the
Township of Westampton shall have the authority to remove or have
removed such obstructions or vehicles as may violate any section of
this chapter, at the expense of the owner of the vehicle. The
presumption of ownership may be overcome by proof furnished to
the satisfaction of the Municipal Court or Superior Court, Law
Division, that some other person was the actual offender.
(3) It shall be a separate violation of this chapter for any driver or
operator of any motor vehicle to fail to present a driver's license
and/or vehicle registration upon demand of any person authorized
to enforce this chapter when requested as part of the enforcement
procedure.
J. Notice of violation. The Fire Officials may complete a municipal
summons or a notice of violations, and said summons or notice of
violations shall be issued for all offenders by personally serving same
upon any offender, or if the offender is not attendant to the vehicle shall
mail the notice of violations by certified mail, return receipt requested
to the person's last known address.
§ 128-26 FIREARMS § 128-26
124:125
§ 128-27. Fire Department connections.
All newly constructed buildings equipped with an automatic fire
suppression system or standpipe shall conform to the following
requirements for the Fire Department connection (F.D.C.) in addition to
those specified in the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code:
K. Enforcement. This chapter shall supersede any and all provisions of any
other ordinance promulgated for the enforcement of parking in fire
lanes. Enforcement shall only be done by personnel from either the
Westampton Township Emergency Services Bureau of Fire Prevention
or the appropriate local enforcement agencies. Personnel enforcing
these provisions shall be either uniformed or carry appropriate
identification.
L. Violations and penalties.
(1) It shall be the right of any person receiving such a summons to
plead guilty or not guilty to the charge of violating this chapter.
Those persons pleading not guilty to the charge of violating this
chapter shall be given the opportunity to present their defense
before the Municipal Court of Westampton Township or the
Burlington County Construction Board of Appeals.
(2) All persons pleading guilty in Municipal Court or convicted of
violating this chapter shall be fined a maximum of $50 per violation
for passenger vehicles and $100 per violation for commercial
vehicles and equipment, plus court costs. All fines and court costs
shall be payable to the Municipal Court. All fines assessed as a
result of summonses issued shall be paid thereafter to the
Westampton Township Emergency Services Bureau of Fire
Prevention by the Court Clerk. All court costs shall be paid
thereafter to the Court.
A. Thirty-degree elbow installed in the downward position.
B. Five-inch-diameter connection utilizing Storz-type connections.
C. A blue light shall be illuminated 24 hours per day over any Fire
Department connection. In such suppression systems that Siamese
connections supply zoned areas of suppression, the blue light shall flash
intermittently over the Fire Department connection of the activated
zone. The rate of flash shall not be less than 60 flashes per minute.
D. A weather-resistant sign shall be affixed to, adjacent to, or above the
fire department connection. Specifications for the sign are as follows:
(1) Sign to be red in color with contrasting lettering.
(2) Minimum four-inch letters indicating F.D.C.
(3) Minimum two-inch letters indicating sprinkler, standpipe, or
sprinkler/standpipe.
§ 128-26 WESTAMPTON CODE § 128-27
124:126
§ 128-28. Fire and smoke damper inspections.
HVAC systems installed in any building or structure subject to the
provisions of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code shall be inspected
to ensure that fire and smoke dampers remain functional. The following are
guidelines for periodic inspections.
(4) Partial sprinkler system: two-inch letters indicating area protected.
E. Interior standpipe connections within structures, in some cases, will
require additional plain language on signs to identify location,
particular system and supply location.
A. Periodic inspection and testing standards recommended by the
National Fire Protection Association:
(1) Each damper shall be tested and inspected one year after
installation. The test and inspection frequency shall then be every
four years.
(2) Care shall be exercised that all tests are completed in a safe
manner wearing the appropriate personal protective equipment.
(3) Full unobstructed access to the damper shall be verified and
corrected as required.
(4) Where a fusible link is installed on a combination fire/smoke
damper, the fusible link shall be removed for testing the damper for
full closure simulating a fire condition per the requirements and
frequencies of 19.5.4 of NFPA 80, Standard for Fire Doors and
Other Opening Protectives.
(5) The test shall be conducted with normal HVAC airflow.
(6) The operation of the damper shall verify that there is no damper
interference due to rust or bent, misaligned, or damaged frame or
blades, or defective hinges or other moving parts.
(7) The damper frame shall not be penetrated by any foreign objects
that would affect proper fire damper operations.
(8) The damper shall be verified to not be blocked from closure in any
way.
(9) The fusible link shall be reinstalled after testing is complete. If the
link is damaged or painted, it shall be replaced with a link of the
same size, temperature rating, and load rating.
(10) All inspections and testing shall be documented indicating the
location of the damper, date of inspection, name of inspector, and
deficiencies discovered. The documentation shall have a space to
indicate when and how the deficiencies were corrected.
§ 128-27 FIREARMS § 128-28
124:127
§ 128-29. Fire Department obstruction.
(11) All documentation shall be maintained by the property owner and
available for review by the authority having jurisdiction.
B. Maintenance.
(1) Any reports of abrupt changes in airflow or noise from the duct
system shall be investigated to verify that they are not related to
damper operation.
(2) All exposed moving parts of the damper shall be dry lubricated as
required by the manufacturer.
(3) If the damper is not operable, repairs shall begin as soon as
possible.
(4) Following any repairs, the damper shall be initiated at a time
interval recommended by the actuator manufacturer.
(5) All maintenance shall be documented and records shall be retained
in accordance with § 128-28A(10) and (11).
C. Compliance with the provisions of this article shall be monitored by the
local enforcing agency and the Township's Fire Official.
D. All inspections shall be conducted by technicians and contractors who
have been certified by the International Certification Board (ICB) and
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) to ensure the quality of
the inspection process.
E. All results of the inspections are to be given to the Township Fire
Official within 30 days of the completion of the inspection. The Fire
Official will keep inspection reports until the next inspection is
completed four years later. If the fire and smoke damper systems are
found to be faulty, repairs must be completed and approved by an ICB
and ANSI certified technician and contractor within 60 days from the
date the system was found to be faulty.
A. Fire apparatus obstruction. It shall be unlawful to attempt, conspire,
hamper, obstruct, restrict, block or fail to yield to, the path of travel of
any fire emergency vehicle, in any way, operating during a fire or
emergency.
B. Fire hose. A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled over any
unprotected fire hose of a Fire Department when laid down on any
street, or any other vehicular roadway, without the consent of the fire
officer in command.
C. A person or persons shall not erect, construct, place or maintain any
speed bumps, speed humps, fences, gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood or
metal horses, vehicles, or any other type of obstruction in or on any
street within the boundaries of the municipality without prior approval
§ 128-28 WESTAMPTON CODE § 128-29
124:128
§ 128-30. Building evacuation.
It shall be a violation of this section for any person, manager, firm,
corporation, owner, tenant, or person responsible for a given structure
or premises, to fail to immediately notify the Westampton Township
Emergency Services and immediately evacuate the entire structure when,
and if, the following conditions are present: a fire alarm is activated, there
is smoke in the structure, an explosion has occurred, there is a fire in
the structure, any fire protection system is activated, any hazardous or
flammable material is spilled or leaked, upon the order of the Fire/EMS
Chief, Fire Official, or Incident Commander.
§ 128-31. Fire watch.
from the Fire Official. The word "street" as used in this section shall
mean roadway, accessible to the public for vehicular traffic, including
but not limited to private streets or access lanes, as well as all public
streets and highways in the boundaries of the municipality. Approval
from the Fire Official shall be a variance from this ordinance and shall
be documented as such.
D. Street closings. Prior to the closing of any street, notification shall be
made to the Westampton Township Emergency Services and the
Westampton Township Police Department. Such notice shall include
why the street is to be closed, when the street is to be closed, and how
long such closing shall last. Notification shall also be made upon the
reopening of the street.
E. Fire appliances. A person shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with or
otherwise disturb any fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be
installed or maintained under the provisions of the Fire Prevention
Code except for the purpose of extinguishing fires, training or testing
purposes, recharging, or making necessary repairs, or when permitted
by the Fire Official. Whenever a fire appliance is removed as herein
permitted, it shall be replaced or reinstalled as soon as the purpose for
which it was removed has been accomplished. Defective and
nonapproved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced or repaired
as directed by the Fire Official.
F. Compliance order. A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to comply
with the order or direction of a firefighter, or interfere with the
compliance attempts of another individual, during a fire or emergency.
G. Penalty. Any person, firm, or corporation found guilty in the Municipal
Court of the Township of Westampton of a violation of the terms of this
section shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both, in the
discretion of the Municipal Court Judge. Any fines collected shall be
forwarded to the Westampton Township Emergency Services Bureau of
Fire Prevention.
§ 128-29 FIREARMS § 128-31
124:129
A. A "fire watch" is defined as a: temporary measure to ensure continuous
and systematic surveillance of and response to the Township or a
portion thereof, or a building, or portion thereof, by one or more
trained, competent, responsible, able-bodied and qualified individuals
whose only duties shall be to perform constant patrols of the protected
premises for the purpose of identifying and controlling fire and other
life/property hazards, detecting early signs of unwanted fire, raising an
alarm of fire, notifying the Fire Department, and engaging in
firefighting or other emergency response. The Fire Official shall
determine whether a fire watch is deemed necessary. A fire watch may
be posted in any portion of the Township and also in public and
privately owned buildings and/or properties.
B. In no case shall a required and/or installed fire alarm or fire sprinkler
system be rendered inoperable in an attempt to eliminate preventable
alarms without the written consent of the fire official. In the event of a
fire protection system found not operating, provisions for a constantly
attended fire watch shall be posted in the building or premise on which
the fire protection system is located. No fire alarm or fire sprinkler
system shall remain out of service for any period of time without
notification of the Fire Official. Any alarm found to be out of service
without the written consent of the Fire Official shall be subject to
penalties described in the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
C. A fire watch may include firefighting, rescue, recovery and other
emergency responses; the maintaining of posted fire lanes, means of
egress, and posted occupancy loads; enforcement of no smoking in
posted areas; area and building surveillance; checking for proper
permits; inspecting for proper safety precautions of cooking equipment;
and such other functions as required by the Fire Official or his assigned
designee.
D. A fire watch shall be paid for by a building owner, tenant, lessee, or
organization under the following circumstances:
(1) Required fire protection systems are out of service;
(2) A fire watch is directed by the Westampton Township Emergency
Services Bureau of Fire Prevention or is requested by the building
owner, tenant, or lessee; public and private events where 100
people or more are in attendance; events where with the approval
of the Fire Official or his assigned designee the posted occupancy
load is exceeded; all other situations deemed necessary by the Fire
Official or his assigned designee.
(3) All fire watch services ordered for the benefit/protection of private
property shall be paid at the rate of $45 per hour per person, and
there shall be a minimum payment of four hours per worker plus an
administration fee of 15% applied for the individual and the vehicle
used. Additionally, there will be a fee of $250 per hour for the use of
each Township fire apparatus. All payments shall be paid to the
§ 128-31 WESTAMPTON CODE § 128-31
124:130
§ 128-32. Fire alarms and reporting.
§ 128-33. File information requests and certificates of code
compliance.
Westampton Township Emergency Services Bureau of Fire
Prevention within 10 days after the service is provided. No
volunteer firefighter shall be paid for any fire watch under this
article.
E. Fire watches shall be performed by active employees of the
Westampton Township Emergency Services Bureau of Fire Prevention.
Any qualified individuals used for the purposes of a fire watch shall
report directly to the Fire Official or his/her assigned designee.
F. Any building otherwise subject to this ordinance can opt out of a fire
watch by submitting proof to the Fire Department that the building is
covered by a private security watch or other comparable substitute for
a fire watch. A "fire watch" log as provided by the Westampton
Township Emergency Services Bureau of Fire Prevention in this
instance must be maintained and forwarded to the Fire Official
immediately upon restoration of the affected systems in order to allow
for the completion of said fire watch.
G. Failure for property owner or designated property representative to
establish, maintain, or properly document a fire watch when requested
by the Westampton Township Emergency Services Bureau of Fire
Prevention will result in an assessed penalty not to exceed $500 per day
for every day the condition exists.
A. The Fire Official shall investigate, or cause to be investigated, the
activation of any fire alarms, fire detector or fire protection system
occurring within the jurisdiction to determine the cause for such
activation and to determine if the device and/or equipment have been
properly restored to full service.
B. Failure to report. It shall be a violation of this code for any person or
persons, having knowledge of same, to fail to report to the Westampton
Township Emergency Services and/or its Bureau of Fire Prevention the
activation of any fire protection system or device or to fail to report the
occurrence of any fire, any attempted arson, or the spill or leakage of
any flammable or combustible liquid or gas or of any hazardous
material immediately upon gaining such knowledge.
A. A fee of $25 shall be required for all requests for fire investigation
reports. All other file information requests shall be charged at the
photocopy rate of $0.75 per page. A fee of $10 shall be required for all
requests for fire investigation photos.
B. The cost for the issuance of a certificate of Fire Code status shall be
$45.
§ 128-31 FIREARMS § 128-34
124:131
§ 128-34. Public water supply.
§ 128-35. Emergency contacts.
All business and multiple-family buildings and complexes must post a list
of the emergency contacts and service companies for use by emergency
personnel in a conspicuous location as determined by the Fire Official.
§ 128-36. Snow removal.
A. The location and distribution of fire hydrants to be placed upon public
property as well as installation of water mains to assure adequate fire
flow based on the hazard to be protected shall be determined by the
project developer utilizing accepted engineering and industry
standards. During the planning and zoning approval process, the Fire
Official shall be provided with site plans indicating hydrant location,
size and location of fire service water mains. The Fire Official and Fire/
EMS Chief shall review and approve all submitted plans prior to the
installation of any fire hydrant or fire service water distribution system.
A fire hydrant shall not be placed into or removed from service until
approved by the Fire Official and Fire/EMS Chief. Fire Hydrants must
be located within 50 feet of all Fire Department connections.
B. Fire hydrant use approval. A person or private company shall not use or
operate any fire hydrant unless a permit and approval for such is
obtained from the Fire Marshal and the water company having
jurisdiction.
C. Private yard systems locations and relocation. All new and existing
shopping centers, apartment complexes, oil storage plants, lumber
yards, educational or institutional complexes and similar occupancies
and uses involving high fire or life hazards, and which are located more
than 100 feet from a public street or which require quantities of water
beyond the capabilities of the public water distribution, shall be
provided with properly placed fire hydrants. Such fire hydrants shall be
capable of supplying fire flows as required by the Insurance Service
Organization or the American Water Works standards and shall be
connected to a water system in accordance with accepted engineering
practices. The Fire Official and the Fire/EMS Chief shall review and
approve the number and location of all fire hydrants. Private fire
hydrants shall not be placed into or removed from service until
approved.
D. Temporary water. At any temporary construction site or new
construction site, all parties shall provide a water source for firefighting
purposes subject to the approval by the Fire Official.
A. It is the responsibility of the owner or occupant to have snow removed
from their property in a manner which will not delay the response of
emergency personnel. Removal of snow shall not obstruct the following:
§ 128-34 WESTAMPTON CODE § 128-36
124:132
§ 128-37. Stairway information signs.
A sign shall be provided at each floor landing in all interior exit stairways
more than three stories above grade, designating the floor level, the floor
level above (at) the floor of discharge, the identification of the stairway and
the availability of roof access from the stairway. Floor level characters shall
be at least six inches in height and characters of other information shall be
a least 1 1/2 inches in height. Signage shall be located approximately five
feet above the floor landing in a position which is readily visible when the
doors are in the open and closed positions.
§ 128-38. Commercial property identification of rear doors.
The rear exterior doors on multiple tenant commercial properties shall be
identified with a minimum of four-inch letters of contrasting color stating
the business name and the unit number. The signage shall be provided and
maintained up-to-date by the landlord at his/her expense. Names shall be
updated as soon as occupancy changes.
§ 128-39. Elevator keys.
§ 128-40. R-1 Use Group floor-level exit signs.
(1) Access to the parking lot, to the perimeter of any building, and any
fire lanes or "No Parking" designated areas.
(2) All fire hydrants.
(3) All means of egress and exit doors.
(4) All fire protection systems and fire department water supply
connections.
A. All elevator keys utilized for emergency operations of elevators within
buildings and structures in the Township of Westampton will have
standardized operation keys as follows: Phase I and II - Yale 3502.
B. Building owners/occupants will have one year from the date of
inspection to comply with this requirement.
A. When exit signs are required, additional approved low-level exit signs
which are internally illuminated, photo luminescent or self-luminous,
shall be provided in all interior exit corridors serving guest rooms of
hotels in Group R-1. The bottom of the sign shall not be less than six
inches or more than eight inches above the floor level. For exit doors,
the sign shall be on the door or adjacent to the door with the closest
edge of the sign within four inches of the latch side of the doorframe.
B. Business Use Group floor-level exit signs. When exit signs are required,
additional approved reflective exit signs shall be provided in business
use group buildings, three or more stories, the bottom of the sign shall
be not less than six inches or more than eight inches above the floor
§ 128-36 FIREARMS § 128-40
124:133
§ 128-41. Prohibited acts; violations and penalties.
§ 128-42. Large gatherings.
level. For exit doors to stairwells, the sign shall be on the door or
adjacent to the door with the closest edge of the sign within four inches
of the latch side of the doorframe.
C. Implementation: all residential. All electrical-operated low-level exit
signs required by § 128-40 must be installed within three years of the
adoption of the section.
D. All reflective low-level exit signs required by § 128-40B must be
installed within one year of adoption of the section.
A. Prohibited acts. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person,
firm or corporation to:
(1) Obstruct, hinder, delay or interfere by force or otherwise with the
Westampton Township Emergency Services Bureau of Fire
Prevention in the exercise of any power or the discharge of any
function or duty under the provisions of the chapter.
(2) Prepare, utter or render any false statement pertaining to reports,
documents, plans or specifications permitted or required under the
provisions of this chapter.
(3) Render ineffective or inoperative, or fail to properly maintain, any
protective equipment or system installed, or intended to be
installed, in a building or structure.
(4) Refuse or fail to comply with a lawful ruling, action, order or notice
of the Westampton Township Emergency Services Bureau of Fire
Prevention.
(5) Violate or cause to be violated any of the provisions of this chapter.
(6) Refuse to provide identification and/or vehicle registration
information.
B. Summons. The Fire Official and/or designee shall be empowered to
issue a Municipal Court summons for violations of this chapter.
C. Violations and penalties. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty in
the Municipal Court for a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for a period of not exceeding 90 days, or both. Each and
every day a violation continues shall be a separate offense. Such
penalty shall not relieve the violator of the duty to take corrective
actions.
A. Fire exit announcement. At indoor places of assembly with occupant
loads of 50 and over, such as theatres, auditoriums, multipurpose
§ 128-40 WESTAMPTON CODE § 128-42
124:134
§ 128-43. Board-up services rotation.
A "board-up" service is defined as one which provides on-call means to
secure properties within Westampton Township against unauthorized
access via boarding up openings and/or perimeter fencing in the event of
unsafe structural conditions or fire. Any licensed, permitted, and insured
company providing "board-up" services that desires to provide said
services, on a rotational basis, within the Township of Westampton shall
submit an annual application with the Clerk of Westampton Township by
November 30 of each year for inclusion on the next year's list of "board-up"
service providers.
rooms, or similar occupancies used for noncontinuance programs, an
audible announcement by the venue host, or by recorded
announcement, shall be made not more than 10 minutes prior to the
start of each program, to notify the occupants of the location of exits to
be used in the event of a fire or emergency.
B. Notice of large gatherings. It shall be required for any responsible party
involved in any gatherings at which over 100 attendees are anticipated
within the Township of Westampton, whether inside a structure or
outside, to make advanced notification to the Westampton Township
Emergency Services and the Westampton Township Police Department.
The Fire/EMS Chief shall determine whether or not an emergency
ambulance will be required to provide "standby" services for the
duration of the event with fees for such a service not to exceed $100 per
hour and payable by the responsible party.
§ 128-42 FIREARMS § 128-43
124:135
Chapter 131
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 99.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 149.
Site plan review — See Ch. 196.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 215.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 128-43 WESTAMPTON CODE § 128-43
124:136
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization; Findings of Fact; Purpose and Objectives
§ 131-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.,
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Township Committee of the Township of
Westampton of Burlington County, New Jersey does ordain as follows:
§ 131-2. Findings of fact.
§ 131-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Township of Westampton are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
§ 131-1 FIREARMS § 131-3
124:137
§ 131-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 131-3 WESTAMPTON CODE § 131-4
124:138
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 131-5. Word usage.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
§ 131-6. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are
between one and three feet. Base flood elevations (BFEs) derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone.
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average
depths are between one and three feet.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH Zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one-percentannual
or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO, A1-A30,
AE, A99, or AH.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS), including the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM). For zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30, the elevation represents
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
§ 131-5 FIREARMS § 131-6
124:139
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map
on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the elevated
floor elevated above the base flood elevation plus freeboard by means of
piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the
water, and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity
of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an
area of special flood hazard, "elevated building" also includes a building
elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 131-6 WESTAMPTON CODE § 131-6
124:140
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without accumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
0.2 foot.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed or existing walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 131-6 FIREARMS § 131-6
124:141
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348),22 includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pilings, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
22.Editor's Note: See 16 U.S.C. § 3501 et seq.
§ 131-6 WESTAMPTON CODE § 131-6
124:142
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally aboveground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its condition before damage
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 131-6 FIREARMS § 131-6
124:143

ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 131-7. Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Westampton, Burlington County, New Jersey.
§ 131-8. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 131-9. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, relocated to, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or
both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses
involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township
of Westampton from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.
§ 131-10. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinances, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of Westampton,
Community No. 340118, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report, "Flood Insurance Study,
Burlington County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)," dated December
21, 2017.
(2) "Flood Insurance Rate Map for Burlington County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions)," as shown on Index and Panel Nos. 34005C0136F,
34005C0137F, 34005C0138F, 34005C0139F, 34005C0141F,
34005C0142F, 34005C0143F, 34005C0144F, 34005C0251F,
34005C0252F, 34005C0256F, whose effective date is December 21,
2017.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at 710
Rancocas Road, Westampton, New Jersey.
§ 131-7 FIREARMS § 131-11
124:145
§ 131-11. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 131-12. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free
from flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of
Westampton, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 131-11 WESTAMPTON CODE § 131-12
124:146
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 131-13. Development permit required.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of
special flood hazard established in § 131-8. Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Construction Official and
may include, but not be limited to, plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale
showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in
question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage
facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following
information is required:
§ 131-14. Designation of local administrator.
The Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 131-15. Duties and responsibilities of administrator.
Duties of the Construction Official shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any structure has been
floodproofed.
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 131-18B; and
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review.
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions of § 131-19A are met.
B. Use of other base flood and Floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 131-8,
§ 131-13 FIREARMS § 131-15
124:147
Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the Construction
Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer § 131-18A, Specific standards,
Residential construction, and § 131-18B, Specific standards,
Nonresidential construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 131-13C.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control and the Land
Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Substantial damage review.
(1) After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to
structures due to flood and nonflood causes.
(2) Record and maintain the flood and nonflood damage of substantial
damage structures and provide a letter of substantial damage
determination to the owner and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control.
(3) Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of
§ 131-18A, Specific standards, Residential construction, § 131-18B,
Specific standards, Nonresidential construction and § 131-18C,
Specific standards, Manufactured homes.
F. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations, where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
§ 131-15 WESTAMPTON CODE § 131-15
124:148
§ 131-16. Variance procedure.
flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between
a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting
the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
appeal the interpretation as provided in § 131-16.
A. Appeal board.
(1) The Land Development Board as established by Westampton
Township Committee shall hear and decide appeals and requests
for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Land Development Board shall hear and decide appeals when
it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Construction Official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Land Development Board, or
any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court, as
provided in New Jersey Statutes.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Land Development Board
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
§ 131-15 FIREARMS § 131-16
124:149
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of § 131-16A(4) and the purposes
of this chapter, the Land Development Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) The Construction Official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
in § 131-16A(4)(a) through (k) have been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
§ 131-16 WESTAMPTON CODE § 131-16
124:150
or victimization of the public as identified in § 131-16A(4), or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 131-16 FIREARMS § 131-16
124:151

ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 131-17. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, are required:
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) For all new construction and substantial improvements the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
§ 131-17 FIREARMS § 131-17
124:153
§ 131-18. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 131-8, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard, or in § 131-15B, Use of other base flood data, the following
standards are required:
(1) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements having fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings in at least two exterior walls of
each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding, shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(2) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other covering
or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE Zone shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, together with the attendant utilities (including
all electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other
§ 131-17 WESTAMPTON CODE § 131-18
124:154
service equipment) and sanitary facilities, elevated at or above
the base flood elevation plus one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI
24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is more restrictive;
(2) Require within any AO or AH zone on the municipality's DFIRM
that all new construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, elevated above the depth number specified in feet plus
one foot above the highest adjacent grade (at least three feet if no
depth number is specified) and require adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures.
B. Nonresidential construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure located in an A or AE Zone
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, together with the
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities as well as all electrical,
heating, ventilating, airconditioning and other service equipment:
(1) Either:
(a) Elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus one foot or
as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is more
restrictive; and
(b) Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's
DFIRM to elevate above the depth number specified in feet
plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade (at least three
feet if no depth number is specified) and require adequate
drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures;
(2) Or:
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level plus one foot
or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 6-1, whichever is
more restrictive, the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 131-15C(2)(b).
C. Manufactured homes.
§ 131-18 FIREARMS § 131-18
124:155
§ 131-19. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 131-8 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles,
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 131-17A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall:
(a) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(b) Be constructed to minimize flood damage;
(c) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage;
(d) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the
lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation plus one foot
or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is
more restrictive; and
(e) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade
and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist floatation, collapse, and lateral
movement.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If Subsection A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Article V, Provisions for flood hazard
reduction.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
accumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 a foot at any
point.
§ 131-18 WESTAMPTON CODE § 131-19
124:156
ARTICLE VI
Severability; Repealer; When Effective
§ 131-20. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the Ordinance, which shall remain
in full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter
are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 131-21. Repealer.
All ordinances of the Township of Westampton which are inconsistent with
the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
§ 131-22. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon final passage, approval, and publication,
as required by law.
§ 131-20 FIREARMS § 131-22
124:157
Chapter 134
FOOD-HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 43.
§ 131-22 WESTAMPTON CODE § 131-22
124:158
ARTICLE I
Food Manager Training
§ 134-1. Administrative authority.
The Burlington County Health Department shall be the administrative
authority to exercise the powers prescribed by this article.
§ 134-2. Adoption of standards.
Pursuant to the authority contained in N.J.S.A. 26:3-69 through 26:3-69.6,
the Board of Health of Westampton Township, as described in Chapter 43,
does hereby adopt the new rules and standards governing food manager
training as an ordinance operative within the Township regulating training
for managers of potentially hazardous food-handling establishments.
§ 134-3. Title.
The provisions adopted by this article are described and commonly known
as "Food Manager Training."
§ 134-4. Intent and purpose.
The provisions hereinafter contained and enacted are in pursuance of and
for the purpose of:
§ 134-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FOOD — Any food, food product, drink or drink product, wholly or partially
prepared, meant for human consumption.
FOOD MANAGER — Any person who owns or is employed by a wholesale
or retail food establishment who directs, oversees and supervises the
procedures used by the establishment to prepare and store food that is
served and/or purchased by the general public.
POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOODS — Foods which could cause serious
health problems or illness, if not stored, processed and prepared properly.
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — A business, store, restaurant, or any
establishment that is or partially is involved in the preparation of food that
is sold directly to the general public. This includes leased and subleased
establishments, food vendors and kiosks that prepare food, as well as
wholesale food businesses where the products are purchased and put
A. Protecting and promoting the public health and general welfare of
persons in the Township of Westampton; and
B. Preventing food-borne illness in food establishments due to improper
food handling, sanitation and safety.
§ 134-1 FIREARMS § 134-5
124:159
directly for sale to the public. This does not include private or public
schools, associations, nonprofit organizations, the Township Recreation
Department or civic groups that prepare and/or sell food on an occasional
basis for fundraising purposes.[Amended 9-17-2019 by Ord. No. 7-2019]
§ 134-6. Requirements of retail food establishments.
§ 134-7. Food manager training.
§ 134-8. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
A. Every retail food establishment shall be required to have at least one
food manager, with food sanitation and safety training, to supervise
food preparation on the premises. Food establishments that do not have
any on-site preparation of potentially hazardous foods are exempt from
this requirement.
B. Upon request, the owner/manager of a retail food establishment shall
provide to the Burlington County Health Department and/or local Board
of Health satisfactory proof that, at a minimum, the manager of the
establishment shall have taken and passed an approved course in food
sanitation and safety.
A. The training course must be a minimum of eight hours and must be
approved by the Burlington County Health Department. The following
are also acceptable:
(1) A course in food safety and sanitation approved by the New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services;
(2) Or a current valid food manager's certification issued by the
Educational Testing Service.
B. Food managers shall satisfactorily complete a refresher course
approved by the Burlington County Department of Health in food safety
and sanitation every three years.
C. The food manager certification shall be prominently posted on the
premises.
A. Minimum penalty. There shall be a minimum penalty of a fine fixed at an
amount not less than $100.
B. Maximum penalty. For violations of any provisions of this article, the
maximum penalty, upon conviction, shall be a fine not exceeding
$1,000.
C. Separate violations. Each and every day in which a violation of any
provision of this article exists shall constitute a separate violation.
D. It shall be the responsibility of the Burlington County Health
Department (as the authorized agent of the local Board of Health) to
enforce this article.
§ 134-5 WESTAMPTON CODE § 134-8
124:160
E. If a facility does not meet the requirements of this article, the
Burlington County Health Department, with the consent of the local
Board of Health, can grant a temporary waiver of six months, provided
immediate action is taken to ensure compliance with this article.
§ 134-8 FIREARMS § 134-8
124:161
Chapter 135
(RESERVED)
Chapter 140
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 99.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 149.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Site plan review — See Ch. 196.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 215.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 140-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard the heritage of the Township of
Westampton, preserving the elements of the natural and built environment
of the township, which reflects its cultural, social, economic and
architectural history. The purpose is also to help stabilize and improve
property values, foster civic pride, to protect and enhance the township's
historic sites for residents and visitors, to support the maintenance and
development of harmonious settings for the architecturally and historically
significant sites within the township and to promote, support and stimulate
the use of the historic sites for the education, pleasure and welfare of the
citizens of Westampton, its visitors, business and industry.
§ 140-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADDITION — The construction of a new improvement as part of an existing
improvement when such new improvement changes the exterior
appearance of any historic landmark.
ALTERATION — Any work done on any improvement which is not an
addition to the improvement and constitutes a change by addition or
replacement in the exterior architectural appearance of an improvement.
APPLICATION — A form available from the Secretary of the Historic
Preservation Commission and/or the Township Clerk which must be
completed and approved prior to constructing, repairing or altering the
exterior of a designated historic landmark or improvement located within
the historic district.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to
permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
§ 134-8 WESTAMPTON CODE § 140-2
135:162
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — A document indicating
permission or a permit to commence work or activity on a designated
historic landmark or improvement located within the historic district. An
approved application shall become a certificate of appropriateness.
COLOR — From Benjamin Moore Historical Color Collections or equivalent.
COMMISSION — Refers to the Historic Preservation Commission.
DEMOLITION — Partial or total razing or destruction of any historic
landmark or of any improvement within an historic district.
DISREPAIR — The condition of being in need of repairs; a structure or
building in disrepair.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — A definable group of Tax Map lots, the
improvements on which, when viewed collectively, have a unique character
resulting from their architectural and social history of the municipality and,
because of their unique character, can readily be viewed as an area or
neighborhood distinct from surrounding portions of the municipality. Except
as otherwise stated, all references to "landmarks" in this chapter shall be
deemed to include historic districts as well.
HISTORIC LANDMARK — Any real property, improvement, natural object
or configuration or any portion or group of the foregoing determined to be
of historical, archeological, cultural, scenic or architectural significance in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION — The agency which, for the
purpose of this chapter, acts as the Historic Preservation Commission
pursuant to the "Municipal Land Use Law." 23
IMPROVEMENT — Any structure or part thereof constructed or installed
upon real property by human endeavor and intended to be kept at the
location of such construction or installation for a period of not less than 60
continuous days.
OBJECT — A thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historic or scientific
value that may be, by nature of design, movable yet related to a specific
setting or environment.
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE — Repairing any deterioration, wear or
damage to an improvement, or any part thereof, in order to return the
same as nearly feasible to its condition prior to the occurrence of such
deterioration, wear or damage. Ordinary maintenance shall further include
replacement of exterior elements or accessory hardware, including signs,
using the same materials and having the same appearance.
REMOVAL — To partially or completely cause an improvement or portion
of an improvement to change to another location, position, station or
residence.
23.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 140-2 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 140-2
140:163
REPAIR — Any work done on any improvement which is not an addition
to the improvement and does not change the appearance of the exterior
surface of any improvement.
REPLACEMENT — The act or process of replicating any exterior
architectural feature.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, having a fixed location on, above or below
the surface of land or attached to something having a fixed location on,
above or below the surface of land. For purposes of this chapter, the word
"structure" shall also include improvements such as but not limited to
fences, walls, independent radio and television antennae, gasoline pumps,
gazebos and swimming pools.
ZONING OFFICER — The Construction Code Official or Zoning
Enforcement Officer unless otherwise designated.
§ 140-3. Historic Preservation Commission.
A. There is hereby created an Historic Preservation Commission in order
to carry out the responsibilities set forth in this Historic Preservation
Ordinance and in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-107 through 40:55D-112, inclusive. In
order to make available to the public information useful to the
preservation and protection of historic buildings, places, landmarks and
improvements, and provide the basis for consistency of policy in
decision making, the Commission shall maintain complete files and
records, including but not limited to data used in the classification of
buildings, places and improvements, minutes of Commission meetings,
records of applications for certificates of appropriateness and other
matters, as well as information, materials and references submitted by
the public relating to historic preservation. All Commission records and
minutes shall be made public records as provided by law, and all
Commission meetings shall comply with the Open Public Meetings Act,
(N.J.S.A. 10:4-7 et seq.) Membership, appointments and terms, conflicts
of interests and removal, officers, staffs and expenditures shall be as
mandated by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-107 through 40:55D-112. The Commission
shall adopt written bylaws and procedures for the transaction of its
business and for the consideration of applications. The Commission
shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order. At least three members of
the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of its
business.
B. Membership. The Commission shall consist of five regular members and
no more than one alternate member. The members shall be divided into
four classes with no more than two members living outside of
Westampton Township as follows:
(1) Class A: one person who is knowledgeable in building design and
construction or architectural history and who may reside outside of
Westampton Township.
§ 140-2 WESTAMPTON CODE § 140-3
140:164
(2) Class B: one person who is knowledgeable or with a demonstrated
interest in local history and who may reside outside of Westampton
Township.
(3) Class C: citizens of Westampton Township who shall hold no other
township office, position or employment except for membership on
the township's Land Development Board.24
(4) Class D: one member of the governing body.
C. Appointment and terms.
(1) The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
The Mayor shall appoint all regular and alternate members of the
Commission and shall designate at the time of appointment the
regular members by class.
(2) The Mayor, prior to making the appointment of the regular and
alternate members to the Commission, shall elicit
recommendations for membership from the Westampton Township
Historical Society, the general public and other interested
individuals and groups. At least two of the members shall be
property owners in the historic district.
(3) The alternate member must meet the qualifications of Class C
members.
(4) Insofar as it is lawful and proper under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-107 and this
chapter, the existing Commission membership shall serve in the
appropriate class for the term as designated by the Committee.
Thereafter, the term of a regular member shall be four years and
the term of an alternate member shall be two years. A vacancy
occurring other than by expiration of term shall be filled for the
unexpired term only, within 60 days. Vacancies shall be filled in the
same manner as the original appointment and shall be only for the
balance of the unexpired term.
(5) The alternate member may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in
order that a regular member may vote instead of the alternate
member.
D. Conflicts of interest and removal.
(1) No member may act on any matter in which the member has any
personal or financial interest, either directly or indirectly.
(2) A member may be removed by the Township Committee for cause.
Prior to such removal, the Township Committee shall conduct a
24.Editor's Note: See Ch. 149, Land Use Procedures.
§ 140-3 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 140-3
140:165
hearing, if so requested in writing by the member, within 10 days
of notice of intention to remove.
(3) While retaining all other rights of removal existing by reason of
statutory provision or common law, it is the intent of this chapter to
include absenteeism as a cause for removal.
(4) For the purpose of this chapter, any member who fails to attend
three successive regularly scheduled meetings or work sessions or
more than one third of the regularly scheduled meeting or work
sessions in any three-month period, whichever is greater, may be
removed from the Commission. The vacancy created by such
removal shall be filled in the same manner as originally appointed.
(5) It shall be the responsibility of the Secretary to send monthly
reports of attendance to the Township Clerk. When the reports
reflect absences equal to the number prescribed in Subsection
D(4), notices shall be sent within 10 days to the member(s) by the
Clerk of the intent to remove.
(6) Upon request of the member to be removed, a hearing will be held
by the Township Committee to determine whether the absences
were excusable. In the event that the Township Committee
determines that said absences were not excusable, they shall order
the removal of such member and proceed to appoint a replacement
to the Commission.
E. Officers, staff and expenditures.
(1) The Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson
from its members and select a Secretary, who may or may not be a
member of the Commission or a municipal employee, to keep a
record of the proceedings before the Commission, which shall
include the voting records of the members, their attendance,
resolutions acted upon by the Commission and any of its findings,
determinations and decisions. The Commission shall be governed
by Robert's Rules of Order. At least three members of the
Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of its
business. The Commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of
its business, which shall provide for the time and place of holding
regular meetings and for the calling of special meetings by at least
two members of the Commission. All meetings of the Commission
shall be governed by the New Jersey Open Public Meetings Act.25
(2) The Township Committee shall provide for the Commission in its
budget and shall appropriate such funds for the expenses of the
Commission as the Township Committee, in its sole discretion, shall
determine pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-108. The Commission may
employ, contract for and fix the compensation of experts and other
staff and services as it shall deem necessary, except that the
25.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 140-3 WESTAMPTON CODE § 140-3
140:166
Commission shall obtain legal counsel from the Township Solicitor
at the rate of compensation determined by the Township
Committee unless the Township Committee, by appropriation,
provides for separate legal counsel for the Commission.
Expenditures pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed,
exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the
Township Committee for the Commission's use.
(3) The Commission may appoint a consultant who is a recognized
professional in the field of architectural history, historic
preservation or similar discipline to advise the Commission on
matters before it as the Commission may deem necessary to assist
in rendering its decision, pursuant to Subsection E(2) above.
F. The Historic Preservation Commission shall be responsible for:
(1) Identifying and recording historic landmarks, objects or districts
and evaluating these resources against the definitions as outlined
in § 140-2 of this chapter. The survey material shall be reviewed
every other year and updated as necessary to incorporate any
newly acquired historical documentation and to reflect changes to
a resource's integrity or condition.
(2) Recommending to the Land Development Board26 and the
Township Committee sites to be designated as historic landmarks
in accordance with the procedures established in § 140-4 hereof.
(3) Conducting research on and nominating significant resources to
the State and National Registers of Historic Places. If the township
is certified under the state's Certified Local Government (CLG)
Program, the Commission shall, in accordance with the state's CLG
guidelines, review and comment on all state and national register
nominations for historic resources within Westampton Township.
(4) Recommending to the Land Development Board guidelines for
review to be utilized in determinations of historic landmark status.
(5) Advising the Land Development Board on how development and
zoning applications affect historic landmarks or districts pursuant
to criteria outlined in the Commissions bylaws.
(6) Reviewing all actions, including those involving building permit
applications, which affect the exterior of historic landmarks or
improvements within an historic district pursuant to the
procedures established in § 140-7 hereof and the criteria set forth
in the bylaws of the Commission.
(7) Issuing a certificate of appropriateness for all approved
applications.
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 149, Land Use Procedures.
§ 140-3 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 140-3
140:167
§ 140-4. Designation of landmarks and historic districts.
(8) Assisting other public bodies in aiding the public in understanding
historic resource significance and methods of preservation.
(9) Advising the Township Committee on the relative merits of
proposals involving public lands to restore, preserve and protect
historical buildings, places and improvements, including the
preparation of a long-range plan, thereby securing state, federal
and other grants and aid to assist therein and monitoring such
projects once underway.
(10) Advising and assisting township officers, employees, boards and
other bodies including those at the county, state and federal levels,
on all matters which have potential impact on the historic
buildings, places, structures and districts in the township or on the
physical character and ambience of a district.
(11) Cooperating with local, county, state or national historical
societies, governmental bodies and organizations to maximize their
contributions to the intent and purposes of this chapter.
(12) Requesting the Township Committee to seek, on its own motion or
otherwise, injunctive relief for violations of this chapter or other
actions contrary to the intent and purposes of this chapter.
(13) Advising and assisting the Land Development Board during the
preparation of an historic preservation plan element of the Master
Plan.
(14) Preparing and distributing an historic district guideline handbook
to be utilized for application reviews and foster appropriate
rehabilitation within the historic district.
A. There is hereby established in the Township of Westampton, the
following historic district(s) and/or historic landmark(s):
(1) Rancocas Village Historic District. The geographical boundaries
are those designated by the National Register of Historic Places,
United States Department of the Interior, as follows: Beginning at
the corner of Main Street and Springside Road, proceed north on
Springside Road 294.22' Thence proceed west parallel to Main
Street following property lines to North Bridge Street. Thence
north on Bridge Street 515.5' to the township line (ditch). Thence
west along the township line to Stokes Drive (Union Street).
Thence proceed south and then west following the township line
336'. Thence proceed south along the township line across Main
Street to Third Street. Thence proceed east along Third Street to
Bridge Street. Thence continue east along the Rancocas Bypass to
and including the old farmhouse property of Granville Haines.
Thence back to the starting point of Main Street and Springside
§ 140-3 WESTAMPTON CODE § 140-4
140:168
Road. This detailed description is outlined on the Tax Map of the
Township of Westampton.
B. In addition to the historic district(s) and landmarks already identified,
the Commission shall consider for historic landmark or historic district
designation any additional buildings, improvements, objects, sites and
districts within the township which merit historic landmark or historic
district designation and protections, being:
(1) Of particular historic significance to the township by reflecting or
exemplifying the broad cultural, political, economic or social
history of the nation, state or community; or
(2) Associated with historic personages important in national, state or
local history; or
(3) The site of an historic event which had a significant effect on the
development of the nation, state or community; or
(4) An embodiment of the distinctive characteristics of a type, period
or method of architecture or engineering; or
(5) Representative of the work of an important builder, designer, artist
or architect; or
(6) Significant for containing elements of design, detail, materials or
craftsmanship which represent a significant innovation; or
(7) Able or likely to yield information important in prehistory or
history.
C. Based on its review or upon the recommendation of other township
bodies or of concerned citizens, the Commission shall make a list of
districts and landmarks recommended for designation. For each district
and landmark, there shall be a brief description, a statement of its
significance pursuant to the criteria in Subsection B above, a
description of location and boundaries and a map siting.
D. After obtaining the owner's/owners' written authorization, the list of
potential landmarks and districts, as well as the description,
significance, location, boundaries and map siting of each, shall be
subject to review at a Commission public hearing. At least ten days
before such a hearing, notice of the hearing shall be published in an
official newspaper of the municipality. At the hearing, interested
persons shall be entitled to present their opinions prior to the
Commission voting on its recommendations to the Land Development
Board.27
E. After the hearing, the Commission shall submit its recommendations for
sites to be designated to the Land Development Board and the
Township Clerk. The Land Development Board shall hold a public
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 149, Land Use Procedures.
§ 140-4 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 140-4
140:169
§ 140-5. Actions requiring review by the Historic Preservation
Commission.
meeting, no less than 15 days and no later than 45 days after receiving
the Commission's recommendations. The Land Development Board
shall render a decision at that meeting. The Land Development Board
shall, by certified mail and regular mail:
(1) Notify each owner that his property is being considered for historic
landmark or district designation and the reasons therefor.
(2) Notify each owner of the public meeting to be held to discuss
landmark or district designation.
F. Determination that landmark or district status exists shall be made by
the Land Development Board.
(1) Such a determination by the Land Development Board shall create
landmark or district status. Within seven days of the creation of
landmark or district status, the Land Development Board shall, by
certified mail, notify the owner of the property involved of the
determination and advise him of his rights with respect to an
appeal of said determination to the Township Committee. The
Historic Preservation Commission or a member of the public may
seek to appeal the status directly to the Township Committee upon
giving notice to:
(a) The owners and persons of record as objecting thereto; and
(b) The Land Development Board.
(2) Such appeal shall be made within 45 days of the Land Development
Board's determination and the Township Committee shall have the
power to either affirm, modify or vacate the decision of the Land
Development Board as it deems proper.
G. After Land Development Board review and approval, the Commission
shall submit the list of designated landmarks and districts and a map to
the Township Clerk for filing. The Township Committee shall then
consider the designation list and map, and may approve, reject or
modify same by Ordinance. Once adopted, the designation list and map
may be amended in the same manner in which it was adopted. Upon
adoption, the designation list and map shall also be incorporated by
reference into the Municipal Master Plan.
H. Copies of the designation list and official map as adopted shall be made
public and distributed to all municipal agencies reviewing development
applications and building permits. A certificate of designation shall be
served by certified and regular mail upon each owner included in the
list, and a true copy thereof shall be filed with the County Clerk for
recording in the same manner as a certificate of a lien upon real
property.
§ 140-4 WESTAMPTON CODE § 140-5
140:170
§ 140-6. Actions not requiring review by the Historic Preservation
Commission.
Review by the Commission is not required:
A. Applications for development. The Land Development Board shall refer
to the Commission for comment every application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of an
application for any development, within 500 feet of the historic district
or historic landmark designated on the Zoning or Official Map or
identified in any component element of the Master Plan. This referral
shall be made when the application for development is deemed
complete or is scheduled for a hearing, whichever occurs sooner.
Failure to refer the application as required shall not invalidate any
hearing or proceeding.
B. Permits. Except when review is expressly exempted pursuant to
§ 140-6, all applications pertaining to historic landmarks or property in
historic districts shall be referred to the Commission by the Zoning
Officer for a written report on the application of the Zoning Ordinance28
provisions concerning historic preservation to any of those aspects of
the change proposed, which aspects were not determined by approval
of an application for development by the Land Development Board
pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law. The Commission, through its
Secretary, shall report to the Zoning Officer within 45 days of his
referral of the application to the Commission. If within the forty-five-day
period the Commission recommends against the issuance of the permit
or recommends conditions to the permit to be issued, the Zoning Officer
shall deny issuance of the permit or include the conditions in the
permit, as the case may be. Failure to report within the forty-five-day
period shall be deemed to constitute a report in favor of issuance of the
permit and without the recommendation of conditions to the permit.
C. Review when an application for development or building permit is not
required. In the event that the Zoning Officer shall determine that a
building permit and/or application for development involving any
development activity that would effect an historic district or historic
landmark is not needed, then the property owner and/or tenant of the
property on which the exterior changes, alterations or improvements
are proposed to be made shall make application directly to the
Commission for a certificate of appropriateness. The Commission shall
hear such applications employing its procedures set forth in § 140-7 and
the criteria set forth in the Commission bylaws and will render its
findings in writing. The findings of the Commission, in such cases, shall
be enforceable by the Zoning Officer.
A. When an historic landmark requires immediate emergency repair to
preserve the continued habitability of the building and/or health and
safety of its occupants or others, emergency repairs may be performed
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
§ 140-5 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 140-6
140:171
§ 140-7. Application procedures for certificate of appropriateness.
in accordance with existing codes then in effect, without the necessity
of first obtaining the Commission's review. If the repairs utilize identical
materials and colors as were previously used, Commission review is
not necessary. If there is a change in material or color, the repairs
performed shall only be such that are necessary to maintain the
habitability of the improvement. A request for the Commission's review
shall be made as soon as possible and no additional work shall be
performed upon the improvement until an appropriate request for
approval is made and obtained in accordance with the procedures set
forth in this chapter.
B. For changes to the interior of improvements.
C. For ordinary repairs and maintenance which utilize identical materials
and colors as were previously used and which do not constitute a
change to the appearance of the improvement.
A. Application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be made by the
applicant on forms available from the Secretary of the Historic
Preservation Commission and/or the Township Clerk. The application
must be completed and in the hands of the Secretary or the Township
Clerk at least 10 days prior to the next scheduled meeting of the
Historic Preservation Commission in order to be considered by the
Commission.
B. The Historic Preservation Commission shall reach a decision on the
application within (45) days after the Secretary has declared an
application to be complete; otherwise, the application shall be deemed
to have been approved. Nothing herein shall prohibit an extension of
time by mutual agreement of the applicant and the Commission. The
Commission may advise the applicant of its recommendations
regarding the consistency of the proposed action with the standards
applied by the Commission. If an application is approved, the
Commission shall forthwith issue a certificate of appropriateness. If the
Commission disapproves an application, the Commission shall state its
reasons, in writing, within 10 days of such decision.
C. In the event that an applicant alleges that the compliance with the
requirements of this section would be an unreasonable hardship and
that the nature of his application is such that the minor change sought
neither justifies the time and expense of the plenary proceeding nor will
impact negatively on the public good nor specifically on the historic
qualities sought to be preserved, the Commission, by a majority
affirmative vote of its full authorized membership, may grant such relief
from the requirement of this section as it deems consistent with the
public good and the purposes of this chapter.
§ 140-6 WESTAMPTON CODE § 140-8
140:172
§ 140-8. Criteria for review of applications.
In reviewing an application for its effect on an historic landmark or an
improvement within an historic district, the following criteria shall be used
by the Historic Preservation Commission and the Land Development Board.
The criteria set forth in § 140-8A relate to all projects affecting an historic
landmark or an improvement within an historic district. The criteria set
forth in § 140-8B relate to specific types of undertakings and shall be used
in addition to the general criteria set forth below.
A. In regard to all applications affecting an historic landmark or an
improvement within an historic district, the following factors shall be
considered:
(1) The impact of the proposed change on the historic and
architectural significance of the landmark or the historic district.
(2) The landmark's importance to the municipality and the extent to
which its historic or architectural interest would be adversely
affected to the detriment of the public interest.
(3) The use of any improvement involved.
(4) The extent to which the proposed action would adversely affect the
public's view of a landmark or improvement within an historic
district from a public street.
(5) If the application deals with an improvement within an historic
district, the impact the proposed change would have on the
district's architectural or historic significance and the
improvement's visual compatibility with the buildings, places and
improvements to which it would be visually related in terms of the
visual compatibility factors set forth herein.
B. In regard to an application for new construction, alterations, additions,
repairs or replacements affecting an historic landmark or an
improvement within an historic district, the following factors shall be
considered:
(1) Height. The height of the proposed building shall be visually
compatible with adjacent buildings.
(2) Proportion of the building's facade. The relationship of the width of
the building to the height of the front elevation shall be visually
compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually related.
(3) Proportion of openings within the facility. The relationship of the
width of windows to the height of windows in a building shall be
visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
(4) Rhythm of solids to voids on facades fronting on public places. The
relationship of solids to voids in such facades of a building shall be
§ 140-8 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 140-8
140:173
visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
(5) Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. The relationship of the
building to the open space between it and adjoining buildings shall
be visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
(6) Relationship of entrance and/or porch projections. The relationship
of entrance and porch projections to the street to which it is
visually related.
(7) Relationship of materials, texture and color. The relationship of
materials, texture and color of the facade and roof of a building
shall be visually compatible with the predominant materials used in
the building to which it is visually related.
(8) Roof shape. The roof shape of a building shall be visually
compatible with buildings to which it is visually related.
(9) Walls of continuity. Appurtenances of a building, such as walls,
open-type fencing, evergreen and landscape masses shall form a
cohesive wall of enclosure along a street to the extent necessary to
maintain visual compatibility of the building with the buildings and
places to which it is visually related.
(10) Scale of building. The size of a building, the mass of a building in
relationship to open spaces, the windows, door openings, porches
and balconies shall be visually compatible with the buildings and
places to which it is visually related.
(11) Directional expression of front elevation. A building shall be
visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related in its dimensional character, whether this be
vertical character, horizontal character or nondirectional
character.
(12) Exterior features. Improvements related to exterior features, such
as lighting, fences, signs, sidewalks, driveways and parking areas
shall be compatible with features of the improvements to which it is
visually related and shall be appropriate for the historic period for
which the improvement is significant.
C. In regard to an application to demolish an historic landmark or any
improvement within an historic district, the following manners shall be
considered:
(1) Its historic, architectural, cultural or scenic significance.
(2) If it is within an historic district, its significance to the district and
the probable impact of its removal on the district.
§ 140-8 WESTAMPTON CODE § 140-8
140:174
§ 140-9. Effect of project approval, denial and appeal.
(3) Its potential for use for those purposes currently permitted by the
Zoning Ordinance.29
(4) Its structural condition and the economic feasibility of alternatives
to the proposal.
(5) Its importance to the municipality and the extent to which its
historical or architectural value is such that its removal would be
detrimental to the public interest.
(6) The extent to which it is of such old, unusual or uncommon design,
craftsmanship, texture or material that it could not be reproduced
or could be reproduced only with great difficulty and expense.
(7) The extent to which its retention would promote the general
welfare by maintaining and increasing the real estate values,
generating business, creating new jobs, attracting tourists,
attracting new residents, encouraging study and interest in both
American history and the history of Westampton Township,
stimulating interest and study in architecture and design,
educating citizens in American culture and heritage or making the
Township a more attractive and desirable place in which to live.
A. Approval of the application by the Commission shall be deemed to be
final approval pursuant to this chapter. Such approval shall neither
cause nor prevent the filing of any collateral application or other
proceeding required by any other municipal ordinance to be made prior
to undertaking the action requested concerning the landmark or
improvement in any historic district.
B. Denial of approval shall be deemed to bar the applicant from
undertaking the activity which would affect the landmark or
improvement in an historic district which was the subject of the denied
application.
C. Denial of approval shall also bar the applicant from proceeding before
the Land Development Board or Zoning Officer with respect to any
applications relating to the landmark or improvement in any historic
district which was the subject of the denied application.
D. The Land Development Board may postpone demolition of a landmark
for a period of six months. No township official shall issue a demolition
permit for a landmark without approval from the Land Development
Board. If the Land Development Board determines to postpone
demolition, the Land Development Board shall promptly request that
the Commission initiate such actions as may lead to the preservation of
the landmark or improvement.
29.Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
§ 140-8 HISTORIC PRESERVATION § 140-9
140:175
§ 140-10. Violations; notice to abate; summons; injunctive relief.
E. The granting or denial of approval may be appealed in the same manner
as any appeal from any action by the Land Development Board.30
A. If any person shall undertake any activity which affects an historic
landmark or any improvement within an historic district without
obtaining the Commission's review and the required approval, such
person shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter.
B. Upon learning of the violation, the Zoning Officer shall personally serve
or cause to be served upon the owner of the lot whereon the violation is
occurring a notice describing the violation in detail and giving the
owner 10 days to abate the violation by restoring the landmark or
improvement to the condition it was in prior to the violation occurring.
If the owner cannot be personally served within the township with said
notice, a copy shall be posted on the site and a copy sent to the owner at
his last known address as it appears on the township tax rolls.
C. In the event that the violation is not abated within 10 days of service or
posting on site, whichever is earlier, the Zoning Officer shall cause to be
issued a summons and complaint, returnable in the Municipal Court,
charging violation of this chapter and specifying the wrongful conduct
of the violator.
D. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of
not more than $500 or by community service commensurate with the
violation or by both such fine and community service, in the discretion
of the Judge. The continuation of such violation for each successive day
shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing
or permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as
provided above for each separate offense.
E. If any person is in violation of this chapter, he shall be required to
immediately stop the activity, apply for the Commission's review and
take any necessary measures to preserve the landmarks affected
pending a decision. If the project is denied, he shall immediately restore
the landmark to its preactivity status. The Zoning Officer is hereby
authorized to seek injunctive relief, a stop action, restoration or any
other appropriate remedy in the Superior Court, Chancery Division, not
less than 10 days after the delivery of notice. Such injunctive relief shall
be in addition to the penalties authorized in this chapter.
F. In the event that any action which would permanently affect an historic
landmark or historic district or a demolition to remove the landmark is
about to occur without approval having been issued, the Zoning Officer
is empowered to apply to the Superior Court of New Jersey for
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 149, Land Use Procedures.
§ 140-9 WESTAMPTON CODE § 140-10
140:176
§ 140-11. Effect on other provisions; when effective.
Chapter 143
HOCKEY
§ 143-1. Use of street hockey court.
The Westampton Township and Board of Education Street Hockey Court
may be made available to Westampton Township residents or league teams
for street hockey games under the following conditions:
injunctive relief as is necessary to prevent the demolition of any
landmark.
A. No duties or powers of the Commission shall supersede or infringe on
the powers of other township boards or committees.
B. If any section or provision hereof shall be adjudged invalid, such
determination shall not affect the other provisions hereof, which shall
remain in full force and effect to the extent severable from such
determination.
C. All ordinances and all provisions thereof inconsistent or conflicting with
the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such
conflict or inconsistency.
D. This chapter shall take effect upon final adoption after publication
thereof in accordance with the law.
A. Applications for the use of the hockey court must be made to the
Westampton Township Recreation Director. The Director shall grant the
permit if he deems that the use of the premises for the designated time
and purpose will not interfere with or jeopardize the township's
recreation program or facility. In any case where the Director denies
said application for the use of the premises, he shall state his reasons,
in writing, for said denial within three days of the denial. An applicant
may appeal the refusal of the Director to issue a permit to the Township
Committee.
B. The Director of Recreation may establish one or more special conditions
for use of the hockey court in order to protect the facility. Such special
conditions may include:
(1) Hockey teams granted a permit to use the Holly Hills Hockey Court
will be known as "home teams."
(2) There will be a limit of five home teams granted a permit at one
time.
(3) All home team games must be scheduled to be played on Sundays
before 2:00 p.m. Saturday mornings will be reserved for
§ 140-10 HOCKEY § 143-1
143:177
Westampton Township Recreation youth street hockey games, and
Saturdays and Sundays from 2:00 p.m. until dark will be set aside
for nonteam play by Westampton Township residents.
(4) There will be no play on the court after dark or before 8:00 a.m.
[Amended 2-11-1997 by Ord. No. 3-1997]
(5) All home teams will submit a schedule of games to be played on the
court with their application.
(6) At all times of play, at least one of the teams on the court must be a
home team.
(7) Permits must be renewed yearly.
(8) Any damage that occurs during any game must be reported to the
Recreation Director as soon as possible.
(9) Any home team found violating any part of this chapter or special
conditions will be suspended from playing on the court.
(10) Each home team must carry liability insurance and list the
township and Board of Education as additional insured.
C. Any special conditions which are formulated by said Director will
become conditions of the permit.
D. The Director of Recreation shall require the applicant to enter into a
holdharmless agreement, which agreement shall provide that the
applicant shall agree to save and hold the Township of Westampton and
the Board of Education harmless of and from any and all obligations and
liabilities which may arise in the form of any and all claims or lawsuits
in connection with the use and maintenance of the facilities. The
applicant further shall agree, as part of those provisions, to save and
hold harmless the Township of Westampton and the Board of Education,
to defend at the applicant's own cost and expense any such claims or
lawsuits instituted by third parties, which obligations or liabilities
might otherwise accrue against the Township of Westampton or Board
of Education.
E. The permit holder will be responsible for the clean up of the grounds,
including the cleaning of and disposal of all refuse and garbage at the
expense of the applicant after each event. A permit may be revoked if
the area is not kept clean.
F. The applicant shall pay a fee of $100 upon submission of an application
to use the hockey court. At the time the permit is issued, a fee of $10
per game scheduled to be played on the court must be submitted.
Township-recognized youth programs shall be exempt from payment of
the fees.
§ 143-1 WESTAMPTON CODE § 143-2
143:178
§ 143-2. Violations and penalties. [Added 2-11-1997 by Ord. No.
3-1997]
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less
than $50 not more than $500 for each offense, and a separate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
Chapter 149
LAND USE PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 131.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 140.
Site plan review — See Ch. 196.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 215.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 143-2 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 143-2
149:179

ARTICLE I
Land Development Board
§ 149-1. Establishment; composition. [Amended 1-13-1998 by Ord.
No. 1-1998; 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
There is hereby established pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 291,31 in the Township
of Westampton a Land Development Board of nine members consisting of
the following four classes:
§ 149-2. Terms.
A. Class I: the Mayor.
B. Class II: one of the officials of the municipality other than a member of
the governing body to be appointed by the Mayor.
C. Class III: a member of the governing body to be appointed by it.
D. Class IV: six other citizens of the municipality to be appointed by the
Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office. A
member of the Environmental Commission who is also a member of the
Land Development Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be a
Class IV Land Development Board member.
A. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his
official tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class
III shall be for one year or terminate at the completion of their
respective terms of office, whichever occurs first. The term of the Class
IV member who is also a member of the Environmental Commission
shall be for three years or terminate at the completion of his term of
office as a member of the Environmental Commission, whichever comes
first.
B. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent
the expiration of such term shall be evenly distributed over the first four
years after their appointment as determined by resolution of the
governing body; provided, however, that no term of any member shall
exceed four years, and further provided that nothing herein shall affect
the term of any present member of the Land Development Board, all of
whom shall continue in office until the completion of the term for which
they were appointed. Thereafter all Class IV members shall be
appointed for terms of four years except as otherwise herein provided.
All terms shall run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment
was made. [Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
31.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 149-1 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 149-3
149:181
§ 149-3. Alternates. [Added 2-7-1984 by Ord. No. 1-1984]
The Township Committee may appoint two alternate members for Class IV
members who shall meet the qualifications of Class IV members. Alternate
members shall be designated by the Mayor at the time of their appointment
as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms of the alternate
members shall be for two years commencing from January 1 of the year
of their appointment, except that the terms of the alternate members shall
be such that the term of not more than one alternate member shall expire
in any one year; provided, however, that in no instance shall the terms of
the alternate member first appointed exceed two years. Alternate members
may participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote, except
in the absence or disqualification of a regular member of any class. A vote
shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of
an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
§ 149-4. Vacancies.
If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled by appointment as above provided for the unexpired term.
§ 149-5. Land Development Board to exercise powers of Zoning
Board of Adjustment. [Added 1-13-1998 by Ord. No. 1-1998;
amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
Pursuant to the authority granted by P.L. 1994, c. 186, commonly cited and
referred to as the "Municipal Land Use Law," N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., as
amended by P.L. 1985, c. 516, and P.L. 1994, c. 186,32 the Land Development
Board of the Township of Westampton shall consist of nine members and
shall exercise to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions all of
the power of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 149-6. Consideration of applications for variances restricted to
certain members. [Added 1-13-1998 by Ord. No. 1-1998; amended
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25c(1), the Class I and III members of such
Land Development Board shall not participate in the consideration of
applications for development which involve relief pursuant to Subsection d
of Section 57 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d).
§ 149-7. Powers and duties generally. [Amended 1-13-1998 by Ord.
No. 1-1998; 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
The Land Development Board is authorized to adopt bylaws governing its
procedural operation. It shall also have the following powers and duties:
32.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25.
§ 149-3 WESTAMPTON CODE § 149-7
149:182
A. To make and adopt and from time to time amend a Master Plan for the
physical development of the township, including any areas outside its
boundaries which in the Board's judgment bear essential relation to the
planning of the township, in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-28.
B. To administer the provisions of the Land Subdivision Ordinance,33 those
portions dealing with condominium projects and the Design and Site
Plan Review Ordinance34 in accordance with the provisions of said
ordinances and the Municipal Land Use Law of 1975 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq.).
C. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulations.
D. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
E. To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvement
projects projected over a term of six years, and amendments thereto,
and recommend same to the governing body.
F. To consider and make report to the governing body within 35 days after
referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted to it
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40-55D-26a, and also pass upon
other matters specifically referred to the Land Development Board by
the Township Committee, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-26b.
G. When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, to grant variances pursuant to Section 57c of
c. 291, Laws of New Jersey 1975,35 from lot area, lot dimensional,
setback and yard requirements. Whenever relief is requested pursuant
to this subsection, notice of a hearing on the application for
development shall include reference to the request for a variance or
direction for issuance of a permit as the case may be.
H. To hear and decide applications for a conditional use. The term
"conditional use" shall mean a use permitted in a particular zoning
district only upon the showing that such use in a specified location will
comply with the conditions and standards for the location or operation
of such use as contained in the Zoning Ordinance.36 All uses contained
in the Zoning Ordinance designated as special exceptions shall be
considered to be conditional uses.
33.Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Subdivision of Land.
34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 196, Site Plan Review.
35.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55d-70c.
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
§ 149-7 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 149-7
149:183
I. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the governing body for the aid and assistance of the
governing body or other agencies or officers.
J. Additional powers.
(1) The Land Development Board shall have such powers as are
granted by law to:
(a) Hear and decide, by majority vote, appeals where it is alleged
by the appellant that there is error in any other requirement,
decision or refusal made by an administrative officer based on
or made in the enforcement of this chapter.
(b) Hear and decide, by majority vote, requests for interpretation
of the Zoning Map or Ordinance, or for decisions upon other
special questions upon which such Board is authorized by the
Zoning Ordinance to pass.
(c) Grant, by majority vote, a variance from the strict application
of the zoning regulations where by reasons of exceptional
narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of
property, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions,
or by reason of other extraordinary and exceptional situations
or conditions of such piece of property, the strict application of
any regulation in the Zoning Ordinance would result in
peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional
and undue hardship upon the owner of such property, except
that if the applicant requires subdivision, site plan or
conditional use approval by the Land Development Board, the
request for a variance under these circumstances shall be
acted on by the Land Development Board in conjunction with
the subdivision, site plan or conditional use application,
provided that not more than one lot is involved in the variance
request. In no case shall a variance be granted under this
subsection to allow a structure or use in a district restricted
against such structure or use.
(d) Grant a variance to allow a structure or use in a district
restricted against such structure or use in particular cases and
for special reasons, but only by the affirmative vote of at least
1/3 of the full authorized membership of the Board.
(2) No variance or other relief may be granted under the provisions of
this subsection unless such variance or other relief can be granted
without substantial detriment to the public good and will not
substantially impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and
Zoning Ordinance.
(3) Any application under any subsection of this section may be
referred to any appropriate person or agency for its report,
§ 149-7 WESTAMPTON CODE § 149-7
149:184
§ 149-8. Expiration of variance. [Amended 1-13-1998 by Ord. No.
1-1998; 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
Any variance from the terms of this chapter hereafter granted by the Land
Development Board permitting the erection or alteration of any structure
or structures, or permitting a specified use of any premises, shall expire
by limitation unless such construction or alteration shall have been actually
commenced on each and every structure permitted by said variance, or
unless such permitted use has actually been commenced, within 12 months
from the date of publication of notice of the decision; except, however, that
the running of the period of limitation herein provided shall be tolled from
the date of filing an appeal from the decision of the Land Development
Board to the governing body, or to a court of competent jurisdiction, until
the termination in any manner of such appeal or proceeding.
§ 149-9. Time limits. [Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
provided that such reference shall not extend the period of time
within which the Land Development Board shall act.
A. Minor subdivisions. Minor subdivision approval shall be granted or
denied within 45 days of the date of submission of a complete
application to the Land Development Board or within such further time
as may be consented to by the applicant. Approval of a minor
subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date of Land Development
Board approval unless within such period a plat in conformity with such
approval and the provisions of the Map Filing Law, or a deed clearly
describing the approved minor subdivision, is filed by the developer
with the County Recording Officer, the Municipal Engineer and the
Municipal Tax Assessor. Any such plat or deed must be signed by the
Chairman and Secretary of the Land Development Board before it will
be accepted for filing by the County Recording Officer.
B. Preliminary approval of major subdivisions and site plans.
(1) Upon submission of a complete application for a subdivision of 10
or fewer lots or a complete application for a site plan of 10 or fewer
acres, the Land Development Board shall grant or deny preliminary
approval within 45 days of the date of such submission or within
such further time as may be consented to by the developer. Upon
submission of a complete application for a subdivision of more than
10 lots or submission of a complete application of a site plan of
more than 10 acres, the Land Development Board shall grant or
deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of such
submission or within such further time as may be consented to by
the developer; otherwise, the Land Development Board shall be
deemed to have granted preliminary approval for the subdivision or
site plan.
(2) A public hearing shall be held at the preliminary approval stage for
subdivision. Applicants shall be guided by Section 6, Hearings, and
§ 149-7 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 149-9
149:185
§ 149-10. Procedure for filing applications. [Amended 11-10-1998
by Ord. No. 24-1998]
Section 7, Notice, of the Municipal Land Use Law.37 No hearings
will be held with respect to minor subdivisions or site plans at
either the preliminary or final approval stages.
C. Ancillary powers.
(1) Whenever the Land Development Board is called upon to exercise
its ancillary powers before the granting of a variance as set forth in
Article I, § 149-7G, of this chapter, the Land Development Board
shall grant or deny approval of the application within 95 days after
submission by the developer of a complete application or within
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure
of the Land Development Board to act within the period prescribed
shall constitute approval of the application, and a certificate of the
administrative officer as to the failure of the Land Development
Board to act shall be issued on the request of the applicant.
(2) All applications to the Land Development Board for a hearing and
decision on a conditional use shall be in accordance with the
procedures, fee structure, forms and evidentiary requirements set
forth in the Zoning Ordinance with respect to special exceptions.
D. Final approval.
(1) Application for final subdivision approval and final site plan
approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days of submission of
a complete application or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant.
(2) Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the
date of signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall
have been duly filed by the developer with the County Recording
Officer. The Land Development Board may, for good cause shown,
extend the period for recording for an additional period not to
exceed 190 days from the date of the signing of the plat.
A. Applications for development within the jurisdiction of the Land
Development Board pursuant to the provisions of c. 291, P.L. 1975,38
shall be filed with the Secretary of the Land Development Board. For
the purpose of all filings or other communications pertaining to the
Land Development Board of the Township of Westampton, the Secretary
of the Land Development Board shall be the administrative officer of
said Board with the sole exception being the obligation to furnish a list
of property owners. The submission of all applications shall be in
accordance with the procedures set forth in the existing developmental
37.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10 and 40:55D-11.
38.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 149-9 WESTAMPTON CODE § 149-10
149:186
ordinances. The only changes in procedure with respect to said
ordinances will be as required under the provisions c. 291, P.L. 1975.
B. The requirements of the Design and Site Plan Review Ordinance of the
Township of Westampton39 shall be interpreted to pertain to
preliminary approval of site plans only. When the applicant has obtained
a preliminary approval of his site plan or preliminary approval with
conditions of the site plan, the applicant shall file an application for final
site plan approval. A fee of $25 shall be paid, together with this
application. The applicant's plan shall be in accordance with the criteria
set forth in the Design and Site Plan Review Ordinance of the Township
of Westampton and shall set forth those conditions and requirements
imposed by the Land Development Board at the time of preliminary
approval.
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 196, Site Plan Review.
§ 149-10 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 149-10
149:187

ARTICLE II
Provisions Applicable to Land Development Board40
§ 149-11. Organization. [Amended 1-13-1998 by Ord. No. 1-1998;
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
The Land Development Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman
from the members of Class IV. The Board shall select a Secretary and
Assistant Secretary who may be members of the Board or municipal
employees.
§ 149-12. Attorney. [Amended 1-13-1998 by Ord. No. 1-1998;
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
There is hereby created the office of Land Development Board Attorney. The
Board may annually appoint and fix the compensation of or agree upon the
rate of compensation of the Board Attorney, who shall be an attorney other
than the Municipal Attorney.
§ 149-13. Experts and staff. [Amended 1-13-1998 by Ord. No.
1-1998; 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
§ 149-14. Rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the
issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the
A. The Land Development Board may annually employ or contract for the
services of experts and other staff and services as it may deem
necessary. The staff of the Board may include, but shall not be limited
to, a Clerk or Administrative Clerk. The Board shall not authorize
expenditures which exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount
appropriated by the governing body for its use.
B. Board Engineer. The Land Development Board shall have the power,
right and responsibility to employ a licensed professional engineer, who
may also be the Township Engineer, to advise the Board as to
engineering matters. Said appointee shall be answerable and
responsible to the Board. The term of such appointment shall be an
annual appointment. The Board Engineer shall be the advisor on
engineering matters to the Board he represents. However, all review,
plans, documents, whether for subdivision, site plan or variance, the
approval of any and all plats or plans and the signing thereof and the
review, inspection and approval of all construction made pursuant to
any plats or plans approved by the Board shall be the sole responsibility
and duty of the Township Engineer.
40.Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Zoning Board of Adjustment, as amended, was repealed
1-13-1998 by Ord. No. 1-1998. This ordinance abolished the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
subject to the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72.1.
§ 149-11 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 149-14
149:189
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 149-15. Conflicts of interest. [Amended 1-13-1998 by Ord. No.
1-1998; 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
No member of the Land Development Board shall act on any matter in
which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from acting on a
particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the Board on the hearing
of such matter nor participate in any discussion or decision relating thereto.
§ 149-16. Meetings.
§ 149-17. Minutes. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992]
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Board, the findings,
if any, made by it and the reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter
be made available for public inspection during normal business hours at
the office of the Municipal Clerk/Administrator. Any interested party shall
have the right to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in
any legal proceeding concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such
interested party may be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes for
his use as provided for in the rules of the Board.
A. Meetings of the Land Development Board shall be scheduled no less
often than once a month, and any meeting so scheduled shall be held as
scheduled unless canceled for lack of applications for development to
process. [Amended 1-13-1998 by Ord. No. 1-1998; 11-10-1998 by
Ord. No. 24-1998]
B. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on
the request of any two Board members, which meetings shall be held on
notice to its members and the public in accordance with all applicable
legal requirements.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
D. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum except as
otherwise required by any provision of c. 291, P.L. 1975, Section 5a.41
E. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Act, c. 231, P.L. 1975.42
41.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9a.
42.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 149-14 WESTAMPTON CODE § 149-18
149:190
§ 149-18. Rules and regulations.
§ 149-19. Notice requirements for hearings. [Amended 9-21-1992
by Ord. No. 10-1992; 1-13-1998 by Ord. No. 1-1998; 11-10-1998 by
Ord. No. 24-1998]
Hearings shall be required with respect to submission of a preliminary plat
for major subdivision and all applications to the Land Development Board.
Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development, the
applicant shall give notice thereof as follows:
A. Rules. The Land Development Board may make rules governing the
conduct of hearings before such bodies, which rules shall not be
inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. or this
chapter. [Amended 1-13-1998 by Ord. No. 1-1998; 11-10-1998 by
Ord. No. 24-1998]
B. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths or issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties,
and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law, P.L.
1953, c. 38 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.), shall apply.
C. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
D. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
E. Records. The Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof upon request to any interested party at his expense.
A. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of
the municipality or in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
B. Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on the
current tax duplicate or duplicates located within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing and
whether located within or without the municipality in which the
applicant's land is located. Such notice shall be given by serving a copy
thereof on the owner as shown on the current tax duplicate or his agent
in charge of the property or by mailing a copy thereof, by certified mail,
to the property owner at his address as shown on the current tax
§ 149-18 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 149-19
149:191
duplicate. A return receipt is not required. Notice to a partnership
owner may be made by service upon any partner. Notice to a corporate
owner may be made by service upon its president, a vice president,
secretary or other person authorized by appointment or by law to
accept service on behalf of the corporation.
C. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of such
municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the notice required to
be given pursuant to Subsection B of this section to the owners of lands
in such adjoining municipality which are located within 200 feet of the
subject premises.
D. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on an application for development of
property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown on
the Official County Map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining other
county land or situate within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
E. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
F. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning in the
Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Municipal Clerk/Administrator pursuant
to Section 6b of c. 291, P.L. 1975.43
G. All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given at least
10 days prior to the date fixed for hearing, and the applicant shall file
an affidavit of proof of service with the Board holding the hearing on the
application for development.
H. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
deemed complete upon mailing, in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
I. Form of notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of
this chapter shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the
nature of the matters to be considered and identification of the property
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to
lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the
Municipal Tax Assessor's office and the location and times at which any
maps and documents for which approval is sought are available as
required by law.
43.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10b.
§ 149-19 WESTAMPTON CODE § 149-20
149:192
§ 149-20. List of property owners furnished. [Amended 8-10-1987
by Ord. No. 11-1987]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, the Township Tax
Collector shall, within seven days after receipt of a request therefor and
upon receipt of payment of a fee in a sum not to exceed $0.25 per name
or $10, whichever is greater, make and certify a list from the current tax
duplicate of names and addresses of owners of lands within this township
to whom the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to Article II,
§ 149-19B, of this chapter.
§ 149-21. Decisions.
§ 149-22. Publication of decisions. [Amended 1-13-1998 by Ord. No.
1-1998; 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality. Such publication shall be arranged by the
Secretary of the Land Development Board. The applicant shall pay an
additional fee of $10 at the time of submission of his initial application
to cover this cost. Said notice shall be sent to the official newspaper for
publication within 10 days of the date of any such decision.
§ 149-23. Payment of taxes. [Amended 1-13-1998 by Ord. No.
1-1998; 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-65, every
application for development submitted to the Land Development Board
shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or assessments for local
improvements are due or delinquent on the property which is the subject of
such application; or, if it is shown that taxes or assessments are delinquent
on said property, any approvals or other relief granted by either Board
shall be conditioned upon either the prompt payment of such taxes or
assessments or the making of adequate provision for the payment thereof in
such manner that the municipality will be adequately protected.
A. Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth in
writing as a resolution of the Board, which resolution shall include
findings of fact and legal conclusions based thereon.
B. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
date of decision to the applicant or, if represented, then to his attorney,
without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be mailed to
all persons who have requested it and who have paid the fee prescribed
by the Board for such service. A copy of the decision shall also be filed
in the office of the Municipal Clerk/Administrator, who shall make a
copy of such filed decision available to any interested party upon
payment of a fee calculated in the same manner as those established for
copies of other public documents in the municipality. [Amended
9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992]
§ 149-20 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 149-24
149:193
§ 149-24. Fees and escrows.
The fees as required in the Township Land Subdivision Ordinance, the
Zoning Ordinance and the Design and Site Plan Review Ordinance shall
be continued until amended, with the addition of those fees contained
in this chapter.44 In the event that an application contains a request for
subdivision, variance and/or site plan approval, the appropriate fee for each
application made and approval requested shall be submitted. Any charges
made against any escrow account by any professional on behalf of the
township shall be charged against the escrow at the same rate that said
employee charges the township or as specified by ordinance, whichever is
lower. In no event shall any charge against an applicant's escrow exceed
the rate of billing which that particular township professional charges the
township or the rate at which said person receives remuneration from the
township. Said charges shall be made in accordance with a statement of
fees and billing filed by each such professional employee with the township.
A statement setting the rate for township billing when the professional
employee is engaged will be adequate. Said statement shall be held to be
operative and in effect until supplanted by a new statement of fees and
charges filed by the professional and accepted by the township. A copy
of said statement or schedule shall be available to each applicant upon
request.
§ 149-25. Developmental approvals. [Added 6-21-1979 by Ord. No.
9-1979]
A. Expiration of approvals. Any approval from the terms of any
developmental ordinance of the Township of Westampton, including but
not limited to the Zoning Ordinance, the Subdivision Ordinance, the
Design and Site Plan Review Ordinance, the Land Use Procedures
Ordinance, those ordinances dealing with excavation and floodplain
regulation and the Soil Removal Ordinance, shall expire unless
construction shall have been actually commenced or completed in
accordance with the provisions set forth below.
(1) Any variance, conditional use permit, special exception, special use
permit's interpretation of a Zoning Ordinance, decision with
respect to appeal from a decision of the Construction Official or
other appropriate official or any other construction official or other
appropriate official, or any other approval or decision under the
land development ordinances of this township other than
subdivision and site plan approvals shall expire unless construction
or alteration shall have been actually commenced on each and
every structure permitted by said approval or unless such
permitted use has actually been commenced within one year from
the date of approval by the approving authority.
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Subdivision of Land, Ch. 250, Zoning, and Ch. 196, Site Plan
Review, respectively.
§ 149-24 WESTAMPTON CODE § 149-25
149:194
(2) Any subdivision or site plan approval shall expire within three years
from the date of preliminary plat approval if no application has
been filed for final approval or extension of the preliminary plat
approval granted by the approving authority in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter set forth below. If final plat approval has
been granted, this provision with respect to preliminary plat
approval shall be inapplicable, and the expiration of approval shall
be governed as is set forth below with respect to final plats.
(3) Any subdivision or site plan approval shall expire within two years
from the date of final plat approval unless construction shall have
been actually commenced on those improvements, whether ontract,
off-tract, on-site or off-site, required as part of the approval,
as a condition of the approval or shown on the plan presented for
approval or plan revised in accordance with the approval. Said
improvements shall include but not be limited to streets, grading,
pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, streetlighting, shade trees,
surveyors' monuments as required by the Map Filing Law, water
mains, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers or other means of
sewage disposal, drainage structures, erosion control and
sedimentation control devices, public improvements of open space
and, in the case of site plan only, other on-site improvements and
landscaping. If the performance bond covering any of the above
improvements expires prior to the two-year period following final
plat approval without completion of the aforesaid improvements
covered by the bond, the approval shall expire with the expiration
of the bond.
B. Extension of time period for approval. Any approval requiring an
improvement as is set forth above shall last for the life of the
performance bond and any extension of said bond. All improvements
must be completed during the effective life of the performance bond or
the approval shall expire. Any approval may be extended by resolution
of the approving authority. Any extension of preliminary or final
approval of a site plan or subdivision by the approving authority,
pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, shall automatically extend
those time periods for expiration of approvals as are set forth above.
C. Completion of construction. All improvements set forth above must be
completed during the effective life of the performance bond
guaranteeing that improvement or the approval shall expire. Those
improvements which must be commenced during a period of time
following approval as is set forth above shall be completed in
accordance with the building permit or construction permit issued by
the state or municipality, within the time period set forth by such permit
or the law authorizing such permit, requiring continuation of work upon
the premises, building or use. A cessation of construction for a sixmonth
period shall be prima facie evidence of intent to abandon, at
which time the approval shall expire without hearing or notice unless
the permit has been renewed.
§ 149-25 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 149-25
149:195
D. Previously approved applications, uses and plans. Any previous
approval granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, the Land
Development Board or the township governing body of the Township of
Westampton, wherein no construction of the use approved or the
improvements required by the approval has commenced, shall expire
on July 2, 1980, unless an extension is granted by the interpretation of
one of the provisions set forth in this section. 45 [Amended
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
45.Editor's Note: The former section pertaining to appeals to Zoning Board of Adjustment,
which immediately followed this section, was repealed 1-13-1998 by Ord. No. 1-1998.
§ 149-25 WESTAMPTON CODE § 149-25
149:196
ARTICLE III
Appeals
§ 149-26. Appeals from Land Development Board to governing body.
[Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
An appeal from any final decision of the Land Development Board may
be taken to the governing body, provided that such appeal shall be made
within 10 days of the date of publication of such final decision of the Land
Development Board. Such appeal shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17. 46
§ 149-27. Escrow deposit required to cover appeal expenses.
[Added 2-26-1981 by Ord. No. 1-1981; amended 9-21-1992 by Ord.
No. 10-1992]
Immediately upon filing the notice of appeal with the Township Clerk/
Administrator, the entity taking the appeal to the governing body pursuant
to § 149-26 of the Code of the Township of Westampton shall deposit in
escrow the sum of $50. The amount placed in escrow shall be set up
in an escrow fund to be placed with the Township Treasurer. Said fund
shall be used to pay the fees of any professional personnel employed to
process, review, inspect or make recommendations with respect to the
appeal and the documents submitted therewith. Services to be paid out
of the escrow fund shall include but not be limited to legal, engineering,
planning, accounting and processing fees. The fees to be charged shall be
made in accordance with a statement of fees filed by each professional
employee with the Township Clerk/Administrator. If at any time the escrow
fund shall be deemed by the Township Treasurer to be insufficient to cover
the actual or anticipated expenses with respect to the professional review,
said funds shall be subject to increase on demand. If at any time it becomes
evident that the escrow is or will be insufficient to cover the expenses of the
township's professional personnel, the appellant shall increase the fund as
required by the township. Sums not utilized in the review process shall be
returned to the appellant. No decision shall be rendered by the governing
body with respect to an appeal unless the escrow fund is sufficient to cover
the actual or anticipated expenses with respect to the professional review.
46.Editor's Note: The former section pertaining to appeals from the Zoning Board of
Adjustment to the governing body, which immediately followed this section, was repealed
1-13-1998 by Ord. No. 1-1998.
§ 149-26 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 149-27
149:197

ARTICLE IV
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 149-28. Definitions.
Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in c. 291, P.L.
1975,47 such term is intended to have the meaning set forth in the definition
of such term found in said statute, unless a contrary intention is clearly
expressed from the context of this chapter.
§ 149-29. Repealer.
All sections of the Land Subdivision Ordinance, the Zoning Ordinance,
the Design and Site Plan Review Ordinance,48 or any other ordinance of
the Township of Westampton which contains provisions contrary to the
provisions of this chapter shall be and are hereby, to the extent of such
inconsistency, repealed.
§ 149-30. Provisions continued; interim zoning.
The substantive provisions of the Land Subdivision Ordinance, the Zoning
Ordinance, the Design and Site Plan Review Ordinance or any other
ordinance of the Township of Westampton and the development regulations
set forth therein shall continue in full force and effect. The Zoning
Ordinance shall continue as an interim ordinance from the effective date of
this chapter.
§ 149-31. Pending applications.
All applications for development filed prior to the effective date of this
chapter may be continued, but any appeals arising out of decisions made on
any such application shall be governed by the provisions of Article III of this
chapter.
§ 149-32. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Use Procedures
Ordinance of the Township of Westampton."
§ 149-33. Filing of copies. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No.
10-1992]
Immediately upon adoption of this chapter, the Municipal Clerk/
Administrator shall file a copy of this chapter with the County Land
Development Board and copies of all other ordinances of the municipality
relating to land use, such as the Subdivision, Zoning and Site Plan Review
Ordinances.
47.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Subdivision of Land, Ch. 250, Zoning and Ch. 196, Site Plan
Review, respectively.
§ 149-28 LAND USE PROCEDURES § 149-33
149:199
Chapter 152
LICENSES AND PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dealers in precious gems and metals — See
Ch. 177.
Solicitors and canvassers — See Ch. 203.
§ 152-1. License required.
No person shall either directly or indirectly conduct any business as defined
in this section in the township unless he has obtained a mercantile license.
§ 152-2. Application. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992]
Any person required to procure a merchantile license under the provisions
of this chapter shall submit an application to the Township Clerk/
Administrator accompanied by the required fee. The application shall be on
a form provided by the Clerk and shall contain the following:
A. For the purposes of this section, any person shall be deemed to be
engaged in a business and subject to the provisions of this section when
he does either or both of the following acts:
(1) Sells any goods or services from a fixed location in the township
where the business is conducted directly from a fixed location.
(2) Solicits business or offers goods or services for sale or for hire from
a fixed location in the township where the business is conducted
directly from the fixed location.
B. The word "person," as used in this chapter, shall include entities as well
as individuals.
A. A statement as to whether there has been any previous revocation or
suspension of any license issued to the applicant by the township and
the reasons therefore.
B. A statement that the operation fo the applicant's business at the
location requested will not violate the Zoning Ordinance of the
township or any other township49 ordinance or state law.
C. A statement that the applicant is not indebted or obligated in any
manner to the township except for current taxes.
D. The name of the person or entity who will operate the business and to
whom the license is to be issued; if it is a sole proprietorship, the name,
address and home phone number of the owner and any other person to
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning,
§ 149-33 WESTAMPTON CODE § 152-2
152:200
§ 152-3. License fee; transfers; renewal.
§ 152-4. Transferability.
Except as set forth in § 152-3 above, mercantile licenses shall be
nontransferable and nonassignable.
§ 152-5. Investigation; appeal.
Upon submission of the application and required fee to the Township Clerk,
the township shall cause an investigation to be made as to the information
supplied in the application. If a license is not granted, the Clerk shall advise
the applicant, in writing, within 30 days after the filing of the application.
If approved, the license shall be issued by the township. If disapproved, the
fee shall be returned, and the applicant shall have 10 days from receipt
of the notice of disapproval to appeal to the Township Committee. The
Committee shall render a decision as to the accuracy of the facts set forth
in the application no later than 30 days after the date of the taking of the
appeal, after giving the applicant notice and an opportunity to be heard.
§ 152-6. Responsibilities of license holder.
The holder of a mercantile license shall:
be notified in event of an emergency; if the tntity is a partnership,
the name and adddress of all general partners; if a corporation, the
name and address of local officers and/or managers; and for both
corporations and partnerships, the name, address and number of the
individual to be notified in event of an emergency.
E. The address and description of the premises at which the business is to
be carried on and the name and address of the owners of the premises,
if the applicant is a tenant and not the owner.
A. The annual fee for a mercantile license shall be $50. Upon transfer of
the location of the licensed business to a new location within the
township, a license may be transferred within its current term on
amendment of the information contained in the application for license
and payment of a transfer fee of $15. [Amended 5-27-2008 by Ord.
No. 5-2008]
B. All license fees shall be paid in advance to the township, and the annual
fee shall be based upon a fiscal year and shall be prorated on a
quarterly basis.
C. Mercantile licenses shall be renewed annually on or before July 1 of
each year by submitting a renewal application along with the requisite
annual fee.
A. Permit reasonable inspections to be made of his premises by
appropriate township officials.
§ 152-2 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 152-6
152:201
§ 152-7. Permits for nonprofit and public welfare purposes.
The Township Committee may authorize the issuance of special permits
without the payment of the mercantile license fee to any public, charitable,
educational, literary, fraternal or religious organization for the conduct
or operation of a temporary nonprofit enterprise of a public, charitable,
educational, literary, fraternal or religious nature. However, applicants shall
submit the usual application form in the manner provided and, if such
permit is granted, shall observe all other requirements of this chapter.
§ 152-8. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 152-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both,
in the discretion of the Judge before whom such conviction shall be had.
Each and every violation under this chapter or each day that any provision
of this chapter shall have been violated shall be construed as a separate and
distinctive offense thereunder.
Chapter 155
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch. 95.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Solicitors and canvassers — See Ch. 203.
Solid waste — See Ch. 206.
B. Permit access to the licensed premises at all reasonable times for the
purpose of inspection.
C. Avoid all prohibited, improper, unlawful or unnecessary practices or
conditions which do or may adversely affect public health, morals or
welfare.
D. Post and maintain his license on the licensed premises in a place where
it may readily be seen at all times.
E. Maintain all permits and licenses required by any law or regulation.
A. Any person acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
§ 152-6 WESTAMPTON CODE § 152-9
155:202
§ 155-1. Littering prohibited.
No person shall discard, deposit, throw or leave any wastepaper, tin cans,
bottles, garbage, waste, trash or refuse of any kind whatsoever upon any
public street, road, avenue, park or other public place.
§ 155-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation (as defined by
general law), any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department
of the United States in accordance with federal statute or regulation and
any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided
by general law. In addition thereto, "newspaper" shall mean and include
any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than
four issues per year and sold to the public. The term "newspaper" shall
not include publications delivered free of charge, not at the request of
the property owner, which consist primarily of advertising material. Such
publications are, for the purposes of this chapter, to be considered
handbills.
§ 155-3. Distribution of handbills.
A. No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any sidewalk,
street or other public place within the township, nor shall any person
hand out, distribute or sell any handbill in any public place; provided,
however, that it shall not be unlawful for any person to hand out or
distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any handbill to any
person willing to accept it.
B. No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle;
provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a
person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof,
a handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
C. No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any private
premises which are temporarily or continually uninhabited or vacant.
D. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill upon any
private premises if requested by anyone therein not to do so or if there
is placed on said premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance
thereof a sign bearing the words "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or
Agents," "No Advertisement" or any similar notice indicating in any
manner that the occupants of said premises do not desire to be
molested or have their rights of privacy disturbed or to have any such
handbills left upon such premises.
§ 152-9 LITTERING § 155-3
155:203
§ 155-4. Posting of notices.
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device
calculated to attract the attention of the public to any lamppost, public
utility pole or shade tree or upon any public structure or building, except as
may be authorized or required by law.
§ 155-5. Activities prohibited. [Added 6-6-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
No person shall:
§ 155-6. Covering of vehicles required. [Added 6-6-1988 by Ord. No.
7-1988]
All vehicles shall be covered so as to prevent the dropping, leaking or
otherwise escaping of the vehicle's load.
E. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute or cause to be thrown,
deposited or distributed any handbill in or upon private premises which
are inhabited, if the owner of said premises has either posted said
premises as specified in Subsection D or notified the publisher or
distributor of said handbill, by certified mail, return receipt requested,
that no handbills are to be delivered to said premises. In the case of
premises which are not posted and for which no notice has been sent, a
person may place or deposit handbills thereupon, being careful to
secure same and prevent such handbill from being blown or drifting
about such premises or sidewalks or streets or other public places;
mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law
or regulations.
F. Exemptions.
(1) The provisions of Subsections D and E shall not apply to the
distribution of mail by the United States nor to newspapers, as
defined herein, except that newspapers shall be placed on private
property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public
place or upon private property.
(2) The provisions of Subsections D and E shall not apply to the
distribution of any handbill, the entire contents of which consists
solely of religious written matter.
A. Discard or dump any household or commercial solid waste in any place
not specifically designated for the purpose of solid waste storage or
disposal.
B. Store any bulky household items, such as appliances, furniture or
mattresses or tires except in a fully enclosed structure in any
residential area of the township.
§ 155-3 WESTAMPTON CODE § 155-7
155:204
§ 155-7. Construction site debris. [Added 6-6-1988 by Ord. No.
7-1988]
No person shall cause the accumulation of debris on or around a
construction site or shall store the same in such a manner that it is likely to
be removed by natural forces onto adjacent property.
§ 155-8. Open or overflowing disposal bins prohibited. [Added
6-6-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
No person shall cause or allow open or overflowing commercial, industrial
or residential waste disposal bins.
§ 155-9. Sidewalks and curbs to be kept free from obstruction,
nuisances and litter. [Added 6-6-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in charge of any building
or structure shall keep and cause to be kept the sidewalk and curb abutting
his building or structure free from obstruction and nuisances of every kind
and shall keep said sidewalks, areaways, backyards, courts and alleys free
from litter and other offensive material.
§ 155-10. Disposal of sweepings. [Added 6-6-1988 by Ord. No.
7-1988]
No person shall sweep or deposit into any gutter, street, catch basin or
other public place any accumulation of litter from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. All such sweepings shall be collected and properly
containerized for disposal.
§ 155-11. litter receptacles. [Added 6-6-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
Litter receptacles shall be required and serviced in the following public
places by the proprietors of said places or sponsors of said events:
sidewalks used by pedestrians in active retail, commercially zoned areas,
such that at a minimum there shall be no single linear quarter-mile without
a receptacle, buildings held out for use by the public, including but not
limited to government buildings, railroad and bus stations, parks, drivein
restaurants, all vendor locations, self-service refreshment areas,
construction sites, gasoline service station islands, shopping centers,
parking lots, campgrounds and trailer parks, marinas, boat moorage and
fueling stations, boat launching areas, public and private piers operated for
public use, beaches and bathing areas and at special events to which the
public is invited, including sporting events, parades, carnivals, circuses and
festivals.
§ 155-12. Farm activities excluded. [Added 6-6-1988 by Ord. No.
7-1988]
Nothing contained herein shall be interpreted to prohibit normal farming
and agricultural activities.
§ 155-7 LITTERING § 155-13
155:205
§ 155-13. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 158
RESERVED
Chapter 166
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 117.
§ 166-1. Creation of loud, unreasonable or unnecessary noise
prohibited.
A. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity convicted of a violation of
this chapter or any section thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less
than $50 nor more than $100 if said conviction constitutes a first
offense. For any second or subsequent offense, said person, firm,
corporation or other entity shall be sentenced to a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $500 or a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90
days, or both, in the discretion of the sentencing court. In addition, any
person, firm, corporation or other entity convicted of a violation of this
chapter shall pay all expenses incurred for the removal of said fitter.
B. Each day that any violation hereunder shall continue shall be deemed a
separate offense or violation.
A. The making, creating or permitting of any noise of such character,
intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life, health or welfare of
any individual or which steadily or intermittently annoys, disturbs,
injures or endangers the comfort, repose, peace or safety of any
individual is hereby prohibited.
B. Construction or repair of buildings. The erection (including excavating),
demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, October through March,
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, April
through September, and on Saturday and Sunday from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. is prohibited except in the case of urgent necessity in the interest
of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the
Township.
§ 155-13 WESTAMPTON CODE § 166-1
166:206
Chapter 171
PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 82.
Curfew — See Ch. 112.
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 117.
§ 171-1. Legislative intent.
The Township Committee does specifically find that far too many minors
are committing breaches of the public peace, which, in significant part, is
occasioned by a failure of the parent of the minor to exercise reasonable
control and supervision over the minor. Although the existing statutes do
afford a means to alert parents to their responsibilities to both the minor
and society in general, it is the considered opinion and legislative judgment
of the Township Committee that further legislation is necessary to
accomplish effective parental control and supervision. This chapter,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, is intended to fill this void.
§ 171-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are
defined as follows:
MINOR — An person under the age of 18 years.
PARENT — Includes either or both parents of a minor, the legal
guardians of such minor or any other person(s) having the care or
custody of the minor committing the violation of the public peace.
However, the term "parent" shall not apply to parents, legal guardians
or other persons whose custody and control over such minor has been
removed by court order, decree or judgment or military service or
marriage of such minor.
VIOLATION OF THE PUBLIC PEACE — Includes any of the following
acts: defacing, damaging or destroying public property or the private
property of another within the Township of Westampton; or committing
an assault or assault and battery upon another in the township; or
consuming and/or possessing alcoholic beverages in a public place in
the township; or breaking and entering or entering without breaking
into the property of another with the intent to steal; or threatening
another with the intention of extorting money or anything of value; or
possession and/or use of a controlled dangerous substance, as same
shall be defined under Title 24, Revised Statutes of New Jersey; or
juvenile delinquency based upon any of the above offenses.
B. Word usage. In order for a parent to violate § 171-3 of this chapter,
utilizing the terminology "allow," "permit" or "suffer," where a minor is
§ 166-1 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 171-2
171:207
§ 171-3. Certain acts prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any parent to assist, aid, abet, allow, permit, suffer
or encourage a minor to commit a violation of the public peace, as defined
herein, either by overt act, by failure to act or by lack of supervision and
control over such minor.
§ 171-4. Violations and penalties.
Any parent who shall violate the terms of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to punishment by a fine not exceeding $500, in the
discretion of the court.
§ 171-5. Remedy to be cumulative.
The remedy provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative, not exclusive,
and the state or any other person shall have the right to proceed under any
other legally available remedies.
Chapter 172
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation Advisory Committee — See Ch. 59.
§ 172-1. Finding and purpose.
The Township Committee of the Township of Westampton finds that it is in
the best interest of the residents of Westampton Township to regulate the
use of the buildings, parks, playgrounds and open space areas owned and
maintained by the Township and to establish regulations related to said use.
§ 172-2. Facilities use policy.
The Township Committee of the Township of Westampton has adopted
and incorporates by reference herein the Westampton Township Facilities
Use Policy as a means to reserve use of the Township's facilities, thereby
improving the accessibility and scheduling of facilities and, at the same
apprehended and convicted of a violation of the public peace, the
Chief of Police of the township, or his designated agent, shall forthwith
serve written notice of the act and conviction on the parent. If at any
time within 180 days of the giving of such notice, such minor shall
again be charged and thereafter be subsequently convicted of the same
classification of a violation of the public peace, it shall be rebuttably
presumed that the parent allowed, permitted or suffered said minor to
commit a violation of the public peace.
§ 171-2 WESTAMPTON CODE § 172-2
171:208
time, provide for their safe, constructive and prolonged use. All groups,
organizations and/or leagues will be required to pay a reasonable fee to use
Township facilities and Board of Education facilities which are maintained
by the Township. Said fees, rents, rates or other charges shall be kept on file
with the Director of Recreation and may be modified as appropriate, subject
to review and approval by the Township Committee.
§ 172-3. Prohibited acts.
A. It shall be unlawful and in violation of this chapter for any person, firm,
corporation or other entity to perform or permit to be performed any of
the following acts within any building, park, playground or open space
area of the Township to:
(1) Operate, drive or park any automobile except on a street, driveway
or parking lot in any park, playground or open space area or park
or leave any such vehicle in any place other than the areas
established for public parking. No two-wheeled motor vehicle shall
be permitted in any park, playground or open space area except in
specific locations provided for said use, if any.
(2) Bring animals on any Township-owned premises unless the animal
is a certified and registered service animal.
(3) Smoke or carry, possess or consume any alcoholic beverages,
narcotics or drugs.
(4) Hold, possess or use any firearm or weapon within the boundaries
of any park, playground or open space area but for law
enforcement officers and firearm permit holders.
(5) Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act, including
disturbing the peace, using profanity or committing any assault,
battery or fighting.
(6) Loiter in parked vehicles or park overnight.
(7) Litter or dump.
(8) Use or cause to be used any loud music or loudspeakers, public
address systems or amplifiers without first having obtained written
permission from the Township.
(9) Barbecue or use propane tanks except by permit.
(10) Mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or remove
any Township property, whether temporary or permanent,
monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers or other
structures or equipment facilities of a park, playground or open
space area or parts thereof whatsoever, either real or personal.
(11) Hit balls against fences or practice golf.
§ 172-2 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 172-3
171:209
§ 172-4. Hours of operation; use of areas and facilities.
(12) Sell, vend, peddle or offer for sale any commodity or article within
any park, playground or open space area which such activity is
purely for pecuniary profit, other than employees and officials of
the Recreation Department or persons having prior written
permission from the Township. No vendors of any kind are allowed
except by permit.
(13) Swim in any pond, lake stream or other body of water, except for
areas designated and posted as approved for swimming.
(14) Fish or operate motorboats, canoes, kayaks and any other water
vehicle on any stream, lake or body of water owned and operated
by Westampton Township when posted.
B. In addition to the above, failure of any person, firm, corporation or
other entity to abide by the following regulations on the Westampton
Sports Complex turf fields shall be unlawful and in violation of this
chapter:
(1) No food or drinks other than sports drinks and water.
(2) No chewing gum, nuts or sunflower seeds.
(3) No metal cleats.
(4) No driving of tent stakes or other sharp objects that could pierce or
damage the turf.
(5) No bicycles, scooters, skateboards, rollerblades, etc.
(6) No dragging of goals and equipment.
(7) No picking or pulling of grass fibers or infill materials.
A. The public parks, playgrounds and open space areas of Westampton
Township that do not have lighting shall be open for use from sunrise to
sunset.
B. The public parks, playgrounds and open space areas of Westampton
Township equipped with lighting shall be open from sunrise until sunset
unless the lighting is operational in which case they shall not be lit and
occupied after 10:00 p.m. on Sundays through Thursdays and after
11:00 p.m. on Fridays and Saturdays. If the lights are not in operation,
these parks, playgrounds and open space areas shall be closed after
sunset in the evening.
C. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity not in the possession of a
valid permit issued by Westampton Township on a public park,
playground or open space area before sunrise or after closing time shall
be deemed in violation of this section.
§ 172-3 WESTAMPTON CODE § 172-4
171:210
§ 172-5. Violations and penalties.
D. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, all parks, playgrounds
and open space areas shall be open to the public every day of the year
during the hours designated in this section.
E. In the case of inclement weather, field maintenance or other significant
determination by Township personnel, any area may be declared closed
to the public by the Township at any time and for any interval of time,
either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or
otherwise), regardless of whether an individual or organization has
obtained a permit to use the same. The Township shall post notice of
any closure near the entrances to the park, playground or open space
area or the specific field area as appropriate.
F. No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall enter any portion or
area of any park, playground or open space area closed or restricted by
the Township, as indicated and directed by posted notice or signs.
G. Westampton Township will not be liable for any vehicle damage or
personal damage; all sports participants, spectators, coaches, players,
vendors, runners, and walkers in playground and picnic areas are at
risk to be hit with balls. All are to be alert at all times.
H. Municipal buildings, parks, playgrounds and open space areas are
under video surveillance and police patrol.
I. All of the above shall also pertain to any building, park, playground or
open space area when used or occupied by any departmental entity of
Westampton Township unless the governing rules of such space
contradict any provision of this chapter, in which case the governing
rules of the space shall apply.
A. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity convicted of a violation of
this chapter or any section thereof shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed $2,500 if said conviction constitutes a first offense. For any
second or subsequent offense, said person, firm, corporation or other
entity shall be sentenced to a fine not to exceed $5,000 or a term of
imprisonment or period of community service not to exceed 90 days, or
both, in the discretion of the sentencing court.
B. In addition to any fine that may be imposed in violation of this section,
any person, firm, corporation or other entity found guilty, or, if a minor,
adjudicated, of unauthorized use of the Township parks, playgrounds,
or open space areas shall be monetarily liable for the damage caused to
the facility, including all legal and/or administrative costs to repair all
damage.
§ 172-4 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 172-5
171:211
Chapter 177
PRECIOUS GEMS AND METALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 152.
§ 172-5 WESTAMPTON CODE § 172-5
177:212
ARTICLE I
Dealers
[Adopted 6-25-1981 by Ord. No. 12-1981]
§ 177-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to terms used within this chapter,
unless the context requires otherwise:
BUYER — Any person, partnership or corporation who or which, through
any means, buys gold, silver, precious or semiprecious metals or gems.
DEALER — Any person, partnership or corporation who or which, through
any means, buys or sells gold, silver, precious or semiprecious metals or
gems and includes anyone advertising the purchase or sale of any of the
aforementioned items.
GOLD — Any article or product with a gold content, without regard to the
fineness thereof.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
PRECIOUS OR SEMIPRECIOUS GEM — Includes but is not limited to those
categories known as "diamonds," "rubies," "pearls" and "sapphires" and
commonly called a "jewel."
PURCHASE — Includes any exchange of gold, silver or any precious or
semiprecious gem for anything of value. A payment need not be made
by way of money in order to constitute purchase for the purposes of this
chapter.
REGULATED ACTIVITY — The purchase of any used item containing gold or
silver for subsequent resale purposes and not for personal use.
SELLER — Any person, partnership or corporation who or which, through
any means, sells gold, silver, precious or semiprecious metals or gems.
SILVER — Any article or product with a silver content, without regard to
fineness thereof.
USED ITEM CONTAINING GOLD OR SILVER — Any item containing gold
or silver previously sold or transferred to a consumer for the personal use
or enjoyment of such consumer.
§ 177-2. License required. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No.
10-1992]
No person shall engage in a regulated activity as defined above without
having first obtained a license therefor from the Township Clerk/
Administrator, which license shall bear a number issued by the Township
Clerk/Administrator and shall be prominently displayed within the licensed
premises. The requirement of a license shall apply to the business entity and
to any individual employee who engages in a regulated activity on behalf of
a business entity.
§ 177-1 PRECIOUS GEMS AND METALS § 177-3
177:213
§ 177-3. License fee.
At the time of filing the application for a license, a license fee of $100
shall be paid for the initial license for the premises where the activity is
to be conducted, together with a fee of $25 for each employee who is to
be licensed. Thereafter, the annual renewal for the license and for each
employee who is to be licensed shall be $25.
§ 177-4. Term of license.
Each license shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it is issued.
§ 177-5. Application for license. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No.
10-1992]
An application for license shall be in writing on forms established by the
Township Clerk/Administrator and shall state the full name and place of
residence of the applicant or, if the applicant be a partnership, of each
member thereof or, if a corporation or association, of each officer and
stockholder thereof, together with the place or places where the business
is to be conducted. For any corporation whose stock is publicly traded,
the requirement for the information on each officer and stockholder may
be satisfied by attaching to the application a copy of the most recent
annual report of the corporation listing the officers and directors of the
corporation, along with a certification as to the total number of stockholders
and the name and address of any stockholder holding more than 10% of
the outstanding stock. The application shall include the fingerprints of each
individual applicant or licensed employee, each member of a partnership
or each stockholder holding more than 10% of the outstanding stock in a
corporate applicant.
§ 177-6. Investigation of applicant; issuance or denial of license.
[Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992]
Upon receipt of an application completed pursuant to this chapter, the
Clerk/Administrator shall refer the application to the Chief of Police, who
shall institute such investigation of the applicant's moral character and
business responsibility as he deems necessary for the protection of the
public welfare. Upon completion of the investigation, which in no case shall
take more than 30 days, the Chief of Police shall return the application
or a copy thereof to the Clerk/Administrator, accompanied by his
recommendation as to whether the license should be issued or denied. If the
recommendation of the Chief of Police is to deny the license, the grounds
for the recommendation shall be stated. Grounds for recommending denial
of a license may include information indicating that the applicant is not of
good moral character or is of questionable business responsibility, and a
recommendation of denial shall be given if the applicant has been convicted
of a crime of the first or second degree or of any crime involving dishonesty,
fraud, deceit or misrepresentation. Upon receipt of the recommendation
of the Chief of Police, the Clerk/Administrator shall issue or deny the
§ 177-3 WESTAMPTON CODE § 177-6
177:214
license accordingly. Any person aggrieved by such denial may appeal to the
Township Committee which may confirm or reverse the denial as deemed
advisable.
§ 177-7. Revocation of license.
Any license may be revoked for any violation of this chapter, in addition
to any other penalty imposed for any violation. Upon any violation, the
Township Committee may suspend a license upon written notice to the
license holder. Upon receipt of the notice of suspension the license holder
may, within 10 days, request a hearing on the suspension before the
Township Committee. The hearing shall be held within 30 days of the
request, at which hearing the license holder shall have the opportunity to
be heard. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Township Committee shall
either revoke the license or shall reinstate the license. In the event that the
license holder shall not request a hearing, the license shall be automatically
revoked upon the expiration of 10 days after the notice of suspension has
been given to the license holder.
§ 177-8. License limited.
No person licensed as a dealer in the township shall, by virtue of one
license, keep more than one place of business for receiving or taking goods.
§ 177-9. Doing business at place not covered by license prohibited.
No dealer shall, at any time, do business at any place other than the place
for which the license was granted.
§ 177-10. Record of transactions; inspection by police.
A. Every licensee shall issue to the seller and keep for his own records for
not less than one year a serialed receipt for each purchase of precious
metals, containing the following:
(1) The name and address of the buyer.
(2) Date of the transaction.
(3) The names of the precious metals purchased.
(4) The fineness of the precious metals purchased.
(5) The weight of the precious metals purchased.
(6) The prices paid for the precious metals at the standard measures of
weight and fineness.
(7) The name, address and signature of the seller.
(8) The driver's license number or social security number of the seller.
§ 177-6 PRECIOUS GEMS AND METALS § 177-10
177:215
§ 177-11. Prohibited transactions.
A licensee shall not accept or buy any gold, silver or precious or
semiprecious gem from any person under the age of 18 years, unless such
minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian and said parent or guardian
gives specific written consent to the transaction and acknowledges the
receipt required by the buyer to be given to the seller.
§ 177-12. Minimum retention of articles.
No dealers shall sell any articles until the same has been in their possession
at least 15 days.
§ 177-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person as defined above who violates any provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500
or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, within
the discretion of the Municipal Judge. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed in each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
B. The buyer shall make the record of transactions available for inspection
by any police officer.
§ 177-10 WESTAMPTON CODE § 177-13
177:216
Chapter 180
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch. 95.
Buildings unfit for human habitation — See
Ch. 106.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 128
Historic preservation — See Ch. 140.
Littering — See Ch. 155.
Solid waste — See Ch. 206.
§ 180-1. Certain deposits upon land or in buildings prohibited.
No person, firm, association or corporation shall deposit or cause or permit
to be deposited, or permit or allow to be continued (if previously deposited),
upon any land or in any building, any substances such as cans, metal, cloth,
paper or other rubbish, or garbage or offal, which may tend to harbor rats
or mice or otherwise create the possibility of fire, or which shall otherwise
in any manner tend to affect the public health.
§ 180-2. Depositing of certain materials: permit required;
procedure.
In the event of necessity, or if the depositing of any such materials shall be
claimed to be without any of the effects sought to be avoided by virtue of
this chapter, the person or persons seeking to make such deposit shall first
make application to the Township Committee, in writing, therein specifying
the location of the property upon which material is to be deposited, the
name of the depositor, the name of the owner or other persons interested
in the title to said lands and the nature of the material and the manner in
which the same is to be deposited or otherwise disposed of as well, also, as
any other and additional information which the Township Committee of said
township may deem necessary. If, following investigation and determination
of said application, the Township Committee shall, by majority vote,
determine that such disposition of the material specified shall not be
injurious to health or the cause of creation of vermin or other pests and
shall not be the creation of a fire menace, and that the same shall not in any
other manner be a source of public or private nuisance, a written permit for
such work in the manner specified may be issued in accordance with the
resolution of said Township Committee for such purpose.
§ 180-3. Abatement.
Any person, firm, association or corporation presently owning or renting
any building or tract of land in which is now deposited any of the materials
mentioned or otherwise referred to in § 180-1 of this chapter shall
immediately remove such materials and abate such nuisance or shall be
subject to the penalties of this chapter.
§ 177-13 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 180-4
180:217
§ 180-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-28-1974 by Ord. No.
1-1974]
Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation violating the
provisions of this chapter or any part thereof shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine of not exceeding $500 or imprisonment for not exceeding
90 days, or both, in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court or
other officer before whom hearing thereon is held, and such fine may be
imposed, collected and enforced in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:49-5 (1937),
or the amendments thereof or supplements thereto.
Chapter 182
PROPERTY, VACANT AND ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch. 95.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 106.
Littering — See Ch. 155.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Housing standards — See Ch. 254.
Nuisances — See Ch. 256.
§ 182-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CREDITOR — Consistent with Section 3 of P.L. 2008, c. 86, a state-chartered
bank, savings and loan association or any credit union, any person required
to be licensed under the provisions of the New Jersey Residential Mortgage
Lending Act,50 and any entity acting on behalf of the Creditor named in the
debt obligation, including, but not limited to, servicers.[Added 11-21-2016
by Ord. No. 22-2016]
OWNER — The title holder, any agent of the title holder having authority
to act with respect to a vacant property, and foreclosing entity subject to
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 (P.L. 2008, c.127, Sec. 17) or any other
entity determined by the Township of Westampton to have authority to act
with respect to the property.
VACANT AND ABANDONED PROPERTY — Any building used or to be
used as a residence or business which is not legally occupied or at which
substantially all lawful construction or business operations or residential
occupancy has ceased, and which is in such condition that it cannot legally
be reoccupied without repair or rehabilitation and at least two of the
following conditions exist:
50.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 17:11C-51 et seq.
§ 180-4 WESTAMPTON CODE § 182-1
180:218
§ 182-2. General requirements.
Overgrown or neglected vegetation, including, but not limited to,
brush, weeds, dead or dying trees;
A.
B. Infestation of insects, vermin, rats, or other pests;
The accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, or mail on the
property;
C.
D. Disconnected gas, electric, or water utility services to the property;
The accumulation of hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy substances or
materials on the property;
E.
F. The accumulation of junk, letters, trash, or debris on the property;
G. The absence of window treatments such as blinds, curtains, or shutters;
H. The absence of furnishings and personal items;
Statements by neighbors, delivery persons, or government employees
indicating that the residence is vacant and abandoned;
I.
Windows or entrances to the property that are boarded up or closed off,
or multiple windowpanes that are damaged, broken, and unrepaired;
J.
Doors to the property that are smashed through, broken off, unhinged,
or continually unlocked;
K.
A risk to the health, safety, or welfare of the public or any adjoining
or adjacent property owners, that exists due to acts of vandalism,
loitering, criminal conduct, or the physical destruction or deterioration
of the property;
L.
An uncorrected violation of a municipal building, housing, or similar
code during the preceding year, or any order by municipal authorities
declaring the property to be unfit for occupancy and to remain vacant
and unoccupied;
M.
The mortgagee or other authorized party has secured or winterized the
property due to the property being deemed vacant and unprotected or
in danger of freezing;
N.
A written statement issued by a mortgagor expressing the clear intent
of all mortgagors to abandon the property; or
O.
P. Any other reasonable indicia of abandonment.
A. Effective May 1, 2015, the owner of any vacant property as defined
herein shall within 60 days after the building becomes vacant property
or within 30 days after assuming ownership of the vacant property,
whichever is later, file a registration statement for each such vacant
property with the Township of Westampton Code Enforcement Official
§ 182-1 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 182-2
180:219
§ 182-3. Registration statement requirements; property inspection.
on forms provided by the Township Code Enforcement Official for such
purposes. The registration shall remain valid until the end of the
calendar year. The owner shall be required to renew the registration
annually, no later than January 31, as long as the building remains
vacant property and shall pay a registration or renewal fee in the
amount prescribed in § 182-4 of this chapter for each vacant property
registered.
B. Any owner of any building that meets the definition of vacant property
prior to May 1, 2015, shall file a registration statement for that property
on or before May 31, 2015. The registration statement shall include the
information required under § 182-3 of this chapter, as well as any
additional information that the Township Code Enforcement Official
may reasonably require.
C. The owner shall notify the Township Code Enforcement Official within
30 days of any change in the registration information by filing an
amended registration statement on a form provided by the Township
Code Enforcement Official for such purpose.
D. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the Township of
Westampton against the owner or owners of the building.
A. After filing a registration statement or a renewal of a registration
statement, the owner of any vacant property shall provide access to the
Township Code Enforcement Official to conduct an exterior and interior
inspection of the building to determine compliance with the Township
Code, following reasonable notice, during the period covered by the
initial registration or any subsequent renewal.
B. The registration statement shall include the name, street address, and
telephone number of a natural person 18 years of age or older,
designated by the owner or owners as the authorized agent for
receiving notices of code violations and for receiving process in any
court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding, on behalf
of such owner or owners in connection with the enforcement of any
applicable code. This person must maintain an office in the State of
New Jersey or reside within the State of New Jersey. The statement
shall also include the name of the person responsible for maintaining
and security of the property, if different.
C. An owner who is a natural person and who meets the requirements of
this chapter as to location of residence or office may designate him- or
herself as agent.
D. By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this section,
the owner consents to receive any and all notices of code violations
§ 182-2 WESTAMPTON CODE § 182-3
180:220
§ 182-4. Fee schedule.
§ 182-5. Requirements for owners of vacant and abandoned
property.
The owner of any building that has become a vacant and abandoned
property, and any person maintaining, operating, or collecting rent for any
such building that has become vacant shall, within 30 days thereof:
concerning the registered vacant property and all process in any court
proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding brought to
enforce code provisions concerning the registered building by service
of the notice or process on the authorized agent. Any owner who has
designated an authorized agent under the provisions of this section
shall be deemed to consent to the continuation of the agent's
designation for the purposes of this section until the owner notifies
the Township Code Enforcement Official of a change of authorized
agent or until the owner files a new annual registration statement. The
designation of an authorized agent in no way releases the owner from
any requirement of this chapter.
A. The initial registration fee for a vacant and abandoned property as
defined in § 182-1 shall be $250 and shall be prorated until the end of
that calendar year. [Amended 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 22-2016]
B. Vacant and abandoned property registration fee schedule.
(1) Initial registration: $250.
(2) First renewal: $500.
(3) Second subsequent renewal: $750. [Amended 11-21-2016 by
Ord. No. 22-2016]
(4) Any subsequent renewal: $1,000. [Added 11-21-2016 by Ord.
No. 22-2016]
A. Enclose and secure the building against unauthorized entry as provided
in the applicable provisions of the Township Code, or as set forth in
rules and regulations supplementing those codes; and
B. Post a sign affixed to the inside of the building indicating the name,
address, and telephone number of the owner, the owner's authorized
agent for the purpose of service of process (if designated pursuant to
§ 182-3 of this chapter), and the person responsible for day-to-day
supervision and management of the building, if such person is different
from the owner holding title or authorized agent. The sign shall be of a
size and placed in such a location so as to be legible from the nearest
public street or sidewalk, whichever is nearer, but shall be no smaller
than 15 inches by 17 inches; and
§ 182-3 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 182-5
180:221
§ 182-6. Administration.
The Township Committee for the Township of Westampton may issue rules
and regulations for the administration of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 182-7. Violations and penalties.
§ 182-8. Compliance with other provisions.
Nothing in this chapter is intended to nor shall be read to conflict or prevent
the Township of Westampton from taking action against buildings found to
be unfit for human habitation or unsafe structures as provided in applicable
C. Secure the building from unauthorized entry and maintain the sign until
the building is again legally occupied or demolished or until repair or
rehabilitation of the building is complete.
D. Place a sign or posting indicating that unauthorized persons are not
permitted entry into the building or on the porch, curtilage or
surrounding areas in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
2C:18-3b(2). Said sign/posting shall clearly indicate "No trespassing" in
a form approved by the Township of Westampton and shall be placed in
a conspicuous location on the premises.
E. The owner of any vacant building shall acquire and otherwise maintain
liability insurance by procuring a vacancy policy in an amount of not
less than $300,000 for buildings designed primarily for use as
residential units and not less than $1,000,000 for any other building,
including, but not limited to, buildings designed for manufacturing,
industrial, storage or commercial uses, covering any damage to any
person or any property caused by any physical condition of or in the
building.
F. The owner shall attach evidence of the insurance to the owner's
registration statement. Any registration statement submitted that does
not include such evidence shall not be deemed to be a valid registration.
A. Any owner who is not in full compliance with this chapter or who
otherwise violates any provision of this chapter or of the rules and
regulations issued hereunder shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$500 and not more than $1,000 for each offense. Every day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
Fines assessed under this chapter shall be recoverable from the owner
and shall be a lien on the property.
B. For purposes of this chapter, failure to file a registration statement in
time, failure to provide correct information on the registration
statement, failure to comply with the provisions of § 182-5 of this
chapter, or such other matters as may be established by the rules and
regulations of the Township Committee for the Township of
Westampton shall be deemed to be violation of this chapter.
§ 182-5 WESTAMPTON CODE § 182-8
180:222
provisions of the Code of the Township of Westampton and/or the Uniform
Construction Code. Further, any action taken under any such code provision
other than the demolition of a structure shall not relieve an owner from its
obligations under this chapter.
§ 182-9. Upkeep of vacant and abandoned residential properties
subject to foreclosure proceedings. [Amended 11-21-2016 by Ord.
No. 22-2016]
A. Pursuant to the provisions of the Public Laws of 2014, Chapter 35,51 a
creditor, as defined in § 182-1, filing a summons and complaint to
foreclose a lien on a residential property that is vacant and abandoned,
whether the filing of the summons and complaint is made before or
after the determination that the property is vacant and abandoned,
shall be responsible for the care, maintenance, security, and upkeep of
the exterior of the residential property. This obligation applies whether
the determination that the property is vacant and abandoned is made
by the public officer pursuant to the provisions of this chapter of the
Code of the Township of Westampton, pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 2A:50-73 or otherwise.
B. If the public officer, or other authorized municipal official, determines
that a creditor obligated to care, maintain, secure and keep up a vacant
and abandoned property has failed to do so in violation of the provisions
of this chapter of the Code, the public officer or other authorized
municipal official shall issue a notice of violation to the creditor that has
filed a summons and complaint to foreclose on the property in question.
The notice shall require the person or entity to correct the violation
within 30 days of receipt of the notice, or within 10 days of receipt of
the notice if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health
and safety. The issuance of this notice shall constitute evidence that a
property is vacant and abandoned for purposes of N.J.S.A. 2A:50-73.
C. An out-of-state creditor shall include the full name and contact
information of the in-state representative or agent in the notice
required to be provided to the Municipal Clerk pursuant to paragraph
one of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51. An out-of-state creditor found by a court of
competent jurisdiction to have violated this provision shall be subject to
a fine of $2,500 for each day of the violation commencing on the day
after the ten-day period set forth in paragraph one of N.J.S.A. 46:10b-51
with respect to notifying the Municipal Clerk that an action to foreclose
on the property has been filed.
D. Except as set forth in this chapter and herein, any person, firm,
corporation or entity violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punishable as provided in this Code. A creditor required
to care, maintain, secure and keep up a property under this chapter
cited in a notice issued pursuant to Subsection 9B shall be subject to a
fine of $1,500 for each day of the violation.
51.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12s.
§ 182-8 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 182-9
180:223
Chapter 192
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 99.
Buildings unfit for human habitation — See
Ch. 106.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Site plan review — See Ch. 196.
Solid waste — See Ch. 206.
Excavation of streets — See Ch. 212, Art. II.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 215.
E. Notice of violations of property maintenance, building or other property
codes for any property declared vacant and abandoned pursuant to this
chapter shall be given to a foreclosing creditor pursuant to the
procedures of this Code as required by P.L. 2014, c. 35.52
52.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12s.
§ 182-9 WESTAMPTON CODE § 182-9
192:224
ARTICLE I
Use and Rents
[Adopted 4-19-1955]
§ 192-1. Schedule of charges for use of Mount Holly Sewerage
Authority system.53
Each person connected to the sewerage system of the Mount Holly
Sewerage Authority shall pay to the Township of Westampton a sewer
service charge in accordance with the following schedule:
A. Charges for sewage disposal service. [Amended 3-24-1983 by Ord.
No. 4-1983]
(1) Metered services. The charges for metered services shall be as set
forth on the attached Schedule A.54
(2) The charge for unmetered services shall be as set forth in the
attached Schedule B.55
(3) No rebate shall be made for water measured by the meter but not
discharged into the system, nor shall the Authority be responsible
for the accuracy of the meters.
B. The minimum charge for any premises or group of premises containing
two or more dwelling units, apartments or separately operated business
establishments, served through a single meter or connection, will be
determined by multiplying the aforesaid minimum charge by the
number of dwelling units, apartments or other establishments so
served.
C. Premises not discharging the entire volume of water into the sewerage
system will be allowed a proportionate reduction in the charges,
provided that the customer shall install and maintain facilities,
satisfactory to the Authority, for measuring either the volume
discharged or not discharged into the sewers.56
D. Customers using private water supplies, excepting where the usage is
solely domestic and applicable fixture rates may properly be used, and
excepting when the usage is at a reasonable uniform rate and is
estimated by the Authority to be less than 100,000 gallons per quarter,
will be required to install and maintain facilities, satisfactory to the
53.Editor's Note: An ordinance adopted 9-23-1968, establishing a contract between the
Township of Westampton and the Willingsboro Municipal Utilities Authority for sewage
disposal for a portion of the township, provides that the Willingsboro Municipal Utilities
Authority will handle directly all billings and collections for the use of its services.
54.Editor's Note: Schedules A and B are attached to Ord. No. 4-1983, which is on file in the
office of the Township Clerk/Administrator.
55.Editor's Note: Schedules A and B are attached to Ord. No. 4-1983, which is on file in the
office of the Township Clerk/Administrator.
56.Editor's Note: See also Subsection A(2).
§ 192-1 SEWERS § 192-1
192:225
§ 192-2. Discharge of industrial wastes and deleterious substances
prohibited; penalty.
§ 192-3. Installation of toilets required where sewer available;
penalty.
Authority, for measuring and determining the volume used or
discharged into the sewers.
E. In addition to the rates hereinbefore set forth, there shall be added to
each quarterly bill the amount of $1.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall discharge into said server any
industrial waste or anything deleterious to said sewers or the sewage
system of the Authority, but said sewers shall be used only in conformity
with the rules, regulations and practices of said Authority.
B. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $25 for
every day said violation continues.
A. The owner of each dwelling house whose lot borders on any of the
streets wherein a sewer main is laid shall, within 60 days of
construction of his house where the main already exists, install a toilet
in said house and connect the house to the sewer.
B. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of the section
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $25 for
each day said violation continues.
§ 192-1 WESTAMPTON CODE § 192-3
192:226
ARTICLE II
Connections
[Adopted 12-15-1970 by Ord. No. 6-1970]
§ 192-4. Sewer connections required.
The owner of any property located along the line of any sewer in the
Township of Westampton, on which property a house or other building with
toilet facilities is now or shall hereafter be erected, shall connect such house
or other building with such sewer.
§ 192-5. Written notice of order. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No.
10-1992]
The owner of such property failing to connect such house or other building
with the server shall be ordered to do so by the Township Committee,
and written notice of such order shall be given and served upon such
owner by the Township Clerk/Administrator, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, or by handing it to him personally or by leaving it at his place of
abode with a member of his family above the age of 18 years.
§ 192-6. Violations and penalties.
§ 192-7. Extension of time.
The Township Committee, with the approval of the Board of Health of this
township, may extend the time for connection because of unusual conditions
or extreme hardship.
A. Any owner of a property failing to comply with any order within 60 days
after service of such notice shall subject the property of that owner to
be assessed the minimum sewer charge the same as if the sewer were
connected, and such charge shall be a lien on the property and assessed
by the Tax Assessor of this township.
B. Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall fail to comply with
any order within 60 days after service of such notice shall pay a fine not
exceeding $25 and an additional fine of $10 for each day of delay, after
the expiration of the 60 days in which the provisions of the order or
notice are not complied with, to be levied by the Judge before whom
convicted.
§ 192-4 SEWERS § 192-7
192:227
Chapter 196
SITE PLAN REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 99.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 131.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 149.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 215.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 196-1. Purpose; site plan approval required; conformance with
other standards.
§ 196-2. Changes in use; requests for waiver of site plan review;
minor site plan.
A. The purpose of site plan review is to determine whether the proposed
building, structure or use will conform to the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey, the Zoning Chapter, the Land Subdivision Chapter and other
applicable requirements of the township. Site plan review shall work
towards the development of an aesthetically acceptable and wellordered
community serving the interest of the public health, safety and
general welfare of the township residents.
B. Prior to the excavation, grading or clearing of land for other than
agricultural purposes, or construction or issuance of any permit of the
Construction Official or Zoning Officer of the township, said
construction or permit pertaining to any building, structure or use
within the township, with the exception of a single-family dwelling in a
residential zone, site plan approval for the proposed grading, building,
structure or use must be obtained. No certificate of occupancy shall be
issued until and unless all construction and required improvements
shall have been completed in conformity with the approved site plan.
Notwithstanding the above, all development in the flood hazard area
shall require a site plan and be subject to the provisions of Chapter 131,
Floodplain Management, of the Township of Westampton, in addition to
the applicable sections of this chapter. Site plan review shall be
required prior to excavation, grading or clearing of land for other than
agricultural purposes in whole or in part in connection with the
installation of a second driveway on any premises. [Amended
8-18-1983 by Ord. No. 15-1983]
C. All construction and improvements shall be in accordance with the
design and construction standards for improvements set forth in the
Land Subdivision Chapter.57
57.Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Subdivision of Land.
§ 192-7 WESTAMPTON CODE § 196-2
192:228
A. With the exception of residential dwelling units, any change of
permitted use will void the previously issued certificate of occupancy
and require the issuance of a new certificate of occupancy. The new use
will be subject to site plan review.
B. Any applicant may request a waiver from site plan review as required
under the terms of this chapter, provided that the applicant's site plan
involves the following and is not within the flood hazard area:
(1) An existing building.
(2) No new construction.
(3) No extension of the on-tract parking improvements are required.
(4) No change in the existing drainage.
(5) Construction of a building for agricultural purposes.
C. Request for waiver of site plan review shall be made by completion of
an appropriate form provided by the administrative official and
payment of the requisite fee. In the event that site plan waiver is not
granted, the applicant's fee will be applied to the site plan application.
The applicant will then be required to go forward with the requisite site
plan application. The balance of the fee and all escrows will be required
in the event site plan review is not waived.
D. Minor site plan submission; definition and required data. [Added
8-10-1987 by Ord. No. 13-1987]
(1) Definition. For site development which is not large in scale but
which does not qualify for site plan waiver, submission as a minor
site plan shall be permitted. A "minor site plan" shall be defined as:
(a) Building construction of less than 1,000 square feet; and/or
(b) Clearing, grading, paving or excavation of less than 1,500
square feet.
(2) Required data. The required data to support a minor site plan
application are as follows:
(a) A plan which may be drawn by the applicant.
(b) A plan showing all existing improvements on the site.
(c) The plan showing those improvements to be constructed.
(d) The plan showing a North arrow or North point.
(e) The plan containing a scale.
(f) The plan showing the zoning district in which the property is
located.
§ 196-2 SEWERS § 196-3
192:229
§ 196-3. Submission of preliminary site plan.
§ 196-4. Submission of final site plan.
A. No later than 15 working days prior to a regularly scheduled Land
Development Board meeting, the applicant shall submit six copies of
the preliminary site plan to the administrative official, who shall certify
the site plan as complete or incomplete within 45 days from the date of
filing. The administrative official shall transmit the site plans to the
Land Development Board for review except for those site plans
connected with a use variance which shall be submitted to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment. The appropriate board shall review the plan at a
public meeting, at which time the applicant may be called to explain,
amplify or discuss the plan. In the event of nonappearance of the
applicant, the plan may be denied for lack of prosecution. In the event
that the plan is denied by the reviewing authority, a statement of
reasons for the decision shall be given to the applicant. The applicant is
not required to amend the plan until after the reviewing authority has
acted at a public meeting, as all conditions and recommendations prior
thereto are purely advisory. [Amended 3-4-1986 by Ord. No. 7-1986;
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
B. The reviewing authority shall take action on the site plan in such a
manner and within the time period as prescribed by the applicable
statutes of the State of New Jersey, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and the
Land Use Procedures Chapter of the Township of Westampton.58
C. If preliminary site plan approval with conditions is granted, an
amended site plan conforming to the amendments or conditions
required by the approving resolution shall be submitted to the applicant
and certified by the Township Engineer prior to the applicant's
submittal of final plans.
D. Review or approval by the municipal reviewing authority does not
preclude the necessity for submission, review and approval by other
appropriate reviewing authorities. In appropriate instances, the
municipal authority may require approval by other reviewing
authorities prior to the municipal approval. In other instances, the
municipal reviewing authority may condition any approval that it grants
upon timely receipt of a favorable report by the other reviewing
authority.
A. No later than 15 working days prior to a regularly scheduled Land
Development Board meeting, the applicant shall submit six copies of
the final site plan to the administrative official, who shall certify the site
plan as complete or incomplete within 45 days from the date of filing.
The Township Engineer or other appropriate municipal employee or
official shall prepare a report which shall include a comparison of the
final site plan submission to the approved preliminary site plan. Said
58.Editor's Note: See Ch. 149, Land Use Procedures.
§ 196-3 WESTAMPTON CODE § 196-4
192:230
§ 196-5. Concurrent submission of preliminary and final site plans.
The applicant may request at the time of preliminary filing that the plan
be processed through the preliminary and final stages concurrently. If
the reviewing authority concurs, the application may be processed in one
step with preliminary and final approvals being granted simultaneously.
However, the reviewing authority may, at its sole discretion, grant only
preliminary approval at the time of first review thereby requiring the
applicant to make a separate final site plan submission.
§ 196-6. Concurrent submission of site plan with request for
variance or conditional use.
report shall contain any recommendations and/or conditions to be
recommended to the reviewing authority. [Amended 3-4-1986 by
Ord. No. 7-1986; 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
B. The reviewing authority shall either approve, approve with conditions
or deny. In the event of disapproval the applicant shall be given a
statement of reasons for the rejection of the plan.
C. After approval the applicant shall submit six copies of a revised plan
which conforms to any conditions imposed by the reviewing authority to
the administrative official of the municipality. No building permit shall
be issued or construction commenced until the final site plan has been
certified by the Township Engineer. No certification of the plan by the
Township Engineer nor signing of same by the chairman and secretary
of the reviewing authority shall be done until the required improvement
shall be completed or bonded for in conformity with those sections of
the Municipal Land Use Law and township requirements which deal
with the performance and maintenance guaranties. In the event that
said performance guaranty is not posted prior to final approval and final
approval is made contingent upon the posting of said performance
guaranty, the date of the vote of the resolution shall be the date of the
plan. If the performance guaranty is not posted within 190 days from
the date of approval, the approval shall expire and become null and void
and of no effect.
A. An applicant may submit to the Land Development Board for approval a
site plan accompanied by a request for a variance from the bulk and
area requirements of the Zoning Chapter, or a site plan accompanied by
a conditional use application. An applicant may submit to the Zoning
Board a use variance application accompanied by a site plan.
[Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
B. The municipal agency originally granting preliminary site plan approval
shall be responsible for reviewing and acting on the final site plan.
C. The applicant shall complete each application for each request for
relief, i.e., site plan, subdivision variance or conditional use regardless
§ 196-4 SEWERS § 196-6
192:231
§ 196-7. Review guidelines.
Site plan review shall consider but not be limited to the following:
§ 196-8. Design standards.
of the Board to which it is submitted, and the applicant shall pay each
fee.
A. The height, bulk, area and setback distances of all building structures.
B. The architectural design, including the appearance of and materials
used on the exterior faces.
C. Parking and traffic control, including location and material,
requirements for curbing, driveways, parking areas, pedestrian walks
and other requirements to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
D. Reasonable screening at all seasons of the year of playgrounds, parking
and service areas.
E. Lighting of buildings, grounds and signs to assure the elimination of
any adverse effects on adjoining property owners while simultaneously
requiring adequate lighting for the proposed development.
F. Provisions for necessary utilities such as water supply, sewers, gas and
electric.
G. The stormwater collection and disposal system.
H. Noise abatement, odor and rodent control, trash and garbage collection
facilities.
I. Provisions for incoming raw materials and outgoing finished products,
together with outdoor facilities for storing same.
J. Provisions for soil erosion and sedimentation control.
A. Parking and loading. All parking areas shall provide for adequate
ingress and egress and safe and convenient traffic circulation. Access
drives and aisles shall be of sufficient width to permit safe access to
parking spaces and safe traffic movement. Driveways leading to
common parking areas, exclusive of driveways serving only one
dwelling unit, whether attached or detached, shall not be less than 75
feet from any street intersection nor 20 feet from another driveway,
measured along the curbline. In addition, all off-street parking and
loading areas, except for parking which is accessory to one-family
dwellings, shall, unless otherwise provided by this chapter, meet the
location requirements prescribed in the following schedule:
§ 196-6 WESTAMPTON CODE § 196-8
192:232
Schedule of Minimum Distances for Location of Parking and
Loading Areas
Zone* From
Buildings
(feet)
From
Streets
(feet)
From
Property
Lines
(feet)
From
Residential
Zone
(feet)
B-1 12 25 25 50
C 12 20 20 30
OR-1 12 50 25 50
OR-2 12 25 25 50
OR-3 12 25 25 50
I 12 50 25 50
NOTES:
* All uses except one- and two-family dwellings.
** Loading areas accepted.
B. Screening and buffering.
(1) Applicability. The landscape standards for screening and buffering
in the nonresidential zones included in Subsection B(2) and (3)
below shall be used for front yard buffers and for the screening of
parking areas and buildings along property lines and residential
zones. The depth of the planted buffer/screen shall be as follows:
Zone Front Yard
Buffer
(feet)
Nonresidential
to
Nonresidential
Screen
(feet)
Nonresidential to
Residential
(feet)
B-1 25 25 50
C 20 20 30
OR-1 50 25 50
OR-2 25 25 50
OR-3 25 25 50
I 50 25 50
(2) General considerations. The site and surroundings should be
thoroughly analyzed. The following items shall be reviewed to
determine the design layout and/or plant material selection:
(a) The shape or form of the land itself.
(b) The geology and soil characteristics.
§ 196-8 SEWERS § 196-8
192:233
(c) The surface and subsurface water conditions.
(d) Existing vegetation patterns. (Except in urban and other highly
disturbed sites, the native vegetation found on and around the
site is usually a good indicator of which vegetation types will
perform well.)
(e) Movement of the site (earth) relative to the sun. Landforms and
other physical features will affect light and shadow patterns
and their motions.
(f) Local and regional climate (precipitation, temperature ranges,
humidity, wind patterns, etc.).
(g) Air and water pollution.
(h) Physical features both on and off site (existing or proposed
buildings, land forms, vegetation massings, etc.).
(i) Community, social and cultural values.
(3) General recommendations.
(a) Retaining the services of a New Jersey certified landscape
architect is recommended for the site analysis, design and
selection of plant material.
(b) A specific standard design module for street and highway
plantings will not be put forth here since each site (and its
surroundings) has a unique character. A downtown street tree
planting may only require a single species of shade tree equally
spaced in a geometric pattern. With the landscape forms most
often found in Westampton Township, the use of a single
species of trees in geometric patterns becomes less
appropriate. The linear, less formal hedgerow seen commonly
bounding cropland, fields and pastures is often a more suitable
model for plantings along lot lines and street and highways
traversing such landscapes.
(c) Rather than specify a modular design to be used on each
design proposal, the following plant material density for a
hypothetical fifty-foot-long by twenty-five-foot-wide module
which could be repeated as many times as necessary both in
length and width (e.g., a site with a highway frontage of 500
feet and a one-hundred-foot-wide buffer requirement would
need 40 modules). The plant material requirements of these
modules may be arranged to suit the specific landscape design
objectives of the proposed plan.
[1] The front yard buffer module shall include two canopy
trees (i.e., large deciduous trees) and three understory
trees (i.e., deciduous and/or evergreen trees that do not
generally reach the mature height of the canopy trees).
§ 196-8 WESTAMPTON CODE § 196-8
192:234
Species selection should be based on an appropriate
woodland successional model and shall include species
from the following list of canopy and understory trees:
Canopy and Understory Trees
Canopy trees
Red oak (quercus rubra)
White oak (quercus alba)
Black oak (quercus velutina)
Chestnut oak (quercus prinus)
Pin oak (quercus palustris)
Red maple (acer rubrum)
Sugar maple (acer saccharum)
Green ash (fraxinus pennsylvanica)
White ash (fraxinus americana)
American beech (fagus grandifolia)
Tulip tree (liriodendron tulipifera)
Sweet birch (betula lenta)
River birch (betula nigra)
Paper birch (betula papyrifera)
Sweetgum (liguidainbar styraciflua)*
Sycamore (platanus occidentalis)*
Black gum or sour gun (nyssa sylvatica)
Basswood (tilia americana)
Understory trees
Common witchhazel (hamamelis virginiana)
Flowering dogwood (cornus florida)
Shadtree (amelanchier canadensis)
Sassafras (sassafras albidum)
Sweetbay magnolia (magnolia virginiana)
Hop horn beam (ostrya virginiana)
Ironwood (carpinus carolinian)
Red cedar (juniperus virginiana) EG
Hemlock (Tsuga canadensis) EG
American holly (ilex opaca) EG
White pine (pinus strobus) EG
Red pine (pinus resinosa) EG
§ 196-8 SEWERS § 196-8
192:235
Canopy and Understory Trees
Key:
*Locate tree trunk not closer than
40 feet from roadways, parking
lots, pedestrian walkways and
bicycle paths.
EG - Evergreen
[2] In addition to the canopy and understory trees noted above
that are required for the front yard and buffer module, the
screen planting module shall also include 15 shrubs per
fifty-foot by twenty-five-foot module, including species
from the following list of shrubs:
Shrubs
Summersweet (clethra alnifolia)
Gray dogwood (cornus paniculala)
Silky dogwood (cornus amomum)
Inkberry (ilex glabra) EG
Spicebush (lindera benzoin)
Bayberry (myrica pennsylvanica)
Highbush blueberry (vaccinum coryinbosum)
Arrowwood viburnum (viburnum dentatum)
Maple-leaved viburnum (viburnum acerifolium)
Blackhaw viburnum (viburnum prunifolium)
Mountain laurel (kalmia latifolia) EG
Rosebay rhododendron
(rhododendron maximum)
EG
(d) Plants native to the physiographic province in which the site
lies should comprise a minimum of 70% of the total number of
plants proposed for installation.
(e) The percentage of evergreen usage should be decided after
completion of site analysis and the statement of design goals.
(f) Canopy trees should be installed with minimum trunk
diameters of 1 1/2 to two inches (B&B).
(g) Understory trees should be installed with a minimum height of
five feet (B&B).
(h) Soil conditions should be renovated if necessary to improve
growing conditions.
§ 196-8 WESTAMPTON CODE § 196-8
192:236
§ 196-9. Required preliminary and final site plan details.
(i) Should it not be necessary to plant all the required modules
due to driveway and sight triangle locations, a credit should be
made (i.e., unused trees should be located elsewhere on the
site).
(j) All plans and installation of plant material are subject to review
and inspection by the municipal landscape architect, if there
be one, or the Township Engineer.
(4) Where parking is located in a front yard, the Land Development
Board may require construction of landscaped berms up to a height
of five feet, with slopes at a ratio of not less than two to one.
[Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
(5) Where off-street parking and loading areas adjoin or face premises
situated in a residential zone, the Land Development Board may
require the construction of a fence or wall not less than four feet
nor more than six feet in height, maintained in good condition.
[Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
C. Interior parking lot landscaping. All parking lots shall satisfy the
following design standards unless specifically exempted by this
subsection: [Added 8-9-2011 by Ord. No. 11-2011]
(1) A landscaped island of least 200 square feet shall be located at the
ends of all rows of parking.
(2) There shall be no more than 20 parking spaces in a row without an
intervening landscaped island of at least 200 square feet in size
separating additional parking spaces in the row. All nonresidential
buildings of 10,000 square feet or less in size shall be exempt from
this standard.
(3) Each landscaped island shall contain, at a minimum, at least one
deciduous shade or ornamental tree. In islands containing parking
lot light standards, signage, fire hydrants, electrical equipment or
similar equipment that prevents the placement of trees, lowgrowing
shrubs shall be substituted for the required trees.
(4) All trees within landscaped islands shall be limbed to seven feet
above-grade and all other plantings shall be limited to a mature
height of 30 inches.
A. Preliminary site plan details. All preliminary site plans shall contain the
following information:
(1) Name of development.
(2) Date of the original plan and each subsequent revision date.
(3) North arrow.
§ 196-8 SEWERS § 196-9
192:237
(4) Graphic scale.
(5) Total tract acreage to 1/100 of an acre.
(6) Existing and proposed streets and street names.
(7) Floodplain areas based on one-hundred-year storms.
(8) All roads, driveways, watercourses and existing buildings within
200 feet of the tract.
(9) A key map at a scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet showing the
location of the site within the community.
(10) The zoning of the site and the lots adjacent to it and the tax plate,
block and lot numbers and the owner of record.
(11) A topographic survey of the site with contours at two-foot intervals
or closer if the topography of the ground is flat and if the Board
directs, and a title survey certified by a licensed land surveyor if the
same is required by the Board. As an alternate, the Board may
require spot elevations.
(12) The exact size, shape and location of all existing and proposed
buildings, structures, parking areas and open spaces.
(13) All setbacks, lot and right-of-way lines and the dimensions,
locations and purpose of all easements.
(14) The location and arrangement of vehicular accessways and the
location, size and capacities of all parking areas and curbs,
sidewalks, walkways and all other areas devoted to pedestrian use.
(15) Basic drainage design, including size, type, location and grade of
pipes; location of structures in the system; and design calculations.
Drainage areas shall be shown where appropriate.
(16) A parking schedule in accordance with the appropriate municipal
ordinance.
(17) A statement of how the sewer, water and all utilities to service the
project will be designed.
(18) The building's major elevations and floor plans.
(19) Test borings distributed over the tract to a depth of 10 feet showing
soil types, depth of water and date of boring, if same are necessary
in the opinion of the Board.
(20) Where on-site sewerage facilities are proposed, percolation test
results from the area proposed for disposal shall be submitted.
(21) Design concerns of any topographic problems.
§ 196-9 WESTAMPTON CODE § 196-9
192:238
(22) Other information as required by the Land Development Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No.
24-1998]
B. Final site plan details. All final site plans shall contain the following
information:
(1) Setback dimensions shall be shown on the plan.
(2) Existing and proposed contours with intervals of one foot where
slopes are more than 3% but less than 15% and five feet when 15%
or more only where deemed necessary by the Board. In the
alternative spot elevations may be required.
(3) The site plan shall include front, rear and side elevations of the
proposed buildings and structures.
(4) The location and arrangement of vehicular accessways and
locations, size and capacity of all parking and loading areas shall be
included.
(5) Curbs, sidewalks, walkways and all other areas devoted to
pedestrian use shall be clearly delineated.
(6) A complete landscape plan, including size and type of all plants,
shall be included.
(7) Location of all utilities shall be shown, including water supply,
sewers, gas and electric services, lighting, illumination and refuse
storage area.
(8) The storm drainage system shall be shown, and the applicant shall
supply drainage calculations to substantiate the size and location of
the proposed storm drainage system.
(9) Parking schedule in keeping with the requirements of the
appropriate municipal ordinance.
(10) Construction details, including dimensions and materials of
pavement, curbs and walks and details of all special features,
including but not limited to inlets, manholes, headwalls, lights,
hydrants, valves, traffic control devices, fencing, play equipment,
etc.
(11) Appropriate places for the signatures of the chairman and
secretary of the approving authority, the date of the official
authority action and a place for the signature of the Township
Engineer who will certify the plan as to compliance with all
conditions imposed by the reviewing authority.
(12) Accompanying the final site plan submission shall be copies of all
plans approved or submitted for approval by other regulatory
agencies.
§ 196-9 SEWERS § 196-10
192:239
§ 196-10. Fire lanes. [Added 4-19-1984 by Ord. No. 3-1984]
A. Fire lanes shall be designated as set forth hereafter on all plans and
specifications for the construction or remodeling of any public or quasipublic
structure where deemed necessary by the Township Fire
Marshal. The owner of any property on which there is presently located
a public or quasi-public structure which has no fire lanes or on which
the fire lanes presently existing are deemed inadequate by the Fire
Marshal shall be required, upon reasonable notice, to provide, locate
and designate appropriate fire lanes in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
B. Design. Each fire lane shall be constructed to a minimum width of 18
feet and shall be constructed of either asphalt paving, concrete,
concrete paving blocks or gravel. The fire lane shall be designed to
support a weight of approximately 40 tons. Where the fire lane is
required to access a roadway, a depressed curb must be provided.
Construction of the fire lane can be combined with a pedestrian path if
appropriately located and constructed. All fire lanes shall be visually
designated either by their form or by the materials used in their
construction. The design of the fire lanes shall be subject to review by
both the Township Fire Marshal and the Township Engineer.
[Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 19-1998]
C. Location. Fire lanes shall be located so as to serve the entire building
from the building site; so as to provide the most direct means of access
for all emergency vehicles; to be sufficiently close to the building to
provide the means to provide protection for the structure while being
far enough removed so as to provide safety for the emergency vehicle
using the fire lane in the event of collapse of the building. However, the
ultimate authority with respect to the determination for the location of
the fire lanes shall lie with the Fire Marshal of the Township of
Westampton. The Fire Marshal shall make the aforesaid determination
after reviewing recommendations of both the Township Engineer and
Township Planner.
D. Fire lanes shall be appropriately posted with signs indicating the words
"NO PARKING - FIRE ZONE" or "NO PARKING - FIRE LANE" in red
letters on a white background, with a red line bordering the perimeter
of the sign, said sign to be 12 inches by 18 inches, made of metal with
rust-resistant reflectorized coating, posted at the ends of each fire lane,
and at one-hundred-foot intervals therein. Fire areas shall also be
designated by covering the face and top of the curb of the prohibited
area with a solid yellow color of paint. The above criterion for the
painting of fire areas is to be considered a minimum, and additional
painting may be placed on the site consisting of crosshatches, solid
yellow areas or such other designations, in addition to the curb
painting, as may serve to act as a deterrent to parking in fire zones.
[Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 19-1998]
§ 196-10 WESTAMPTON CODE § 196-10
192:240
§ 196-11. Fees. [Amended 8-10-1987 by Ord. No. 13-1987]
The following fees shall be applicable:
E. The owner of the site upon which a fire lane is located shall be
responsible for constructing, designating and marking fire lanes as
required by this section. All maintenance and repair of the signs and
pavement markings, if any, shall remain the responsibility of the owner
and any successor. The maintenance and repair shall be a continuing
condition of any approval conferred with respect to the construction,
remodeling or occupancy of the building or structure on the premises.
Any failure to maintain or repair said signs or pavement markings shall
be a basis for voiding the prior approval. Approvals which shall be
conditional under this subsection shall include, but not be limited to,
final site plan approval and certificates of occupancy. No such approval
shall be held to be void unless a hearing by the issuing officer or agency
has been held on due notice to the owner of the premises.
F. Enforcement.
(1) No unauthorized vehicles shall be allowed to park, stand or stop in
any fire lane, nor shall any person in any manner obstruct any fire
lane. Any violation of this section shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $500 for each separate offense or by imprisonment of not
more than 90 days, or both. "Unauthorized vehicle" shall be
interpreted to mean a vehicle other than an emergency vehicle, as
well as such other vehicles as may be designated by the Fire
Marshal as being authorized.
(2) Any vehicle parked, stopped or standing in violation of this section
in any fire lane shall be deemed a nuisance, and the Fire Marshal
may provide for its immediate removal. The cost of its removal and
any subsequent storage which may be required shall be paid by the
owner of the vehicle before he may be allowed to regain possession
of same.
(3) The Fire Marshal, the Fire Inspector, the Code Enforcement Officer
and the Township Police Department shall have concurrent
jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this section.
(4) Notwithstanding the penalties above set forth, the township shall
be entitled to pursue any other remedy available at law or equity to
enforce the provisions hereof.
A. Site plans; accompanying variance or conditional use requests; filing
fees.
(1) Informal review; concept plan: $200. The amount of any fees shall
be credited toward fee for review of the application for
development. [Amended 4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 6-2012]
§ 196-10 SEWERS § 196-11
192:241
(2) Minor site plan: $200. [Amended 4-24-2012 by Ord. No.
6-2012]
(3) Preliminary site plan: $200. [Amended 6-9-1998 by Ord. No.
13-1998; 4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 6-2012]
(4) Final site plan: $200. [Amended 6-9-1998 by Ord. No. 13-1998;
4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 6-2012]
(5) Consolidated submission: $400. [Amended 6-9-1998 by Ord. No.
13-1998; 4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 6-2012]
(6) A request for a variance, conditional use, appeal from the decision
of the Administrative Officer or Construction Official or
interpretation of zoning map or ordinance accompanying a site
plan will require filing of a separate application and the
appropriate fee, in addition to the site plan application and fee.
[Amended 6-9-1998 by Ord. No. 13-1998]
B. Escrows (professional review fee). [Amended 6-9-1998 by Ord. No.
13-1998; 11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 19-2000]
(1) Informal review; concept plan: $500. The amount of escrow charge
for informal review shall be credited toward the applicant's escrow
account to be applied to the application for development.
[Amended 4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 6-2012]
(2) Minor site plan: $1,500 or $50 per acre, whichever is greater.
[Amended 4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 6-2012]
(3) Preliminary site plan: $3,000, plus $50 per acre. [Amended
4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 6-2012]
(4) Final site plan: $3,000, plus $50 per acre. [Amended 4-24-2012
by Ord. No. 6-2012]
(5) Consolidated submission: $6,000, plus $100 per acre. [Amended
4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 6-2012]
(6) Escrow for inspection: 5% of the bonded amount.
C. Sums not utilized for review and in the inspection process shall be
returned to the applicant. If additional sums are deemed necessary, the
applicant shall be notified of the required additional amount and shall
add such sum to the escrow.
D. Site plan waiver. A filing fee of $100 shall be submitted with each
application for site plan waiver. An escrow fee of $300 shall be
submitted and shall be applied toward the fee required for site plan in
the event the waiver is not granted. [Amended 6-9-1998 by Ord. No.
13-1998; 4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 6-2012]
§ 196-11 WESTAMPTON CODE § 196-12
192:242
§ 196-12. Performance and maintenance bonds; off-tract
improvements.
§ 196-13. Violations and penalties.
A violation of any of the provisions of any section of this chapter shall be
punishable, upon conviction thereof by the Judge of the Municipal Court, by
A. Performance bonds.
(1) In approving the final site plan, the reviewing authority shall
require that the applicant first furnish a performance bond in an
amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation of
improvements for the purpose of guaranteeing the completion of
such items as are set forth in the site plan that will affect the public
interest, such as but not limited to drainage, streets, recreational
areas, shade trees or shrubbery and required landscaping, offstreet
parking, loading and unloading zones, artificial lighting,
sidewalks, curbs, driveways, water mains, culverts, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers or other means of sewage disposal, erosion control
and sedimentation control and other required on-site
improvements. An estimate of the improvement costs shall be
prepared by the Township Engineer in order to determine the
amount of the performance guaranty. Said performance guaranty
shall have been reviewed and have the approval of the Township
Solicitor as to both form and amount prior to the issuance of any
permits.
(2) In the event that the reviewing authority grants final site plan
approval conditioned on the posting of the performance bond, said
performance guaranty shall be posted within 190 days of said
approval, or the approval shall expire.
B. Maintenance bonds. A maintenance bond in an amount not to exceed
15% of the cost for the above improvements shall be required at the
time of release of the performance bond, said maintenance bond to be
in the form and amount and under the procedures required by the
statutes of the State of New Jersey and other developmental ordinances
of the Township of Westampton dealing with bonds in general and
maintenance bonds in particular.
C. Off-tract improvements. Off-tract improvements where required shall
be made in accordance with the criteria set forth in the Subdivision
Ordinance of the Township of Westampton.59
D. Release with respect to both the performance guaranty and
maintenance guaranty shall be in accordance with the same procedures
set forth in the ordinances of the Township of Westampton with respect
to subdivisions. [Added 8-10-1987 by Ord. No. 13-1987]
59.Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Subdivision of Land.
§ 196-12 SEWERS § 196-13
192:243
a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or
both, such fine and imprisonment to be in the Judge's discretion. Each day
that the offense occurs shall be deemed to be a separate occurrence and
offense.
Chapter 197
SMOKING
§ 196-13 WESTAMPTON CODE § 196-13
192:244
ARTICLE I
Smoking on Township Property
[Adopted 7-17-2018 by Ord. No. 5-2018]
§ 197-1. Smoking restrictions on municipal property.
Smoking within the boundary of Westampton Township owned land, or any
property which is owned, maintained or in the possession of the Township
of Westampton, including but not limited to all parks, playgrounds, active
and passive recreational facilities, the Municipal Building, the Public Works
garage, the fire house, Springside Recreation Department, and the
Westampton Sports Complex, shall be limited to only designated smoking
areas or more than 25 feet from any door to a Township-owned building.
§ 197-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SMOKE — The gases, particles, or vapors released into the air as a result of
combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization, when the apparent or usual
purpose of the combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization is human
inhalation of the by-products, but excluding incense or similar products
inhaled solely for olfactory purpose so long as the products do not contain
tobacco or nicotine. The term "smoke" includes, but is not limited to,
tobacco smoke, electronic cigarette vapors and marijuana smoke.
§ 197-3. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Westampton Township Police
Department.
§ 197-4. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person found to be in violation of this chapter shall be issued a
summons and shall be subject to the following penalties:
(1) First offense: a fine of not less than $100 and not to exceed $150.
(2) Second offense: a fine of not less than $150 and not to exceed $250.
(3) Subsequent offenses: a fine of not less than $300 and not to exceed
$500.
B. In addition to the above penalties, any person found to be in violation of
this chapter shall also be responsible for all costs of prosecution.
§ 197-1 SEWERS § 197-4
192:245
Chapter 199
SOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 99.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 131.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 149.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Site plan review — See Ch. 196.
Excavations in streets — See Ch. 212, Art. II.
§ 199-1. Permission to excavate required. [Amended 6-11-2002 by
Ord. No. 8-2002]
No person shall excavate or otherwise remove soil for sale or for use, other
than on the premises from which the soil shall be taken, except as necessary
in conjunction with the construction or alteration of improvements on such
premises, and excavating or grading incidental thereto in conjunction with
a well-balanced earthwork design, without first having procured permission
therefor from the Township Committee.
§ 199-2. Application. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992]
The Township Committee shall not consider any application for the removal
of soil from the premises for sale or otherwise unless and until the owner
of the premises shall first file with the Township Clerk/Administrator an
application requesting such permission, together with a map of the
premises showing the contour lines and proposed contour grades resulting
from such intended removal of soil in relation to the topography of the
premises, and the proposed contour lines and grades shall be subject to
the inspection and approval of the Township Committee of the Township of
Westampton. No such permission for soil removal shall be issued until such
map has been filed and until the proposed contour lines and grades have
been approved by the Township Committee of the Township of Westampton.
§ 199-3. Hearing.
A. Upon written request for a hearing made by the applicant to the
Township Committee, an opportunity to be heard shall be granted
within 30 days thereafter, and the Township Committee, in considering
and reviewing the application and in arriving at its decision, shall be
guided by and take into consideration the public health, safety and
general welfare, and particular consideration shall be given to the
following factors:
(1) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(2) Drainage.
(3) Soil fertility.
§ 197-4 WESTAMPTON CODE § 199-3
199:246
§ 199-4. Removal requirements.
If permission to remove the soil is granted, the owner or person in charge
shall so conduct the operation that there shall be no sharp declivities, pits
or depressions and in such a manner that the area shall be properly leveled
off, cleared of debris and graded to conform to the contour lines and grades,
as approved by the Township Committee of the Township of Westampton.
§ 199-5. Top layer of arable soil. [Amended 6-11-2002 by Ord. No.
8-2002]
§ 199-6. Bond. [Amended 6-11-2002 by Ord. No. 8-2002]
Before any permit or permission for soil removal shall be granted or issued,
the owner or applicant shall file with the Township Committee a bond, in
(4) Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and lands.
(5) Land values and uses.
(6) Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious physical development of the township.
B. If, after examining the application and the map provided for in § 199-2
of this chapter, and after the hearing in the event a hearing is requested
by the applicant, the Township Committee shall be of the opinion that
the proposed soil removal will not create conditions inimical to the
public health, welfare and safety and will not result in the creation of
any sharp declivities, pits or depressions, soil erosion or fertility
problems, depressed land values nor create any drainage or sewage
problems or other conditions of danger, permission to remove the soil
shall be granted.
A. The owner of the premises, or the person in charge of the removal of
soil, when permission has been duly granted, shall not take away the
top layer of arable soil without specific approval of the Township
Committee and only when a sufficient quantity of such top layer of
arable soil shall be set aside for retention on the premises so that it can
be replaced to a depth of six inches over the premises when the soil
removal operations are completed or as directed by the Township
Committee, pursuant to levels and contour lines approved by the
Township committee of the Township of Westampton.
B. The removal of the top layer of arable soil, not to exceed 500 cubic
yards, in conjunction with the construction of site plan or subdivision
improvements, as approved by the Land Development Board, which
result in an excess of topsoil at the site, shall not require additional
approval of the Township Committee providing that sufficient topsoil is
retained on-site to provide a six-inch layer throughout the postdevelopment
grassed and landscaped areas as indicated on the
approved plans.
§ 199-3 SOIL REMOVAL § 199-6
199:247
acceptable form and with acceptable surety and in sufficient amount, to
ensure the faithful performance of the work to be undertaken pursuant to
the permission granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
The amount of the bond shall be determined on the basis of a cost estimate
for site restoration as prepared by the Township Engineer in accordance
with the applicable bond preparation provisions included in the Subdivision
Ordinance.60
§ 199-7. Permit required.
No excavation shall be made and no soil shall be removed under the
provisions of this chapter unless a permit therefor shall have been first
obtained, as provided herein, and no excavation shall be made and no soil
shall be removed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 199-8. Fees. [Amended 6-11-2002 by Ord. No. 8-2002]
The Township Committee shall charge and collect fees for each soil removal
permit in accordance with the following:
§ 199-9. Right of entry to inspect.
For the purpose of administering and enforcing this chapter, any duly
authorized officer, agent or employee of the Township of Westampton shall
have the right to enter into and upon any lands in or upon which soil-moving
operations are being conducted in order to examine and inspect such lands.
§ 199-10. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOIL — As used in this chapter, any earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus,
rock or dirt, without regard to the presence or absence therein of organic
matter.
A. Sand bank, gravel pit or unclassified soil excavations. The fee for
excavation shall be $150. [Amended 6-24-2003 by Ord. No.
18-2003]
B. Topsoil removal. The fee for removal of topsoil in conjunction with site
plan or subdivision improvements which result in an excess of topsoil
shall be $150. [Amended 6-24-2003 by Ord. No. 18-2003]
C. Escrow (professional review fees). A fee of $1,000 or $50 per acre,
whichever is greater, to cover professional reviews. Sums not utilized
shall be returned to the applicant and, when necessary, additional sums
shall be provided by the applicant. The escrow amount for engineering
inspection shall be 5% of the estimated construction costs upon which
the bond estimate is based.
60.Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Subdivision of Land.
§ 199-6 WESTAMPTON CODE § 199-11
199:248
§ 199-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment in
the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, in the discretion
of the Judge before whom such conviction shall be had. Each and every
violation and nonconformance of this chapter, or each day that any provision
of this chapter shall have been violated, shall be construed as a separate
and distinct violation thereof.
Chapter 203
SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 152.
§ 203-1. Findings; purpose.
It is hereby determined, declared and recited that the legitimate business
or practice of soliciting and canvassing from door to door, regardless of
purpose, affords a means for the criminal-minded to obtain admittance to
private homes in furtherance of some present or future unlawful objective
and an opportunity for the practice of fraud, deceit and dishonest dealing by
the unscrupulous minority, with redress difficult because of lack of means
of identifying the solicitor, and, consequently, public safety and welfare
require that those going from door to door for any purpose be required first
to give such information as will identify themselves and prevent possible
abuse of the right by the criminally inclined.
§ 203-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXPRESS INVITATION — Includes the making of calls as a part of a service
to which the occupant of the house subscribes.
SOLICIT (or words in which "solicit" is a component) — Includes the act
of going from door to door or house to house within this Township without
prior express invitation or request from the occupant of the premises at
which the call is made, for any purpose or in any fashion, including but
not limited to the vending, distribution, dissemination or delivery of goods,
fares, merchandise or services, or of written, oral or recorded intelligence
or communication or invitation of any kind, or requesting, inviting or taking
orders or subscriptions for present or future delivery or furnishing of any
such things or matters; or for the purpose of making canvasses, surveys or
the like or doing any other act which is commonly comprehended in the
terms of soliciting, canvassing or peddling. "Solicit" does not include giving
§ 199-11 SOIL REMOVAL § 203-2
199:249
alarm of fire or similar emergency warning or activity in the discharge of a
governmental duty or when the occupant of the premises expressly invites
a person to the premises.
§ 203-3. Registration cards required. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord.
No. 10-1992]
No person shall solicit from door to door within this Township without
first registering and obtaining a registration card from the Township Clerk/
Administrator of the Township of Westampton as provided in this chapter.
§ 203-4. Application for registration: procedure and information
required.
A. Each applicant for registration shall, at the time of registering, give full,
exact and true answers, in writing, on a registration form filed by him
providing for registration and recording of the applicant's name,
permanent and temporary residence and business addresses, social
security number, height, weight and other personal identification data,
including identifying marks and a recent, clear and accurate
photograph (approximately 2 1/2 inches square, furnished in duplicate
by the applicant) of his face; the purpose of the proposed solicitation;
the name and permanent address of the person, company or
organization for whom he is acting, together with a copy of a written
credential from said person to so act, stating his exact relationship to
them, the place where the goods or services to be sold or offered are
manufactured, prepared or produced and where then located, the
names and addresses of two references, preferably owners of real
estate in Burlington County or the State of New Jersey or, in lieu
thereof, such other available evidence as to his good character as will
enable an investigation to corroborate that fact; any prior convictions of
federal, state or municipal offenses, including the nature thereof and
sentence imposed; the route, date and approximate hours of his
solicitation in the Township (which shall be between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m.); the registration number of any vehicle he will use
in this Township; and his driver's license data.
B. The applicant shall, at the time of completing the written registration,
deposit with the Township Clerk/Administrator for the use of the
Township the sum of $5 to defray part of the cost to the Township of the
registration and incidental cost of the investigation hereinafter referred
to and of administration of this chapter. Each registration shall be
renewed annually. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992]
C. Upon completion of the form and deposit of the cost, the Township
Clerk/Administrator shall promptly initiate and cause to be concluded
within 10 days thereafter an investigation designed to corroborate the
registration data, prior criminal record, moral character and (in case of
commercial solicitations) the business responsibility of the registrant;
provided, however, that if the investigation has not been completed
§ 203-2 WESTAMPTON CODE § 203-4
199:250
§ 203-5. Issuance of registration cards; suspension and revocation.
[Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992]
§ 203-6. Duty of registrant.
within 10 days, the applicant will be issued a temporary registration
card forthwith, subject to completion of the investigation. [Amended
9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992]
D. If the investigation indicates that the registrant has been convicted of
an offense involving moral turpitude, or if the registration information
is false or misleading in any material respect, or that his moral
character (or business responsibility in the case of commercial
solicitation) or record of other offenses is of such a nature as to present
a clear and present danger to public good, safety or welfare, the
Township Clerk/Administrator shall note his findings in that respect on
the registration form, together with his disapproval, and furnish the
applicant with a copy thereof, by certified mail to his permanent
address or by handing it to him personally, and no registration shall
issue thereon; provided that the registrant shall have the right, within
10 days of the date of such notice, to file a request with the Township
Committee for a review thereof, who, upon receipt of such notice
directed to the Mayor, shall promptly fix a time and place at which the
registrant may be heard and the matter reviewed and shall forthwith
either affirm or reverse the disapproval of the Township Clerk/
Administrator and, in the latter event, order a registration card to be
issued. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992]
A. Upon compliance by the applicant with the terms of this chapter and
upon approval of his registration, there shall be issued to the registrant
a registration card indicating that the person named thereon is
registered in accordance with the terms of this chapter. Such card shall
have securely fixed thereto one of the photographs so submitted and
signed by the Township Clerk/Administrator in such fashion that part of
his signature extends over a portion of such photograph.
B. Such registration card shall remain the property of the Township and
may be immediately suspended by the Township Clerk/Administrator
for any violation of this chapter and, within five days of such
suspension, upon written notice and the reasons therefor and an
opportunity to be heard, revoked by the Township Committee for such
cause.
C. No registrant shall be required to register more than once, provided
that he promptly advises the Township Clerk/Administrator of any
change in registration data required above and, upon request, furnishes
new photographs when the ones provided become unrepresentative of
his likeness.
A. The registrant shall:
§ 203-4 SOIL REMOVAL § 203-6
199:251
§ 203-7. Exemptions. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992]
(1) Carry the registration card with him at all times while soliciting and
exhibit it to any person upon request.
(2) Promptly notify the Township Clerk/Administrator of any change of
address or any change in any of the data he has given on his
registration form. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992]
B. No registrant shall solicit before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after the hour
of 5:00 p.m. or at any time on a Sunday.
C. No registrant shall solicit at any residence or other building when
barred by the householder by a sign with the words to the effect that
solicitors or peddlers are not invited or are prohibited.
A. Any person, organization, society or association desiring to solicit or
have solicited in its name, money, donations of money or property, or
financial assistance of any kind, or desiring to sell or distribute any item
of literature or merchandise for which a fee is charged or solicited from
persons other than members of such organization, at any place or
places within the Township of Westampton for a charitable, religious,
patriotic or philanthropic purpose, shall be exempt from the provisions
of §§ 203-4, 203-5 and 203-6 of this chapter, provided that there is filed
a sworn application, in writing, with the Township Clerk/Administrator,
which shall give the following information:
(1) Name and purpose of the cause for which the permit is sought.
(2) Names and addresses of the officers and directors of the
organization.
(3) Period during which solicitation is to be carried on.
(4) Whether or not any commission, fees, wages or emoluments are to
be expended in connection with such solicitation and the amount
thereof.
(5) Name and address of each agent or representative who will
conduct solicitations and the length of time that said agent or
representative has been employed or affiliated with such
organization, society, association or corporation.
B. Upon being satisfied that such person, organization, society or
association is a religious, charitable, patriotic or philanthropic
organization and that the agents or representatives who shall conduct
the solicitations are of good moral character and reputation, the
Township Committee shall approve the issuance of and the Township
Clerk/Administrator shall issue a permit. Such organization, association
or corporation shall furnish all its members, agents or representatives
conducting solicitation credentials, in writing, stating the name of the
§ 203-6 WESTAMPTON CODE § 203-7
199:252
§ 203-8. Nonapplicability. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No.
10-1992]
The requirements of this chapter shall not be construed to apply to any
veteran who holds a special state license issued under the laws of the
State of New Jersey; provided, however, that such exemption in the case
of such veteran shall extend only to the requirement of securing a license
hereunder, and such veteran shall otherwise be required to comply with all
sections of this chapter and shall be required to procure from the Township
Clerk/Administrator a special veteran's permit which shall be issued by the
Clerk/Administrator upon proper identification as required herein.
§ 203-9. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be separable, and, in the event that any
part or section hereof is held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect
any other section or part of this chapter and shall be construed so as not to
interfere with any constitutional right of freedom of speech or religion or so
as to place undue burden upon interstate commerce.
§ 203-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-28-1974 by Ord. No.
1-1974]
Any person or persons violating this chapter or any of the provisions hereof
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both,
in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court before whom such
conviction may be had.
§ 203-11. Charitable solicitations on roadways. [Added 12-10-2013
by Ord. No. 14-2013]
organization, the name of the agent and the purpose of solicitation.
[Amended 10-25-1979 by Ord. No. 17-1979]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION —
Any person determined by the Federal Internal Revenue Service to
be a tax-exempt organization pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3); or
(1)
Any person who is, or holds himself or herself out to be, established
for any benevolent, philanthropic, humane, social welfare, public
health, or other charitable purpose, or for the benefit of law
enforcement personnel, firefighters or other persons who protect
the public safety, or any person who in any manner employs a
charitable appeal as the basis of any solicitation, or an appeal,
which has a tendency to suggest there is a charitable purpose to
any such solicitation.
(2)
§ 203-7 SOIL REMOVAL § 203-11
199:253
CHARITABLE PURPOSE —
Any purpose described in Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3); or
(1)
Any benevolent, philanthropic, humane, social welfare, public
health, or other charitable objective, or an objective that benefits
law enforcement personnel or other persons who protect the public
safety.
(2)
B. Roadway solicitation permitted. The Township shall permit qualified
charitable organizations to solicit contributions for charitable purposes
in roadways situated in the Township.
C. Application permit. If charitable organizations desire to solicit
contributions in roadways situated in the Township, they shall file an
application for a permit with the Municipal Clerk, 30 days prior to the
scheduled solicitation, on a form supplied by the Clerk, specifying the
following information:
(1) Name of applicant organization;
(2) Address of applicant organization;
(3) Telephone number of applicant organization;
(4) Contact person of applicant organization;
(5) Specific location or locations of proposed charitable solicitation;
(6) Dates and times of proposed charitable solicitation;
(7) Identify the manner in which the motorist solicitation will be
conducted and the procedures to be used to ensure the safety of
the members of the public who will be traveling the roadways
situated in the Township.
D. Review of application; issuance of permit. Upon the filing of a complete
application in accordance with the provisions of this section, the
Municipal Clerk shall present same to the Township Committee to grant
or deny the applicant's request by resolution. The Municipal Clerk may
rely on input provided by the Chief of Police in granting permits. In the
event the request is granted, the Municipal Clerk shall issue a permit to
the application which shall be subject to the representations contained
in the applicant's application and any conditions imposed by the
Township. In no event shall any one charitable organization be issued
more than four permits, as permitted under this section, in any one
calendar year.
E. General provisions.
(1) Each person soliciting charitable contributions on behalf of a
charitable organization must be at least 18 years old.
§ 203-11 WESTAMPTON CODE § 203-11
199:254
(2) Permits shall be in possession of a representative of the charitable
organization present at all times during the solicitation and be
available for inspection by local, county, and state police
enforcement personnel.
(3) Solicitation shall not stop traffic or impede the flow of traffic.
Traffic shall already be stopped before solicitation may occur and
shall cease while traffic is moving. Use of flagmen or any traffic
control device, either portable or permanent, shall be prohibited.
(4) The charitable organization shall be responsible for cleaning up
any debris from the right-of-way that arose out of the solicitation
activity.
(5) Solicitation shall only be permitted during daylight hours.
(6) Solicitors shall not drink alcoholic beverages, use drugs, or be
under the influence of drugs or alcohol when soliciting. Solicitors
shall not harass the public.
(7) The Township shall not be liable in any civil action for damages or
property damage or personal injury arising out of the solicitation
activity conducted by charitable organizations in Township
roadways.
(8) All solicitors must wear orange or yellow safety vests while
soliciting in the roadway.
(9) The Township may impose special conditions on any charitable
solicitation permit to preserve and protect the public safety and the
free flow of traffic in its roadways.
(10) If a request pertains to a location or locations on any county or
state highway or intersection of a county or state highway, the
charitable organization shall have the prior approval from the
Township via ordinance.
F. Fee schedule. There shall be no fees assessed for the issuance of a
permit to a qualified charitable organization under this section.
G. Signage requirements.
(1) Signs advertising the roadway solicitation are permitted, but they
must be of a temporary construction.
(2) Signs shall be a maximum of 16 square feet.
(3) At least two warning signs shall be placed as follows:
(a) "CHARITABLE SOLICITATION 500 FEET AHEAD;" and
(b) A second sign following identifying the name of the
organization soliciting.
§ 203-11 SOIL REMOVAL § 203-11
199:255
Chapter 206
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch. 95.
Buildings unfit for human habitation — See
Ch. 106.
Littering — See Ch. 155.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Sewers — See Ch. 192.
(4) Signs shall not be permitted in the traveled way or in medians less
than eight (8) feet in width.
(5) All the signs warning, noticing, or advertising a solicitation shall be
removed immediately following the solicitation event.
H. Violations and penalties. Any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this section shall pay, upon conviction, a penalty of $100.
§ 203-11 WESTAMPTON CODE § 203-11
199:256
ARTICLE I
Disposal of Waste
[Adopted 6-18-1968]
§ 206-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
REFUSE — Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of foods; wastes from the handling, storage and sale of
produce; tin cans; small quantities of rock; small pieces of concrete; glass
crockery.
TRASH — Combustible matter, including but not limited to paper, cartons,
boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches, yard trimmings, wood
furniture and bedding; noncombustible matter, including but not limited to
metals, metal furniture, dirt and mineral wastes; street rubbish, including
but not limited to street sweepings, dirt, leaves, catch-basin dirt and
contents of litter receptacles, provided that "trash" shall not include earth
and wastes from building operations, nor shall it include solid wastes
resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing operations such as
food-processing wastes or boiler-house cinders.
§ 206-2. Uncovered refuse.
It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain anywhere in the township
any refuse or other material subject to decay, other than leaves or grass,
excepting in a tightly covered metal or plastic container as defined in
§ 206-5 hereafter.
§ 206-3. Windblown trash.
It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to accumulate any dust, ashes or
refuse of such a material that it can be blown away by the wind, anywhere
in the township, excepting in a covered container.
§ 206-4. Deposits on streets.
It shall be unlawful to deposit or permit to fall from any vehicle any refuse,
trash or ashes on any public street or alley in the township, provided that
this section shall not be construed to prohibit placing refuse, trash or ashes
in a container complying with the provisions of this article preparatory to
having such material collected and disposed of in the manner provided
herein.
§ 206-5. Preparation for collection.
A. Refuse shall be thoroughly drained of all water and placed in a
receptacle made of metal or plastic of a substantial nature with a tight-
§ 206-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 206-5
199:257
§ 206-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-28-1974 by Ord. No.
1-1974]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
fitting cover and with carrying handles so constructed as to prevent
spillage or leakage of its contents.
B. Trash must be packed in containers. Empty cartons and newspapers
must be securely tied. Where the materials are of such a nature that
they cannot be deposited in any container, the same shall be securely
and properly tied into bundles or packages to prevent any spilling while
being handled by such person designated to collect the same or while
such bundles or packages are located on the sidewalk awaiting
collection. The bundles or packages shall be of a size and weight to
permit ease of handling by one man, and no receptacle or contents shall
weigh more than 50 pounds. All trash and refuse containers shall be
placed within the curbline. No containers, however, shall be placed in
front of nor alongside of the property occupied by another without the
consent of such occupant. No refuse container or trash container or
matter to be collected shall be placed within the curbline for collection
prior to 3:00 p.m. of the day preceding the nearest collection day and
must be removed by 9:00 p.m. of the day of the collection.
§ 206-5 WESTAMPTON CODE § 206-6
199:258
ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 12-19-1988 by Ord. No. 17-1988; amended in its entirety
2-8-2011 by Ord. No. 1-201161]
§ 206-7. Purpose.
§ 206-8. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to P.L. 1987, c. 102 (effective April 20,
1987), N.J.S.A. 40:48-2, N.J.S.A. 40:66-1 and N.J.S.A. 40:49-2.1 and any
amendments adopted thereto.
§ 206-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
ACT OR SWMA — The Solid Waste Management Act, N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et
seq., as amended and supplemented.
ALUMINUM CAN — Empty food and beverage containers comprised of
aluminum. Excluded from this definition are aluminum aerosol cans,
aluminum foil and trays.
ANTIFREEZE — Liquid used in a cooling system that is mixed with water
and prevents the water from freezing. The solution serves as the engine
coolant.
BURLINGTON COUNTY REGIONAL PROGRAM — The program utilized
for the collection of those recyclable materials as designated by the
Department of Solid Waste from residential curbside, participating
multifamily and participating school collection programs.
A. The Township of Westampton finds that reducing the amount of solid
waste and conservation of recyclable materials is an important public
concern and is necessary to implement the requirements of the SWMA
and the County Plan. The recycling of certain materials from the
residential, commercial and institutional establishments in this
municipality will conserve existing landfill capacity, facilitate the
implementation and operation of other forms of resource recovery and
conserve natural resources through reduced energy consumption and
reduced water and air pollution, as well as reduce the demand on raw
material extraction.
B. This article replaces §§ 206-7 through 206-15; §§ 206-17 through
206-20; and §§ 206-22 through 206-25 of Chapter 206 of the Code of the
Township of Westampton.
61.Editor's Note: This article did not amend § 206-16, Disposal of leaves, or § 206-21,
Recycling at Township functions/activities, added 3-10-2009 by Ord. No. 2-2009. See
§ 206-7B.
§ 206-7 SOIL REMOVAL § 206-9
199:259
CERTIFIED RECYCLING COORDINATOR — A person who shall have
completed the requirements of a course of instruction in various aspects
of recycling program management, as determined and administered by the
Department of Environmental Protection.
CLASS A RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Source-separated, nonputrescible,
metal, glass and plastic bottles coded Nos. 1 and 2; and paper and
corrugated and other cardboard.
CLASS B RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Source-separated, nonputrescible
waste concrete, asphalt, brick, block, asphalt-based roofing, scrap and wood
waste; source-separated, nonputrescible waste materials other than metal,
glass, paper, plastic containers, corrugated and other cardboard resulting
from construction remodeling repair and demolition operations on houses,
commercial buildings, pavements and other structures; source-separated
whole trees, tree trunks, tree parts, tree stumps, brush and leaves provided
that they are not composted; source-separated scrap tires; and sourceseparated
petroleum contaminated soils.
CLASS C RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Source-separated compostable or
anaerobically digestible material such as source-separated food waste,
biodegradable plastic and yard trimmings.
CLASS D RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Used oil, antifreeze, latex paints,
thermostats, fluorescent lamps (light bulbs), oil-based finishes, batteries,
mercury-containing devices and consumer electronics.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — All commercial and industrial
activities that operate for profit and are involved in retail or manufacture of
goods and services provided for sale.
COMMINGLED — A combining of source-separated recyclable materials for
the purpose of recycling.
COMMON AREA RECYCLING STORAGE LOCATION — A location designed
in accordance with the land use ordinances of this municipality as required
for multifamily dwellings with more than 20 residential units where
curbside collection is not provided under the Burlington County Regional
Program.
CONDOMINIUM COMPLEX — A group of units, arranged horizontally or
vertically, where the form of ownership of real property under a master
deed providing for ownership by one or more owners of units of
improvements together with an undivided interest in common elements
appurtenant to each such unit.
CONSUMER ELECTRONICS — Computer equipment, including desktop
and laptop computers and related components, including, monitors, circuit
boards, terminals, and CPU's, and peripheral equipment including
keyboards, printers, copiers, and fax machines. It shall also include VCRs,
CD players, DVD players, and cellular phones. Consumer electronics shall
not include televisions as defined herein until such time as such devices are
banned at solid waste disposal facilities in accordance with the Electronics
§ 206-9 WESTAMPTON CODE § 206-9
199:260
Waste Recycling Act, P.L. 2008, c.130 et seq.,62 and any amendments
thereto.
CONTAMINANT — Solid waste, food waste, or other material which
adheres to, or which is otherwise contained on or in, source-separated
recyclable materials.
CORRUGATED AND OTHER CARDBOARD — All corrugated cardboard
normally used for packing, mailing, shipping or containerizing goods,
merchandise or other material, but excluding plastic, foam, foil- or waxcoated
or soiled corrugated cardboard.
COUNTY — The Burlington County Board of Chosen Freeholders, and its
successors and assigns, acting through the Burlington County Division of
Solid Waste Management.
CURBSIDE DESIGNATED RECYCLABLES — Those designated recyclables
that are placed for collection within the parameters of the curbside
collection program as outlined herein.
CURBSIDE RECYCLING CONTAINER — A container(s) provided by the
municipality or persons for the temporary storage of recyclable materials
within the residential unit(s).
DE MINIMIS — Less than 1% by volume.
DEP OR DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those recyclable materials to
be source-separated in this municipality, including but not limited to
aluminum cans, antifreeze, consumer electronics, corrugated cardboard,
fluorescent lights, glass containers, lead-acid batteries, leaves, metal
appliances, paper, plastic bottles (coded Nos. 1 and 2), rechargeable
batteries, steel (tin) cans, textiles, tires and used motor oil.
DISPOSITION OR DISPOSITION OF DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE
MATERIALS — The transportation, placement, reuse, sale, donation,
transfer or temporary storage for a period not exceeding six months, or for
a period of time as mandated by law, of designated recyclable materials for
all possible uses except for disposal as solid waste.
DSW — The Burlington County Department of Solid Waste, its successors
and assigns.
FIBER — All newspaper, fine paper, bond paper, junk mail, office paper,
magazines, paperback books, school paper, catalogs, computer paper,
telephone books, chipboard, corrugated and other cardboard and similar
cellulosic material whether shredded or whole, but excluding wax paper,
plastic- or foil-coated paper, thermal fax paper, carbon paper, blueprint
paper, food-contaminated paper, soiled paper and cardboard.
FLUORESCENT LIGHTS — A lighting system which works by creating
electric arcs inside a gas-rich tube to produce ultraviolet light, then
62.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.94 et seq.
§ 206-9 SOIL REMOVAL § 206-9
199:261
converting this to visible fluorescent light by its passage through a layer of
phosphor on the inside of the glass.
GENERATOR — Any person(s) who causes solid waste to be produced for
any purpose whatsoever.
GLASS — All clear (flint), green, and brown (amber) colored glass
containers. Glass shall not include crystal, ceramics, light bulbs, plate,
window, laminated, wired or mirrored glass.
INK JET CARTRIDGE — A replaceable unit that holds ink and the print
nozzles for inkjet printers.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any entity, either public or private,
either for profit or nonprofit, who operates for educational, charitable,
religious, fraternal or other public purpose.
LEAD-ACID BATTERY — Storage batteries with lead electrodes and that
contain dilute sulfuric acid as the electrolyte. These include starting
batteries, such as vehicle batteries, marine batteries, small sealed leadacids
and deep cell batteries used to power vehicles or marine accessories
such as trolling motors, winches or lights.
LEAVES — Vegetative material, typically generated in the autumn, which
fall from trees and are collected for removal from a property.
METAL APPLIANCES — Appliances composed predominantly of metal
including stoves, washing machines, dryers and water heaters. Also
included are all freon-containing appliances, including air conditioners,
freezers, refrigerators and dehumidifiers.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any park, including a trailer park or camp,
equipped to handle mobile homes sited on a year-round basis as defined in
N.J.S.A. 2A: 18-61.7 et seq.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure or complex of
buildings or structures in which three or more dwelling units are rented
or leased or offered for rental or lease for residential purposes; whether
privately or publicly financed, except hotels, motels or other guest houses
serving transient or seasonal guests as those terms are defined under
Subsection (j) of Section 3 of the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law, P.L.1967,
c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55: 13A-1 et seq.) and N.J.S.A 40:66-1.2 et seq.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Westampton located within the County
of Burlington, State of New Jersey.
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING DEPOT — A site owned and operated by a
municipality for the receipt and temporary storage of certain designated
Class A recyclable materials delivered by residents, small commercial and
nonprofit establishments for a period not exceeding two months, prior to
their transport to a recycling center or end-market.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE — Residential, commercial and institutional
solid waste generated within a community.
§ 206-9 WESTAMPTON CODE § 206-9
199:262
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE STREAM — Residential, commercial and
institutional waste in the context of the Statewide Solid Waste Management
Plan Update, which constitutes the waste stream, used to calculate the
state-mandated 50% recycling rate. This waste stream includes waste types
10 and 23.
PAPER — All newspaper, fine paper, bond paper, junk mail, office paper,
magazines, paperback books, school paper, catalogs, computer paper,
telephone books and similar cellulosic material whether shredded or whole,
but excluding tissue and towel paper, wax paper, plastic- or foil-coated
paper, thermal fax paper, carbon paper, NCR paper, blueprint paper, or foodcontaminated
or soiled paper.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
cooperative enterprise, trust, municipal authority, federal institution or
agency, state institution or agency, municipality, other governmental agency
of any other entity or any group of such persons, which is recognized by law
as the subject of rights and duties.
PLASTIC BOTTLES — All bottles that are labeled as made from
polyethylene terapthalate (PET) and coded as No. 1 and high-density
polyethylene terapthalate (HDPE) and coded as No. 2. Specifically excluded
are bottles that formerly contained hazardous materials, including, but not
limited to paint, solvents, motor oil and pesticides and herbicides.
PUTRESCIBLE WASTE — Organic material which is capable of, and prone
to, a rapid process of biological and biochemical decomposition, under
anaerobic or aerobic conditions, resulting in the formation of malodorous
byproducts.
QUALIFIED PRIVATE COMMUNITY — A residential condominium,
cooperative or fee simple community or horizontal property regime, the
residents of which do not receive any tax abatement or tax exemption
related to its construction comprised of a community trust or other trust
device, condominium association, homeowners' association or council of coowners,
wherein the cost of maintaining roads and streets and providing
essential services is paid for by a not-for-profit entity consisting exclusively
of unit owners within the community. No apartment building or garden
apartment complex owned by an individual or entity that receives monthly
rental payments from tenants who occupy the premises shall be considered
a qualified private community. No proprietary campground facility, as
defined in Section 1 of P.L.1993, c.258 (N.J.S.A. 45: 22A-49), shall be
considered to be a qualified private community.
RECHARGEABLE BATTERIES — Batteries used in portable electronic
devices composed of nickel cadmium (Ni-Cd), nickel metal hydride (Ni-MH),
lithium ion (Li-ion) and small sealed lead (Pb).
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials that would otherwise become solid
waste that can be separated, collected and/or processed and returned to the
economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products.
§ 206-9 SOIL REMOVAL § 206-9
199:263
RECYCLING — Any process by which materials, which would otherwise
become solid waste, are collected, separated or processed and returned to
the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products.
RECYCLING CENTER — A facility designed and operated solely for
receiving, storing, processing or transferring source-separated recyclable
material (Class A, Class B, Class C and/or Class D recyclable materials).
RESIDENT — Any person residing within the municipality on a temporary
or permanent basis, but excluding persons residing in hotels or motels.
SCRAP METAL — Bits and pieces of metal parts (for example, bars,
turnings, rods, sheets, wire) or metal pieces that may be combined together
with bolts or soldering (for example, radiators, scrap automobiles, railroad
box cars) which when worn or superfluous, can be recycled. Included
are all ferrous and nonferrous metals including appliances and appliances
containing refrigerants.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials, as defined
in N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1, et seq. and N.J.S.A. 48:13A-1, et seq.
SOURCE-SEPARATED — Recyclable materials separated from the solid
waste stream at the point of generation.
STEEL CAN — Empty food, beverage and aerosol containers comprised
of tin, steel or a combination thereof, which formerly contained only
nonhazardous substances or such other substances as have been approved
for recycling by Department of Solid Waste.
SWMA — The New Jersey Solid Waste Management Act, as amended.
TELEVISION — A stand-alone display system containing a cathode ray
tube or any other type of display primarily intended to receive video
programming via broadcast, having a viewable area greater than four
inches measured diagonally, able to adhere to standard consumer video
formats and having the capability of selecting different broadcast channels
and support sound capability.
TEXTILES — Clean dry clothing or other fabric measuring at least one foot
by one foot in size. It shall not include material that is wet or mildewed.
TIRES — Rubber wheels used on motorized transport or equipment whether
bias-ply, cross-ply or radial.
TONER CARTRIDGE — An exhausted replaceable cartridge containing
toner powder and sometimes the photosensitive drum on which a laser
printer generates the image to be printed.
TYPE 10 MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE — Waste originating in the community
consisting of household waste from private residences, commercial waste
which originates in wholesale, retail or service establishments such as,
restaurants, stores, markets, theatres, hotels and warehouses, and
institutional waste material originated in schools, hospitals, research
institutions and public buildings.
§ 206-9 WESTAMPTON CODE § 206-9
199:264
TYPE 13 BULKY WASTE — Large items of waste material, such as
appliances and furniture. Discarded automobiles, boats, trucks and trailers
and large vehicle parts, and tires are included under this category.
USED OIL — Any oil that has been refined from crude oil, or any synthetic
oil, that has been used and as a result of such use, is contaminated by
physical or chemical impurities, or unused oil that is contaminated by
physical or chemical impurities through storage or handling and is
determined to be a solid waste by the generator.
USED OIL COLLECTION CENTER — The municipal recycling center that
manages used oil and accepts and/or aggregates and stores used oil
collected from used oil generators regulated under N.J.A.C. 7:26A-6.4 that
bring used oil to the collection center in shipments of no more than 55
gallons pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:26A-6.4(e). Used oil accumulation centers
may also accept used oil from household "do-it-yourself" used oil
generators.
§ 206-10. Require source-separation of designated recyclables.
Notwithstanding the limitations to the Burlington County Regional Program
(BCRP) or the Municipal Recycling Depot as outlined within this article,
every person is required to source-separated and recycle each of the
designated recyclable materials outlined within this article.
§ 206-11. Establishment of curbside program.
A. In order to facilitate the collection of certain designated recyclable
materials, there is hereby established a curbside program for the
collection of source-separated recyclable material from residents of the
municipality.
B. Designated recyclable materials for the curbside program are those
materials designated by the DSW for collection within the BCRP. These
materials are: aluminum cans, corrugated cardboard, glass containers,
paper, plastic bottles (Coded Nos. 1 and 2), steel (tin) cans and other
recyclable materials as may be designated from time to time by the
DSW.
C. Multifamily complexes of 20 or more units, condominium complexes of
20 or more units or mobile home parks of 20 or more units, or any
commercial or institutional establishment shall not receive collection
under this program unless the collection location and type of containers
are approved by the DSW.
D. Collections of recyclable materials pursuant to this section shall be in
accordance with a schedule of recycling collection areas and dates
promulgated by DSW and publicly advertised by the municipality or
county.
E. All residents served by the curbside program shall source-separated all
designated recyclables for curbside collection and shall place them at
§ 206-9 SOIL REMOVAL § 206-11
199:265
§ 206-12. Source-separation and collection of designated
recyclables for the curbside program.
All recyclables placed for collection pursuant to the curbside program
established within § 206-11 of this article shall be source-separated and
prepared for collection in accordance with the following conditions:
the side of the road fronting their residence in the manner designated
by § 206-12 of this article and on the date specified for collection.
F. Residents who are physically unable to place recyclable materials out
for collection within the Burlington County Regional Program shall be
exempt from requirements, for participation within the program.
(1) Determinations for this exemption shall be at the discretion of this
municipality.
A. Cardboard and paper shall be set out in carts provided by this
municipality.
(1) Boxes shall be flattened as to fit into the cart.
(2) Where cardboard boxes are too large to be placed in the cart and
where there are too many boxes to fit within the cart, cardboard
boxes must be flattened and placed alongside the cart for
collection.
(3) Carts shall be placed at the curb with the lid opening facing the
street.
(4) Carts shall be placed in such a manner so as to leave at least two
feet of clear space around each side of the cart.
(a) Carts shall be placed in such a manner so as to avoid
interference from overhead obstructions.
(5) Carts shall be maintained in a neat and sanitary condition so as to
deter vermin and odors.
(6) Carts are the property of the municipality and may not be used for
any other purpose or to contain any other material.
B. Glass containers, aluminum cans, steel cans and plastic bottles:
(1) Remove all caps and lids and dispose of as solid waste.
(2) Glass containers, aluminum cans, steel cans and plastic bottles
shall be rinsed free of contaminants.
(3) Glass containers, aluminum cans, steel cans and plastic bottles
shall be placed in a recycling container provided by the
municipality.
§ 206-11 WESTAMPTON CODE § 206-12
199:266
§ 206-13. Establishment of municipal recycling depot program.
§ 206-14. Common area recycling storage locations.
(4) Plastic and/or paper garbage bags shall not be utilized as
containers for glass containers, aluminum cans, steel cans and
plastic bottles.
C. Municipally provided recycling carts/containers may not be used for
any other purpose whatsoever.
D. Removal of recycling carts/containers provided by the municipality by
any person is prohibited.
E. Recyclables shall not be placed for collection earlier than the evening of
the day preceding a scheduled collection day. Recyclables must be
placed at the roadside by 6:00 a.m. on the scheduled collection day.
F. All other terms and phrases shall be as defined in the SWMA and
regulations promulgated thereunder and the County Plan, unless
content clearly requires a different meaning.
A. There is hereby established a municipal depot program for the
convenience of the residents. Source-separated recyclables listed below
may be brought to 710 Rancocas Road during the times and days
advertised.
B. The following source-separated recyclables will be accepted at the
municipal recycling depot:
(1) Aluminum cans.
(2) Corrugated cardboard.
(3) Glass containers.
(4) Paper.
(5) Plastic bottles (Coded Nos. 1 and 2).
(6) Steel (tin) cans.
(7) Any other recyclable materials as designated by the municipality.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or manager of every
multifamily, qualified private community and mobile home park to
construct and maintain, in a neat and sanitary condition, recycling
storage location(s) and recycling containers on their property in
accordance with Chapter 206 of the Code of Westampton and in
accordance with the requirements of the Burlington County
Department of Solid Waste Management.
B. Designated source-separated recyclables:
§ 206-12 SOIL REMOVAL § 206-14
199:267
§ 206-15. Mandatory commercial and institutional sourceseparation
program.
All persons generating municipal solid waste within this municipality
through the operation of a commercial or institutional establishment shall
source-separated and arrange for collection of all designated recyclables
within 30 days of the effective date of this article.
(1) Aluminum cans.
(2) Corrugated cardboard.
(3) Glass containers.
(4) Paper.
(5) Plastic bottles (coded Nos. 1 and 2).
(6) Steel (tin) cans.
(7) Any other recyclable materials as designated by the municipality.
C. The owner or manager of each and every one of the above referenced
locations shall notify all new residents within 30 days of occupancy and
all other residents no less than two times each calendar year of the
recycling location(s), the list of materials that is required to be
recycled, the location of all recycling containers and the requirements
of recyclable material preparation.
D. The owner or manager of each and every one of the above referenced
locations who elects not to participate in the Burlington County
Regional Program shall arrange for the collection and recycling of the
designated recyclable materials outlined within this section at their
own expense as allowed by law.
E. The owner or manager of each and every one of the above referenced
locations shall be required to report recycling tonnages as described in
§ 206-17, Recycling reporting requirements, except where collection
services are provided by the Burlington County Regional Program.
A. Designated recyclable materials for the mandatory commercial and
institutional source separation program shall consist of the following
materials:
(1) Aluminum cans.
(2) Antifreeze.
(3) Consumer electronics.
(4) Corrugated cardboard.
(5) Fluorescent lights.
(6) Glass containers.
§ 206-14 WESTAMPTON CODE § 206-15
199:268
§ 206-16. Disposal of leaves.
(7) Lead-acid batteries.
(8) Leaves.
(9) Metal appliances.
(10) Paper.
(11) Plastic bottles (Coded Nos. 1 and 2).
(12) Rechargeable batteries.
(13) Steel (tin) cans.
(14) Textiles.
(15) Tires.
(16) Used motor oil.
(17) Ink jet cartridges.
(18) Toner cartridges.
(19) Other recyclable materials as designated by the municipality.
B. The owner or manager of each and every commercial and institutional
source shall be required to report recycling tonnages as described in
§ 206-17.
C. The arrangement for collection of designated recyclables for disposition
hereunder shall be the responsibility of the individual(s) responsible for
the provision of solid waste or recycling services including the provision
or maintenance of litter receptacles located on the property of any
commercial or institutional establishment generating designated
recyclables.
A. No person shall dispose of leaves, arrange for the disposal of leaves or
cause leaves to be disposed at any solid waste facility other than a
composting facility.
B. All persons who gather leaves and who are served by a municipal
program for separate collection of leaves shall source separate all
leaves and place them for collection at the times and in the manner
heretofore or hereafter prescribed by this municipality.
C. All persons who gather leaves and who are not served by a municipal
program for separate collection of leaves shall arrange for the separate
disposal or processing of leaves at a composting facility or any other
facility approved to accept leaves by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
§ 206-15 SOIL REMOVAL § 206-16
199:269
§ 206-17. Recycling reporting requirements.
Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:26A-10.3, all multifamily housing owners, mobile
home parks, commercial and institutional housing owners or their agents
shall report the tonnage of designated recyclable materials collected for
recycling from their business or premises, as follows:
§ 206-18. Unlawful activities; nuisance.
D. Nothing herein shall require any person to gather leaves generated on
their property or prevent any person from utilizing leaves for compost,
mulch or other agricultural, horticultural, silvicultural, gardening or
landscaping purposes on their own property.
A. The management individual(s) responsible for the provision of recycling
services as herein defined at all residential, commercial, institutional
and industrial properties that contract for recycling services with a
private company, shall submit to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator,
by the first day of February of each year, documentation verifying the
previous year's total recycling (expressed by weight) for each material
recycled.
B. Documentation shall take the form of a letter or report issued by the
recycling service provider or end market to the generator of the
recycled material. The generator must maintain weight slips or paid
invoices and make such records available for inspection by this
municipality, county or state for a period not to exceed five years.
C. Any solid waste or recycling service provider shall submit to the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator, by the first day of February of each
year, documentation verifying the previous year's total recycling
(expressed by weight) for each material recycled as prescribed by the
DSW.
D. At a minimum, all reporting shall detail the municipality of origin, the
name and location of the market or recycling center and the amount of
each source-separated recyclable material, expressed in gallons, tons
or cubic yards, brought to each manufacturer or recycling center from
the municipality of origin. Those persons specifying this information in
cubic yards shall also indicate the conversion ratio utilized for
calculating the materials from cubic yards to tons.
A. It shall be unlawful for:
(1) Any person, other than those persons authorized to collect any
designated recyclable which has been placed at the roadside for
collection or within a recycling depot pursuant to this article.
(2) Any person to violate, cause, or assist in the violation of any
provision of this article or any provision of the County Plan
concerning recycling.
§ 206-16 WESTAMPTON CODE § 206-18
199:270
§ 206-19. Noncollection of solid waste.
§ 206-20. Other means of disposal.
§ 206-21. Recycling at Township functions/activities. [Added
3-10-2009 by Ord. No. 2-200963]
Recycling shall be required at all Township functions and activities
including, but not limited to, Westampton Day.
(3) Any person to place or to cause to be placed any material other
than a designated recyclable in or near a recycling depot.
(4) Any person to hinder, obstruct, prevent or interfere with this
municipality, the county or any other authorized persons in the
performance of any duty under this article or in the enforcement of
this article.
(5) Any person to offer to collect or knowingly collect designated
recyclable materials in any manner except as source-separated
recyclable materials as defined herein.
(6) Any person required to provide a report as required under this
article to fail to do so.
B. All unlawful conduct set forth in this section shall constitute a public
nuisance.
A. Any person collecting solid waste generated within this municipality
shall refuse to collect solid waste from any person who has failed to
source-separated recyclables designated under any applicable section
of this article.
B. Any person collecting solid waste generated within this municipality
shall refuse to collect solid waste from any person who has placed solid
waste into a municipally issued recycling container.
A. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, any resident of the
municipality may donate or sell any recyclable to any other person,
whether operating for a profit or not for profit; provided, however, that
the person receiving the recyclables shall not, under any
circumstances, collect the donated or sold material from an established
recycling collection route or from a recycling depot without prior
written permission from this municipality for such collection.
B. Permission for such collection shall not be given for any day other than
a Saturday or Sunday and, in no case, shall such permission be given to
collect recyclables from a recycling depot.
63.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former §§ 206-21 through 206-24 as
§§ 206-22 through 206-25, respectively.
§ 206-18 SOIL REMOVAL § 206-22
199:271
§ 206-22. Noninterference with existing contracts.
§ 206-23. Enforcement.
§ 206-24. Violations and penalties.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with or
in any way modify the provisions of any existing contract which is
consistent with N.J.S.A. 13:1E-29 and in force in the municipality on the
effective date of this article.
B. No renewal of any existing contract upon the expiration of the original
term thereof and no new contract for the collection, transportation,
processing or purchase of solid waste or recyclables shall be entered
into after the effective date of this article, unless such renewal or such
contract shall conform to the requirements of this article.
A. Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator and/or the local Code Enforcement Official of the
Township of Westampton.
B. In addition to the Township, the Burlington County Health Department
and the DSW are hereby appointed as enforcement officer(s) for
enforcement of all recycling requirements of this article.
C. Enforcement of this article shall be commenced in the Superior Court
or in the municipal court of the municipality, and penalty or fine shall be
collected with costs in a summary civil proceeding.
D. Any penalties or fines collected in an enforcement action shall be paid
to the municipality when the municipality brings such action.
E. Any penalties or fines collected in an enforcement action shall be paid
to the Treasurer of Burlington County when such action is brought by
the Burlington County Health Department or the DSW.
A. Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall upon
conviction thereof in a proceeding before a court of competent
jurisdiction be subject to the following fines:
(1) Misuse of recycling containers/carts for trash, theft of containers: A
fine of not less than $65 and not more than $100.
(2) Residential recycling violation: A fine of not less than $25 and not
more than $1,000.
(3) Scavenging: A fine of not less than $50 and not more than $1,000.
(4) Commercial or institutional violation: A fine of not less than $500
and not more than $1,000.
§ 206-22 WESTAMPTON CODE § 206-24
199:272
§ 206-25. Injunctions; concurrent remedies.
In addition to any other remedy provided in this article, the municipality
may institute a suit in equity where unlawful conduct or public nuisance
exists as defined in this article for an injunction to restrain a violation
of this article or the County Plan. In addition to an injunction, the court
may impose penalties as authorized by § 206-24 hereof. The penalties and
remedies prescribed by this article shall be deemed concurrent. The
existence, exercise or any remedy shall not prevent the municipality or
the county from exercising any other remedy provided by this article or
otherwise provided by law or equity.
§ 206-25.1. Construal of provisions.
The terms and provisions of this article are to be liberally construed, so as
best to achieve and to effectuate the goals and purposes hereof. This article
shall be construed in pari materi with the SWMA and the County Plan.
(5) For any person who offers to collect recyclable materials in any
manner except as prescribed within this article: A fine of not less
than $1,000 and not more than $4,500.
(6) For any solid waste or recycling service provider who fails to report
as required within this article: A fine of not less than $500 and not
more than $1,000.
(7) For any management individual(s) responsible for the provision of
recycling services as herein defined at all residential, commercial,
institutional and industrial properties that contract for recycling
services with a private company who fails to report as required
within this article: A fine of not less than $500 and not more than
$1,000.
B. Each continuing day of violation of this article shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 206-24 SOIL REMOVAL § 206-25.1
199:273

ARTICLE III
Refuse Containers and Dumpsters
[Adopted 7-13-2010 by Ord. No. 9-2010]
§ 206-26. Purpose.
This article requires dumpsters and other refuse containers that are
outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all times and prohibits
the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of liquids, semiliquids
or solids from the containers to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Township of Westampton and/or the waters of the
state so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 206-27. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by Westampton Township or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface or groundwater, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 206-28. Prohibited conduct.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
§ 206-26 SOIL REMOVAL § 206-28
199:275
§ 206-29. Exceptions to prohibition.
Exceptions are as follows:
§ 206-30. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department of Westampton
Township.
§ 206-31. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of
Westampton.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
§ 206-28 WESTAMPTON CODE § 206-31
199:276
ARTICLE IV
Recycling Storage Locations
[Adopted 2-8-2011 by Ord. No. 2-2011]
§ 206-32. Purpose.
The Township of Westampton finds that reducing the amount of solid waste
and conservation of recyclable materials is an important public concern
and is necessary to implement the requirements of the SWMA and the
County Plan. Areas for the collection of recyclables on residential properties
should be designed to effectuate collection of material in a safe and sanitary
manner and should be sized to meet current industry standards for volumes
and containers.
§ 206-33. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to P.L. 1987, c. 102 (effective April 20,
1987), N.J.S.A. 40:48-2, N.J.S.A. 40:66-1 and N.J.S.A. 40:49-2.1 and any
amendments adopted thereto.
§ 206-34. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
ACT OR SWMA — The Solid Waste Management Act, N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et
seq., as amended and supplemented.
BURLINGTON COUNTY REGIONAL PROGRAM — The program utilized
for the collection of those recyclable materials as designated by the
Department of Solid Waste from residential curbside, participating
multifamily and participating school collection programs.
CLASS A RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Source-separated, nonputrescible,
metal, glass, paper and plastic containers; and corrugated and other
cardboard.
COMMINGLED — A combining of source-separated recyclable materials for
the purpose of recycling.
COMMON AREA RECYCLING STORAGE LOCATION — A location designed
in accordance with the land use ordinances of this municipality as required
for multifamily dwellings with more than 20 residential units where
curbside collection is not provided under the Burlington County Regional
Program.
CONDOMINIUM COMPLEX — A group of units, arranged horizontally or
vertically, where the form of ownership of real property under a master
deed providing for ownership by one or more owners of units of
improvements together with an undivided interest in common elements
appurtenant to each such unit.
CORRUGATED AND OTHER CARDBOARD — All corrugated cardboard
normally used for packing, mailing, shipping or containerizing goods,
§ 206-32 SOIL REMOVAL § 206-34
199:277
merchandise or other material, but excluding plastic-, foam- or wax-coated
or soiled corrugated cardboard.
COUNTY — The Burlington County Board of Chosen Freeholders, and its
successors and assigns, acting through the Burlington County Department
of Solid Waste.
CURBSIDE DESIGNATED RECYCLABLES — Those designated recyclables
that are placed for collection within the parameters of the curbside
collection program as outlined herein.
CURBSIDE RECYCLING CONTAINER — A container(s) provided by the
municipality or persons for the temporary storage of recyclable materials
within the residential unit(s).
DEP OR DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those recyclable materials to
be source-separated in this municipality, including but not limited to
aluminum cans, antifreeze, consumer electronics, corrugated cardboard,
fluorescent lights, glass containers, lead-acid batteries, leaves, metal
appliances, paper, plastic bottles (coded Nos. 1 and 2), rechargeable
batteries, steel (tin) cans, textiles, tires and used motor oil.
DSW — The Burlington County Department of Solid Waste, its successors
and assigns.
FIBER — All newspaper, fine paper, bond paper, junk mail, office paper,
magazines, paperback books, school paper, catalogs, computer paper,
telephone books, chipboard, corrugated and other cardboard and similar
cellulosic material whether shredded or whole, but excluding wax paper,
plastic or foil-coated paper, thermal fax paper, carbon paper, blueprint
paper, food-contaminated paper, soiled paper and cardboard.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any park, including a trailer park or camp,
equipped to handle mobile homes sited on a year-round basis as defined in
N.J.S.A. 2A: 18-61.7 et seq.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure or complex of
buildings or structures in which three or more dwelling units are rented
or leased or offered for rental or lease for residential purposes; whether
privately or publicly financed, except hotels, motels or other guest houses
serving transient or seasonal guests as those terms are defined under
Subsection (j) of Section 3 of the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law, P.L.1967,
c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55: 13A-1 et seq.) and N.J.S.A 40:66-1.2 et seq.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Westampton located within the County
of Burlington, State of New Jersey.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE — Residential, commercial and institutional
solid waste generated within a community.
PAPER — All newspaper, fine paper, bond paper, junk mail, office paper,
magazines, paperback books, school paper, catalogs, computer paper,
telephone books and similar cellulosic material whether shredded or whole,
§ 206-34 WESTAMPTON CODE § 206-34
199:278
but excluding tissue and towel paper, wax paper, plastic- or foil-coated
paper, thermal fax paper, carbon paper, NCR paper, blueprint paper, foodcontaminated
or soiled paper.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
cooperative enterprise, trust, municipal authority, federal institution or
agency, state institution or agency, municipality, other governmental agency
of any other entity or any group of such persons, which is recognized by law
as the subject of rights and duties.
QUALIFIED PRIVATE COMMUNITY — A residential condominium,
cooperative or fee simple community or horizontal property regime, the
residents of which do not receive any tax abatement or tax exemption
related to its construction comprised of a community trust or other trust
device, condominium association, homeowners' association or council of coowners,
wherein the cost of maintaining roads and streets and providing
essential services is paid for by a not-for-profit entity consisting exclusively
of unit owners within the community. No apartment building or garden
apartment complex owned by an individual or entity that receives monthly
rental payments from tenants who occupy the premises shall be considered
a qualified private community. No proprietary campground facility, as
defined in section 1 of P.L.1993, c.258 (N.J.S.A. 45: 22A-49), shall be
considered to be a qualified private community.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials that would otherwise become solid
waste that can be separated, collected and/or processed and returned to the
economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products.
RECYCLING — Any process by which materials, which would otherwise
become solid waste, are collected, separated or processed and returned to
the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products.
RESIDENT — Any person residing within the municipality on a temporary
or permanent basis, but excluding persons residing in hotels or motels.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials, as defined
in N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 48:13A-1 et seq.
SOURCE-SEPARATED — Recyclable materials separated from the solid
waste stream at the point of generation.
SWMA — The New Jersey Solid Waste Management Act, as amended.
§ 206-35. Containment areas for designated recyclable materials on
residential sites.
A. Design standards for common area recycling storage locations.
(1) In accordance with the municipal recycling article in Chapter 206
of the Code of Westampton, every multifamily, qualified private
community and mobile home park within the Westampton Township
shall be required to provide, for the use of its residents, centralized
and common locations on its property for the storage, prior to
§ 206-34 SOIL REMOVAL § 206-35
199:279
collection, of source-separated recyclables generated by the
residents of the property.
(2) Each common area recycling storage location shall, at a minimum,
conform to the following standards:
(a) The dimensions of the recycling storage location shall be
sufficient to accommodate recycling containers which are of
size and number as required by the DSW and which are
consistent with current methods of collection utilized by the
Burlington County Regional Program or the private collection
company being utilized. The following tables indicate the
minimum container capacity requirements for weekly
recycling service and common container dimensions.
Minimum Container Capacity Requirements for Weekly
Recycling Service
Dual stream
collection
Fiber
(paper and
cardboard)
Commingled
(bottles and cans)
Non-age
restricted
complex
1 cubic yard of
capacity for every 15
dwelling units
0.47 cubic yards (96
gallons) of capacity for
every 18 dwelling
units
Age-restricted
complex
1 cubic yard of
capacity for every 20
dwelling units
0.47 cubic yards (96
gallons) of capacity for
every 24 dwelling
units
Single
stream
collection
Fiber and
commingled
--
Non-age
restricted
complex
2 cubic yards of
capacity for every 20
units
--
Age-restricted
complex
1.4 cubic yards of
capacity for every 20
units
--
Common Container Dimensions
Size
Length
(inches)
Width
(inches)
Height
(inches)
1 cubic
yard
72 24 29
2 cubic
yards
72 34 45 (rear)/34
(front)
§ 206-35 WESTAMPTON CODE § 206-35
199:280
Common Container Dimensions
Size
Length
(inches)
Width
(inches)
Height
(inches)
3 cubic
yards
72 43 48 (rear)/40
(front)
4 cubic
yards
72 51 56 (rear)/46
(front)
6 cubic
yards
80 66 71 (rear)/47
(front)
8 cubic
yards
80 71 86 (rear)/53
(front)
(b) Unless expressly prohibited by a municipality, or not feasible
due to existing site constraints, recycling containers for all
Class A designated recyclables shall be co-located at all solid
waste collection areas within the complex.
(c) The recycling storage locations shall be conveniently located
for the residential disposition of source-separated recyclable
materials, preferably co-located, but clearly separated from,
refuse containers.
(d) Outdoor recycling storage locations shall include a concrete
pad of the size as specified herein. The dimensions of the
recycling storage location shall provide sufficient area for the
required container(s):64
(e) The recycling storage locations shall be well lit and shall be
safely and easily accessible by recycling personnel and
vehicles. Collection vehicles shall be able to access the
recycling areas without interference from parked cars or other
obstacles. The following turning template can be used to plan
vehicular accessibility to recycling storage locations:
64.Editor's Note: See the Common Area Recycling Storage Location Detail at the end of this
chapter.
§ 206-35 SOIL REMOVAL § 206-35
199:281
(f) Reasonable measures shall be taken to protect the recycling
areas and the bins or containers placed therein against theft of
recyclable materials or the bins or containers themselves.
(g) Signs as approved by the DSW clearly identifying the recycling
areas and the materials accepted therein shall be posted
adjacent to all points of access to the recycling areas.
(h) Each recycling area shall be enclosed on three sides by a solid
fence or masonry enclosure six feet in height and shall be
surrounded by landscaping. A durable closable access gate on
the fourth side should be provided.
B. Recycling container storage design standards; new residential
construction. In order to facilitate recycling in all new construction, and
to avoid the creation of unhealthful or cramped storage situations,
sufficient storage shall be available for recycling containers within all
new construction of residential housing.
(1) Recycling storage locations. Curbside recycling container storage
locations shall not include basements that require the negotiation
of stairs, or any location either above or below finished grade.
Locations shall be on a hard-wearing, smooth continuous surface
with access to a path with a width no less than three feet and
headroom of not less than seven feet.
§ 206-35 WESTAMPTON CODE § 206-35
199:282
§ 206-36. Construal of provisions.
The terms and provisions of this article are to be liberally construed, so as
best to achieve and to effectuate the goals and purposes hereof. This article
shall be construed in pari materi with the SWMA and the County Plan.
(2) Single-family and two-family dwellings. Each residential dwelling
unit shall be designed to provide a curbside recycling storage
container storage location containing at a minimum, dimensions
(length times width times height) of no less than 36 inches by 32
inches by 84 inches per unit. The location shall be clearly marked
as such on floor plans of the dwelling unit if to be located inside the
dwelling unit. If to be located outside the dwelling unit, adequate
storage space for the container shall be identified on the property
survey. This shall be done at the time of subdivision approval, if
applicable, or at the time of zoning or building permit application.
(3) Multifamily and condominium complex dwellings. Curbside
recycling container storage locations shall be provided for each
multifamily and condominium complex dwelling where common
area recycling storage locations are not otherwise provided. Each
multifamily and condominium complex dwelling unit shall be
designed to provide a curbside recycling container storage location
containing at a minimum, dimensions (length times width times
height) of no less than 36 inches by 32 inches by 84 inches per unit.
The location shall be clearly marked as such on floor plans of the
dwelling unit if to be located inside the dwelling unit. If to be
located outside the dwelling unit, adequate storage space for the
container shall be identified on the site plans or subdivision plans.
§ 206-35 SOIL REMOVAL § 206-36
199:283
Chapter 209
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 88.
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch. 95.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 131.
Littering — See Ch. 155.
Sewers — See Ch. 192.
Solid waste — See Ch. 206.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
215.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 206-36 WESTAMPTON CODE § 206-36
199:284
ARTICLE I
Containerized Yard Waste
[Adopted 5-24-2005 by Ord. No. 11-2005]
§ 209-1. Purpose.
An article to establish requirements for the proper handling of yard waste
in Westampton Township, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 209-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
LANDSCAPE MATERIAL — Mulch, stone, and any other landscape
material.[Added 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 7-2014]
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings, branches, wood and other tree
material.[Amended 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 7-2014]
§ 209-3. Prohibited conduct. [Amended 5-27-2014 by Ord. No.
7-2014]
The owner or occupant of any property, or any employee or contractor
of such owner or occupant engaged to provide lawn care or landscaping
services, shall not sweep, rake, blow or otherwise place yard waste/
landscape material, unless the yard waste/landscape material is
containerized, in the street. If yard waste/landscape material that is not
containerized is placed in the street, the party responsible for placement
of yard waste/landscape material must remove the yard waste/landscape
material from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this
§ 209-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 209-3
199:285
article. Yard waste/landscape material not containerized must be placed
behind the curb or edge of pavement.
§ 209-4. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
§ 209-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
§ 209-3 WESTAMPTON CODE § 209-5
199:286
ARTICLE II
Improper Disposal of Waste into Storm Sewer
[Adopted 5-24-2005 by Ord. No. 12-2005]
§ 209-6. Purpose.
An article to prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other
than stormwater to the municipal separate stormwater sewer system (MS4)
operated by the Westampton Township, so as to protect public health, safety
and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 209-7. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the plural number include the
singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance
or system of conveyance (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by Westampton Township or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems
that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and
transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 209-8. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by Westampton Township
is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than
stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 209-9. Exceptions to prohibition.
A. Waterline flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
§ 209-6 SOIL REMOVAL § 209-9
199:287
§ 209-10. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Westampton Police Department and the
Code Enforcement Officer of Westampton Township.
§ 209-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, after being duly notified, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$500.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
C. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following its use for its
intended purposes;
(2) Equipment used in the application of salt and deicing materials
immediately following salt and deicing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and deicing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded.
(3) Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation, is limited to
exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not apply to
engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 209-9 WESTAMPTON CODE § 209-11
199:288
ARTICLE III
Yard Waste Collection Program
[Adopted 5-24-2005 by Ord. No. 13-2005]
§ 209-12. Purpose.
An article to establish a yard waste collection and disposal program in
Westampton Township, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 209-13. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the
text of this ordinance clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
LANDSCAPE MATERIAL — Mulch, stone, and any other landscape
material.[Added 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 7-2014]
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings, branches, wood and other tree
material.[Amended 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 7-2014]
§ 209-14. Yard waste collection. [Amended 5-27-2014 by Ord. No.
7-2014]
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is allowed only as follows:
Leaves may be placed in the street during the seven days prior to a
scheduled and announced leaf collection program, in the fall and one week
in the spring, and shall not be placed closer than 10 feet from any storm
drain inlet. Placement of leaves or any other type of yard waste/landscape
material at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any other
manner is a violation of this article. If such placement of yard waste/
landscape material occurs, the party responsible for placement of the yard
§ 209-12 SOIL REMOVAL § 209-14
199:289
waste/landscape material must remove the yard waste/landscape material
from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this article.
Landscape materials and yard waste for collection must be placed behind
the curb or edge of pavement.
§ 209-15. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
§ 209-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
§ 209-14 WESTAMPTON CODE § 209-16
199:290
ARTICLE IV
Wildlife Feeding
[Adopted 5-24-2005 by Ord. No. 14-2005]
§ 209-17. Purpose.
An article to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife in any public park
or on any other property owned or operated by Westampton Township, so as
to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for
failure to comply.
§ 209-18. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, works used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, words
used in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 209-19. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned or
operated by Westampton Township, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife
(for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or
unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 209-20. Enforcement.
§ 209-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Westampton Police Department
and Code Enforcement Officer of Westampton Township.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
§ 209-17 SOIL REMOVAL § 209-21
199:291

ARTICLE V
Illicit Connections to Sewer System
[Adopted 5-24-2005 by Ord. No. 15-2005]
§ 209-22. Purpose.
An article to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal separate storm
sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Westampton, so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure
to comply.
§ 209-23. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate stormwater system operated by the Township of
Westampton, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit
other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES
Permit No. NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not
limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including but not limited to
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by Westampton Township or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems
that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and
transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
§ 209-22 SOIL REMOVAL § 209-23
199:293
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purposes of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides, or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited to,
leachate and cooling water other than non-cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 209-24. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Township of Westampton any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other that stormwater).
§ 209-25. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer of
Westampton Township.
§ 209-26. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
§ 209-23 WESTAMPTON CODE § 209-26
199:294
ARTICLE VI
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
[Adopted 7-13-2010 by Ord. No. 8-2010]
§ 209-27. Purpose.
This article requires the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which are
in direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing
or alterations of facilities on private property, to prevent the discharge of
solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food wrappers and other
litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the
Township of Westampton so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 209-28. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by Township of Westampton or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 209-29. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 209-27 SOIL REMOVAL § 209-29
199:295
§ 209-30. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 209-28 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see
Subsection C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 209-30 below prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they
use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an
area of no more than seven square inches, or is no greater than 0.5
inch across the smallest dimension.
(3) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
square inches, or be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
§ 209-29 WESTAMPTON CODE § 209-30
199:296
§ 209-31. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Westampton Township Police
Department.
§ 209-32. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for each storm drain inlet that
is not retrofitted to meet the design standard.
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
§ 209-30 SOIL REMOVAL § 209-32
199:297
Chapter 212
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Removal of animal debris — See Ch. 88, Art.
III.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 103.
Littering — See Ch. 155.
Loitering — See Ch. 158.
Site plan review — See Ch. 196.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 215.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 221.
Towing and storing — See Ch. 224.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 232.
Recreational vehicles — See Ch. 238.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
Street vacations, acceptances and name
changes — See Ch. A263.
§ 209-32 WESTAMPTON CODE § 209-32
199:298
ARTICLE I
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 9-22-1977 by Ord. No. 13-1977]
§ 212-1. Sidewalks.
The owner or owners, tenant or tenants of any land abutting upon public
streets, avenues and highways of the Township of Westampton shall remove
all snow and ice from the abutting sidewalks on such public streets, avenues
and highways within 12 hours of daylight after the same shall fall or be
formed thereon. In the event of ice which may be so frozen as to make
removal impracticable, the owner or owners, tenant or tenants of lands
abutting or bordering upon public streets, avenues or highways shall cause
the same to be thoroughly covered with sand, ashes or rock salt within 24
hours after the snow shall cease to fall or be formed thereon.
§ 212-2. Certification of costs; lien.
In addition to the penalties herein provided, if the owner or tenant of any
such premises shall neglect or refuse to comply with § 212-1 of this Code,
it shall be the duty of the Department of Public Works, when practicable, to
notify the owner or tenant of the noncompliance and request the removal
of said snow and ice and inform the owner or tenant that the failure to so
remove shall result in the removal of said snow and ice by the Department
of Public Works and the imposition of the costs of said removal as a lien
against the land. Upon the failure of the owner or tenant to remove the
snow and ice within the period of time specified in the notice, not to exceed
24 hours, the Department of Public Works shall forthwith remove said snow
and ice from the sidewalk of the offending owner or tenant. The head of said
Department shall thereupon certify to the governing body the cost of such
removal, which cost shall be charged against the land abutting or bordering
upon such sidewalks, and the amount so charged shall forthwith become a
lien upon such land and shall be added to and become part of the taxes next
to be assessed and levied upon such land and shall bear interest at the same
rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced in the same manner as
taxes.
§ 212-3. Violations and penalties.
Any owner or owners, tenant or tenants who shall violate any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the Judge of the
Municipal Court of the Township of Westampton, be subject for each offense
to a fine not exceeding $500 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90
days, or to both such fine and imprisonment. Each and every twenty-fourhour
period that such violation continues shall be considered a separate and
distinct offense.
§ 212-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 212-3
199:299

ARTICLE II
Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 2-23-1978 by Ord. No. 5-1978; amended in its entirety
11-20-2017 by Ord. No. 17-2017]
§ 212-4. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Township Street
Openings and Excavations in the Township of Westampton."
§ 212-5. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words, terms and phrases
shall have the meanings respectively given herein. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
APPLICANT — Any person, company or entity making written application to
the Township of Westampton for an opening or excavation permit.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Works of the Township of Westampton
or his designee.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstance or occurrence, the existence
of which constitutes a clear and immediate danger to persons or properties.
EXCAVATION WORK — The excavation, removal, digging, disturbing,
replacement, repair, construction, or taking up any surface, pavement,
stone or soil and improvements within the rights-of-way or public properties
of the Township of Westampton. For the purpose of this article, that work
which is being performed outside the public rights-of-way, but requires
the storage of materials or the operation of equipment within the public
right-of-way, in such a manner as may cause damage, will also be deemed
"excavation work." The term "excavation work" shall not include work by
persons exempted from the provisions of this article under § 212-15.7.
IMPROVEMENTS — Curbs, sidewalks, driveways, driveway aprons,
drainage and/or utility service structures, conduits, pavements, base
courses, gutters, retaining walls, channels, headwalls, railings, guardrails,
or any other public improvements existing within the Township's rights-ofway,
properties, lands or easements.
PERMITTEE — Any person who has been granted, and has in full force
and effect, a street opening permit issued hereunder, and also includes any
person that is required to secure a permit for excavation work from the
Township of Westampton.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, entity,
or public or private organization of any kind.
STREET — Any street, roadway, highway, alley, cul-de-sac, avenue, public
easement, public way, public right-of-way, or public grounds in the Township
of Westampton.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Westampton.
§ 212-4 SOIL REMOVAL § 212-5
199:301
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE — The Township Committee of the Township of
Westampton.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — The Township Engineer of the Township of
Westampton
§ 212-6. Permit required.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to perform any
excavation or tunnel work, construct, remove, replace or repair any
improvements, or place any form of construction in, over or upon any
street or improvement or otherwise endanger or obstruct the normal
flow of vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian traffic or normal flow of surface
water, by the placing of any earth or other excavated material,
barricade, structure, material or equipment on any street without first
obtaining a written permit, approved and issued by the Director.
B. Except as provided in Subsection B(1), no permit shall be issued for a
newly constructed or substantially improved street for a period of five
years from the date of acceptance of such construction except in cases
of emergency as described in § 212-15.8. Sixty days prior to the start of
construction of permanent pavement or improvements on any street,
the Director shall notify, in writing, all property owners of record on
such street (within 200 feet), all utility companies serving such street,
the Police Department and the Fire Department of such construction
and of the provisions of this section.
(1) For a permit to be issued for excavation of any paved or improved
street surface which is less than five years, the applicant, under the
instructions of the Director, shall be required to secure approval
from the Township Committee by resolution before any permit can
be approved hereunder.
(a) The applicant, under the instructions of the Director, shall
make application for Township Committee approval as
provided hereunder and provide, to the extent possible, an
explanation of all efforts made to avoid the street opening and
therefore the basis for the requested Township Committee
approval.
(b) Should an applicant be granted a permit by Township
Committee to open the paved street as described herein above,
the fees for the opening shall be assessed as indicated in
§§ 212-8, 212-9, 212-10, and 212-11 herein.
C. The Director shall have the right to revoke or cancel the permit at any
time should the permittee fail to comply with any of the terms,
agreements, covenants, ordinances and conditions thereof.
D. No permit shall be assigned or transferred except upon the prior
written consent of the Director. Nor shall the work take place in any
other than the location specifically designated in the permit.
§ 212-5 WESTAMPTON CODE § 212-6
199:302
§ 212-7. Permit application.
E. No permit shall be issued for an opening during the period from the
first day of December to the 15th day of March or where conditions
exist due to severe weather, freeze, frost, etc., except for emergency
openings or openings required by law.
F. If the application for street opening permit requires the street to be
excavated or opened for a width equal to or greater than 25% but less
than 50% of the existing roadway, or if the opening exceeds one parking
lane width, the applicant shall be required to restore the pavement with
a two-inch mill and two-inch overlay between the curbline and
centerline of the roadway.
G. If the application for street opening permit requires the street to be
excavated or opened for a width of equal to or more than 50% of the
existing roadway, the applicant shall be required to restore the roadway
pavement with a two-inch mill and two-inch overlay from curbline to
curbline.
H. All street openings, excavations and restorations thereof shall be made
under the supervision and control of the Director and shall be subject
the oversight and inspection of the Township Engineer. The Township
Engineer fees shall be charged to the escrow established in § 212-9.
A. No excavation permit shall be issued unless a written application is
submitted to the Director.
B. The written application must be made using the forms provided by the
Township, including applicable fees, established by this article.
C. The permit application shall specify the name, address and contact
information of the applicant, the place and/or places at which the work
is to be done, the type of the work, and the proposed dates of
commencement and completion of the excavation and restoration work.
D. The application shall include or be accompanied by scaled or
dimensioned drawings satisfactory to the Director, detailing the
following:
(1) Any structures, pipes, ducts, wires, cables, or other facilities being
repaired, modified, or installed in the street.
(2) Any roadway excavation.
(3) Any street alteration.
(4) The address(es), locations and dimensions of the excavation and
restoration work.
(5) Restoration procedures including materials types and sizes/
dimensions.
§ 212-6 SOIL REMOVAL § 212-7
199:303
(6) In addition to the information required herein, other information
may be required by the Director, including complete plans, profiles,
ground elevations for both the existing and proposed conditions,
details of any proposed curbs, sidewalks, pavements and other
proposed improvements.
(7) The Director and/or Township Engineer is hereby authorized and
directed to promulgate such written instructions as may be
necessary for the construction of the street opening. Such
instructions shall include but shall not be limited to:
(a) Limitations on the size on the opening.
(b) Restrictions for the protection of existing subsurface
installations, monuments and drainage systems.
(c) Requirements for the storage and removal of excavated
materials.
(d) Provisions for safety precautions to be taken by the permittee.
(e) Requirements for backfilling, inspection and final paving cross
section of openings.
(f) Requirements for utilization of trenchless technology wherever
possible on all piping, trenches and installations of 15 inches in
diameter or less.
(g) Requirements that all nonferrous material contain a wire or
detection device to accurately determine the location after
installation.
(h) Requirements regarding the set elevations of all castings,
including manholes, valve boxes, and inlet castings.
E. A separate application and permit will be required for each type of
opening made. One application or permit shall be sufficient to represent
more than one opening if the openings are for related work and
separated by a distance equal to or less than 50 feet. Related work shall
be defined at the discretion of the Director and/or Township Engineer
based on location(s), type of utility, required equipment, and required
restoration tasks.
F. Permit applications for emergency work shall be submitted to the
Township within 48 hours following the initial excavation work. The
application must include the information required by § 212-7, and
notifications shall be in compliance with § 212-15.8 herein. Failure to
comply with this section may result in the assessment of fines defined
by § 212-15.9 herein.
G. Permit applications for the current annual year will not be approved for
any applicant who has not satisfactorily completed the excavation and
restoration work for the previous year.
§ 212-7 WESTAMPTON CODE § 212-7
199:304
§ 212-8. Permit application fees.
Each applicant for a permit shall pay a permit application fee of $50 per
opening for the purposes of the execution and issuance of the permit. The
applicant fee shall apply to all openings.
§ 212-9. Permit review, inspection and supervision escrow fees.
§ 212-10. Performance deposit or bond.
H. The Director shall grant such permit when all of the requirements of
this article have been satisfactorily complied with by the applicant.
A. Township engineering fees: In addition to the permit application fee as
provide in § 212-8 hereof, applicants for the following permits shall pay
a minimum fee of $150 for the purposes of review and issuance of the
permit, examination of drawings, and initial administrative work
performed by the Township Engineer. This fee is nonrefundable.
(1) Applicants for sidewalk and driveway openings equal to or
exceeding 25 square feet or three square yards.
(2) Applicants for all curb and roadway openings.
B. Inspection and supervision fees:
(1) In all sidewalk, driveway apron or grass area openings or
excavations, the minimum inspection fee shall be 5% of the
Township Engineer's estimate of the cost of repairing and replacing
the sidewalk, driveway or grass area or $150, whichever is greater.
(2) In all curb and street openings and excavations, the minimum
inspection fee shall be 5% of the Township Engineer's estimate of
the cost of repairing and replacing the curb and street or $500,
whichever is greater.
(3) The applicant shall be required to pay escrow fees for additional
inspection required to oversee the correction of unacceptable
workmanship as determined by the Township Engineer.
(4) The cost for repairing and/or replacing the excavated area(s) shall
be determined by the Township Engineer.
C. The fees in Subsections A and B above will be deposited into an escrow
account within the Township and utilized/charged based upon the fees
paid to the Township Engineer for the Township engineering, inspection
and oversight of the project. The permittee is required to submit a
written request for refund of unused portion of the escrow upon
completion and acceptance of the work by the Township.
D. In addition, for any inspection after working hours, on Saturdays,
Sundays or holidays, the applicant will pay the inspector's time at the
overtime rate set by the Township.
§ 212-7 SOIL REMOVAL § 212-10
199:305
A. No person shall be granted a permit to open pavement of any street
until and unless there shall be deposited with the Township, by certified
check or bond, an amount sufficient to secure the cost of repairing and
replacing such street or other surfaces or appurtenances. The cost of
repairing and replacing of such street or surface or appurtenances shall
be determined by the Director or the Township Engineer. The minimum
amount deemed sufficient for such purposes shall be $500 unless
otherwise determined by the Director or the Township Engineer.
B. Permits approved for excavations in newly constructed or substantially
improved roads, in accordance with § 212-6B herein, shall be subject to
the following additional deposit fees:
(1) Infrared treatment costs shall be added to the deposit required
above.
(2) An assessment factor fee equal to 2% for each unelapsed month or
fraction thereof of the five year (60 months) restricted period shall
be applied to the estimated cost determined in § 212-10A, and
added to the deposit required above. The maximum assessment
factor fee shall be 120% of the estimated restoration cost total;
provided, however, that no assessment hereunder shall be less than
$1,000. No portion of the assessment charge shall be refundable
nor shall such assessment payment relieve the permit holder from
the required insurance(s) and/or bonds associated with restoration
of all street openings in recently approved or applied pavement
areas.
C. In lieu of the certified check in § 212-10A, the applicant may file a
performance surety bond in 150% of the estimated cost of repairing and
replacing such street or other surfaces or appurtenances within the
street area in the manner as herein provided. The estimated cost shall
be determined by the Director after the application for permit has been
submitted in compliance with § 212-7 of this article. No such bond shall
be accepted until the Director shall have certified that the amount
thereof is sufficient as provided herein, and the Director and Township
Engineer shall have approved the qualification of the surety, and the
Township Attorney shall have approved the sufficiency of the form and
execution of such guarantee.
D. The fees in Subsections A, B, and C above will be deposited in an
escrow account within the Township and/or bond shall remain in effect
until completion and acceptance of the project. The Township shall
deduct costs to repair the permittee's work from the escrow and/or seek
and obtain costs/services to correct the work by way of the bonding
company securing the permittee's work.
E. The permittee is required to submit a written request for refund of the
unused portion of the deposit and/or release of the posted bond upon
completion and acceptance of the work by the Township.
§ 212-10 WESTAMPTON CODE § 212-11
199:306
§ 212-11. Public utilities.
§ 212-12. Execution of excavation work.
§ 212-13. Time for work to be done.
A. With the Director's approval, a public utility subject to regulation by the
State Board of Public Utilities Commission may comply with the
following requirements in lieu of the Township engineering escrow,
security deposits requirements detailed in § 212-9 and § 212-10 herein.
(1) Township engineering, inspection and supervision escrow fees: In
lieu of individually calculated and assigned escrow fees for each
opening required in § 212-9 hereof, a public utility may establish an
annual escrow in the sum of $15,000 to the Township and file the
same with the Director.
(2) Performance bond: In lieu of the security deposits required in
§ 212-10 hereof, a public utility may execute an annual bond in the
sum of $25,000 to the Township and file the same with the Director.
Such bond shall be conditioned upon compliance with the
applicable provisions of this chapter.
A. Notice requirement.
(1) The permittee shall give the Director not less than 48 hours' notice
prior to starting excavation work and upon completion of the
restoration. Notice shall be given by contacting the Director's office
via fax or email.
(2) Failure to provide notice as required may result in revocation of the
permit and issuance of a stop-work order.
B. The approved permit must be visibly exhibited at the location(s) of the
work, must be in the possession of the parties doing the work and must
be exhibited to the Director or his authorized representative upon
request. No such permit shall be valid except for the place, time and
character of work specified therein.
C. All street openings, excavations, and restoration thereof shall be made
under the supervision and control of the Director and subject to his
inspection.
D. Restoration. The permittee shall restore the site or work promptly, upon
completion thereof; all surplus excavated material and debris shall be
removed and the site shall be restored in a neat and orderly condition.
All areas disturbed during the course of work including those with
topsoil, seed, or sod shall be restored by the permittee to a condition
the same or better than they were previously.
A. The completion date submitted by the applicant shall be the expiration
date of the permit unless the Director requires a specific deadline.
§ 212-11 SOIL REMOVAL § 212-13
199:307
§ 212-14. Removal and protection of utilities.
B. If, for any reason, work is not commenced within the period of 30 days,
the permit shall be void unless within such period the applicant shall
resubmit the application Director for permit extension.
C. Following the application for a permit extension, the Director shall
either return the deposit or extend the time for the beginning of the
work for another period of 30 days by endorsement on the permit.
D. No permit that has been extended shall be valid unless the work is
commenced within 10 days from the date of the extension approval.
E. Any street opening must be backfilled immediately after completion of
underground construction. Temporary paving shall be completed
promptly as trenches are backfilled. Permanent pavement replacement
shall be completed after four weeks from the date of installation of
temporary pavement unless the Director shall designate a longer period
of time. During the winter season, as determined by the Director, the
permanent pavement replacement will be deferred until weather
permits.
F. Sidewalks, driveway aprons and curbs disturbed or removed by permit
shall be replaced within five days after the opening was made.
A. The permittee shall determine the existence and location of all
underground utilities prior to beginning work, and protect the same
against damage. The permittee shall contact the New Jersey One-Call
Service at 800-272-1000 prior to beginning all work and provide the
Director with the New Jersey One Call confirmation upon request.
B. The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the
written consent of the Director and the utility company or person
owning the utility. If it becomes necessary to remove an existing utility,
this shall be done by its owner.
C. No utility owned by the Township shall be moved to accommodate the
permittee unless the cost of such work is borne by the permittee. The
cost of moving privately owned utilities shall be similarly borne by the
permittee unless other arrangements are made with the person owning
the utility.
D. The permittee shall support and protect all pipes, conduits, poles,
wires, or other apparatus that may be in any way affected by the
excavation work, and do everything necessary to maintain support,
sustain, and protect them under, over, along or across such work for its
duration.
E. Should any of the pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus be
damaged, the expense of repairs of same shall be the responsibility of
and charged to the permittee, and his insurance and/or bond shall be
liable therefor. The permittee shall be responsible for any damage done
§ 212-13 WESTAMPTON CODE § 212-14
199:308
§ 212-15. Insurance prerequisite.
Prior to commencement of work, the permittee shall furnish the Director
satisfactory evidence in writing that said permittee has in force and will
maintain in force during the performance of the excavation work and the
period of the excavation permit public liability and property damage
insurance for the protection of the applicant, the Township and its agents
and employees from any and all claims for personal injury, including
accidental death, and property damage. The insurance shall be in minimum
amount of $250,000 to $500,000, and bodily injury in a minimum amount
of $100,000 and duly issued by an insurance company authorized to do
business in the State of New Jersey. In cases where the contractor or
nature of the proposed excavation work are such as to present an unusual
hazard or a higher-than-normal risk of damage or injury, the Director may
require the provision of increased amounts of liability and property damage
insurance.
§ 212-15.1. Indemnification of Township for loss to persons or
property.
The applicant, in accepting a permit under this article, agrees to enter into
a written agreement with the Township so as to save, defend, and keep
harmless the Township from and indemnify it against any and all actions,
suits, demands, payments, losses, costs, damages, and charges incurred
by reason of any damages to property, injuries to persons, or any loss of
life resulting from any negligence of the applicant, his agents, servants or
employees, contractors or subcontractors occurring in the performance of
the work covered by the permit or from any other matter, cause or reason
relating thereto.
§ 212-15.2. Protection of adjoining property.
to any public or private property resulting from the breaking of any
utility water pipes, sewer, gas pipe, electric conduit, or other utility, and
his insurance and/or bond shall be liable therefor.
A. The permittee shall, at all times and at his own expense, preserve and
protect from injury any adjoining property by providing proper
foundations and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. When
in the protection of property it is necessary to enter upon private
property for the purpose of taking appropriate protective measures, the
permittee shall obtain written permission from the owner of such
private property for such purpose, and if he cannot obtain such
permission from such owner, the Director may authorize him to enter
the private premises solely for the purpose of making the property safe.
B. The permittee shall, at its own expense, shore up and protect all
buildings, walls, fences, or other property likely to be damaged during
the progress of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all
damage to public or private property resulting from his failure to
§ 212-14 SOIL REMOVAL § 212-15.2
199:309
§ 212-15.3. Traffic, public safety; applicant's responsibilities and
liabilities for failure.
protect and carry out said work properly. Whenever it may be necessary
for the permittee to trench through any lawn area, the sod shall be
carefully cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have been backfilled
as required by § 212-15.4.
C. All construction and maintenance work shall be done in a manner
calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a
condition as nearly as possible to that which existed before such work
began. The permittee shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees or
shrubs which exist in parking strip areas or easements across private
property without first having notified and obtained the consent of the
property owner or, in the case of public property, the Director.
A. No permittee shall allow or permit to remain unguarded at the place of
excavation or opening any machinery, equipment, or other device
having the characteristics of an attractive nuisance likely to attract
children or which might be hazardous to public safety or health.
B. Every person making an excavation shall be required to place and
maintain suitable warning devices, signs, caution notices, barriers, and
lighting devices pursuant to the requirements of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey as amended and supplemented, and the current
edition of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
C. Temporary construction detours, sign selection and locations, roadway
taper dimensions, barrel and/or cone spacing, locations of certified
flagmen and/or Police Traffic Directors shall be in adherence to the
New Jersey Department of Transportation Roadway Design Manual,
Chapter 14, Guidelines for Traffic Control Plans and Details, and
approved by the Westampton Police Department.
D. All work shall be conducted in such manner as to minimize the
obstruction of traffic and inconvenience to the public and occupants of
adjoining property. Where less than two complete traffic lanes are
maintained, flagmen shall be employed. Where an excavation extends
the full width of a street, only 1/2 of such street shall be open and
backfilled prior to opening the remaining half.
E. All persons making excavations in the streets shall inquire the Police
Department to determine if flagmen or detours of traffic are needed,
and/or whether the work is to be scheduled in order to minimize
disturbance of the normal traffic flow.
F. The permittee shall be liable for all damages caused by the conduct of
the work or failure to properly guard, light, or maintain the work and
work area.
§ 212-15.2 WESTAMPTON CODE § 212-15.3
199:310
§ 212-15.4. Backfill.
Unless otherwise directed by the Director, the following specifications shall
govern the backfill in excavated trenches:
§ 212-15.5. Maintenance and restoration of openings.
Unless otherwise directed by the Director, upon completion of the opening
and backfill as specified in § 212-15.4, the following specifications shall
govern the maintenance and repair of street openings by the permittee.
G. In accepting a permit under this article, the permittee shall enter into a
written save-harmless agreement with the Township as provided under
§ 212-15.1.
H. The permittee shall pay costs of all required flagmen and/or Police
Traffic Directors. The use of certified flagmen shall be approved at the
discretion of the Police Department. The permittee shall produce copy
of the flagman's certification upon request by the Director and/or Police
Department or their respective designees.
I. Costs associated with Police Traffic Directors shall be obtained by
contacting the Police Department at (609) 267-3000 and requesting the
services of an off-duty police officer(s) for traffic direction. All requests
for officers must be given at least 48 hours prior to start time unless
there are emergency circumstances. Cancellation for prior scheduled
officers must be given two hours prior to the proposed start time.
A. All openings shall be restored below grade with backfill consisting of
soil aggregate NJDOT designation I-13 or suitable excavated material
and shall be tamped in twelve-inch layers with a mechanical tamper.
B. All material not suitable for backfill and all excess backfill material shall
be removed from the site and legally disposed of by the permittee.
A. Roadway pavement openings shall temporarily be restored with backfill
pursuant to § 212-15.4 to within 12 inches of below existing surface.
The remainder of the trench shall be filled with six inches of dense
graded aggregate, and six inches of NJDOT hot mix asphalt base course
material and tamped and/or rolled with the minimum capacity of a fiveton
roller. This temporary restoration shall remain in place for a
minimum of four weeks. The trench shall be maintained to the existing
grade by the addition of additional hot mix asphalt base course material
as required until permanent restoration takes place.
B. No permittee shall commence permanent restoration on any street
foundation or surface until the Township Engineer has determined that
settlement of the subsurface is complete and the area properly
prepared for permanent.
C. The final restoration shall include neatly sawcutting the edges of the
existing pavement to a minimum depth of six inches with a pavement
§ 212-15.3 SOIL REMOVAL § 212-15.5
199:311
§ 212-15.6. Release of deposit or bond.
saw or pneumatic cutting tool. The saw cut shall be located 12 inches
beyond the excavation on all sides. The edges of the existing pavement
shall be tack coated. Four inches of NJDOT hot mix asphalt base course
material and two inches of hot mix asphalt surface course material shall
be installed and rolled with a minimum capacity five-ton roller and meet
the existing, adjacent grades with smooth transition and no bumps.
D. All roadway materials shall be manufactured to comply with the current
edition of New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, as amended.
E. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to maintain the temporary
pavement restoration to the existing grade by the addition of hot mix
asphalt base course material or high performance cold patch during the
period prior to permanent pavement restoration work. Should the
permittee fail to maintain such pavement opening, and upon 24 hours'
notice by the Director, the opening may be repaired as specified by the
Township, and the cost thereof deducted from deposits received in
§ 212-10.
F. Driveway openings shall be replaced with the appropriate material and
in compliance with the Township's specifications for driveways.
Driveway aprons constructed within the Township's right-of-way and
adjacent to public sidewalk shall be at minimum Class B concrete, six
inches thick. Sidewalk openings shall be replaced with Class B
concrete, four inches thick. Concrete work shall have a minimum
compressive strength of 4,500 pounds per square inch after 28 days.
G. Where concrete curbing and/or gutters are disturbed, damaged or
removed, curbing and gutters of the exact configuration as the existing
shall be constructed. Concrete shall be Portland cement concrete, airentrained,
conforming to the New Jersey Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications for Class B concrete and shall have a minimum
compressive strength of 4,500 pounds per square inch after 28 days.
H. All restoration work shall be performed to maintain and restore
appropriate drainage abilities, and without damage or impairment of
the Township's stormwater control measures and facilities.
A. No such security deposit, certified check, or performance surety bond
shall be released until all repairing and replacing of streets or other
surfaces or appurtenances within the street area are fully complete to
the satisfaction of the Director, and all fees are paid as provided in this
article. In no event shall any such security deposit, certified check, or
performance surety bond be released within a period of 12 months from
completion of such work and only after written approval thereof by the
Director is obtained.
§ 212-15.5 WESTAMPTON CODE § 212-15.6
199:312
§ 212-15.7. Applicability.
All provisions of this article, except §§ 212-6, 212-7, 212-8, 212-9, 212-10,
212-11, 212-13, shall apply to state, county or municipal authorities and
to contractors performing work in Township streets under construction
contracts with municipal authorities, and such contracts shall contain
provisions and specifications to insure compliance with this article.
§ 212-15.8. Emergencies.
Street openings or excavations may be made without obtaining a written
permit as provided herein in cases of emergency which would reasonably
appear to endanger public health or safety. In such emergencies, adequate
precautions shall be taken as provided in §§ 212-14, 212-15, 212-15.1,
212-15.2, 212-15.3, 212-15.4, and 212-15.5. Immediate notice thereof shall
be communicated to the Director, Police Department, and Fire Department.
Notification of the emergency opening shall be provided to the Director
within 24 hours following the initial opening. The twenty-four-hour
notification shall be made via telephone, email or overnight mail. The formal
application for a permit shall thereafter be made within a period of 48 hours
following the initial opening, and compliance with all of the provisions of
this chapter shall be met.
§ 212-15.9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction of same, be subject to a fine of up to $750
or imprisonment of up to 90 days, or both, for each offense, and, in addition
thereto, shall be subject to a fine of up to $250 per day from the date of such
conviction until such time as said violation has been corrected.
§ 212-15.10. Revocation of permit.
B. Upon the failure of default by the permittee of any of the terms,
agreements, covenants, and conditions of the permit on its part to be
undertaken and performed, said deposit may be used by the Township
for any expense incurred by the Township by reason of such failure or
default on the part of the permittee.
C. After the expense of such failure or default has been paid and deducted
from the amount of the deposit, as determined and certified by the
Director, the balance shall be refunded to the permittee. If the security
is insufficient to cover expenses of the Township, it will place a lien in
the amount of the deficit upon said property for collection in the same
manner as taxes as authorized by resolution of the Township
Committee.
A. Any permit may be revoked by the Director, after notice to the
permittee, for:
§ 212-15.6 SOIL REMOVAL § 212-15.10
199:313
(1) Violation of any condition of the permit or of any provision of this
article.
(2) Violation of any provision of any other applicable ordinance or law
related to the work.
(3) Violation of instructions/directives from the Township Engineer
including unapproved deviation from the Township's standard
details for construction.
(4) Existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or
creating a nuisance or endangering the lives or properties of
others.
B. Written notice of such violation or condition shall be served upon the
permittee or his agent engaged in the work. The notice may be given
either by personal delivery to the permittee or by fax or by mail
addressed to the permittee.
C. A permittee may be granted a period of 48 hours from the date of the
notice to correct the violation and proceed with the diligent prosecution
of the work authorized by the permit before said permit is revoked.
D. When any permit has been revoked and the work authorized by the
permit has not been completed, the Director shall cause such work to
be done as may be necessary to restore the area or part thereof to as
good a condition as before the opening was made. All expenses incurred
therein by the Township shall be recovered from the deposit/bond the
permittee has deposited with the Township.
§ 212-15.10 WESTAMPTON CODE § 212-15.10
199:314
ARTICLE III
Outdoor Sales and Display
[Adopted 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 6-1994]
§ 212-16. Application for permit.
On application to the Township, the Township may permit the outdoor
display and/or sale of goods on sidewalks and adjoining areas, but not
on streets, subject to the conditions contained herein. Such display and/
or sales shall be made only subsequent to the issuance of permits by the
office of the Municipal Clerk/Administrator once said Clerk/Administrator is
satisfied that the criteria herein established for such sales have been met.
§ 212-17. Criteria for permit.
A permit for outdoor display and sales shall be given to an applicant if the
applicant satisfies all of the following criteria:
§ 212-18. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Westampton Township Police
Department.
A. The outdoor display and sales shall be restricted to areas zoned for
business and be in accord with all zoning regulations65 pertaining
thereto.
B. The outdoor display and sales shall be a part of a program sponsored by
a bona fide commercial or mercantile organization, hereinafter referred
to as the "sponsoring organization."
C. All participating displayers or sellers shall own or lease permanent
premises within 25 feet of the place where the outdoor display or sale
will be conducted.
D. The sponsoring organization can demonstrate that the outdoor display
and sales serves the public purpose of furthering the commercial and
mercantile growth and stability of the Township at large.
E. The permit would not adversely affect the public welfare.
F. The applicant must be in possession of an active mercantile license
issued by the Township of Westampton.
G. This article does not apply to the sale of personal property from the
premises of Westampton Township homeowners.
65.Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
§ 212-16 SOIL REMOVAL § 212-19
199:315
§ 212-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or who fails or refuses to comply with any section
of this article or the enabling resolution or permit or conducts a sale without
a permit shall be subject to a penalty up to $500 for each event or for each
successive day of violation after having received notice that said person is
or may be violating the conditions of this article.
§ 212-19 WESTAMPTON CODE § 212-19
199:316
ARTICLE IV
Garage/Yard Sales
[Adopted 4-22-2003 by Ord. No. 11-2003]
§ 212-20. Definitions.
The following words or phrases shall have the following meanings when
used in this article:
GARAGE/YARD SALES — Occasional sales by a householder of personal
property accumulated in the normal use of a dwelling as a residence and no
longer needed by the occupants, such as used kitchenware, toys, furniture,
clothing and the like, offered for sale in the dwelling appurtenant garage or
other outbuilding on the property or appurtenant yards.
§ 212-21. Regulations.
Garage/yard sales may be held under the following circumstances:
A. The merchandise offered at the sale should be only merchandise
acquired for normal use by the householder or other persons occupying
the dwelling on the premises where the sale is held.
B. Nor more than two garage/yard sales shall be permitted on the same
premises in any twelve-month period, and no such sale shall continue
longer than two days.
C. Notification before the date of the sale must be made in writing to the
Township Clerk's office, including name and address of applicant, place,
date and time sale is to be held.
§ 212-20 SOIL REMOVAL § 212-21
199:317

ARTICLE V
Maintenance of Sidewalks and Driveway Aprons
[Adopted 12-18-2017 by Ord. No. 16-2017]
§ 212-22. Maintenance and repair requirements.
§ 212-23. Order to repair.
If it comes to the attention of the Township that a sidewalk or driveway
apron is kept in such a state of disrepair as to endanger the health and
general welfare of the citizens of the Township, the appropriate Township
official may order the property owner to maintain and repair the area
upon notice in writing to be served upon the owner of or the occupant of
such lands requiring the necessary specified repairs or replacement of such
sidewalk to be done by such owner within a period of 30 days from the
date of services of such notice, such notice to be served by regular and
certified mail to the address of the property owner as provided by the Tax
Assessor. The owner may apply for a time extension to complete the repairs
if necessary, such as for weather conditions. If his/her address cannot be
ascertained, then the notice may be inserted for four weeks, once a week,
in the official newspaper of the Township.
§ 212-24. Notice of violation; failure to comply.
A. The owner of any premises in the Township of Westampton abutting a
sidewalk shall, at his/her own cost and/or expense, keep and maintain
said sidewalk in good condition and state of repair and shall not permit
the same to fall into a state of disrepair or to become unfit or unsafe to
walk upon.
B. In the event that any such sidewalk or any part thereof becomes unsafe
or hazardous to the public or unfit to walk upon, the abutting owner at
his/her own cost and expense shall, with expeditious speed, reconstruct
or repair, as the fact may require, such sidewalk or that part thereof
which requires reconstruction or repair. All sidewalks to be
reconstructed or repaired shall be constructed in accordance with
Township standards.
A. If the property owner who has been served notice of an order to repair
in accordance with § 212-23 fails to abate or remedy the condition
within 30 days from the date of service, unless an extension has been
granted, it shall be lawful for the appropriate Township official, upon
filing proof of service or publication of the aforesaid notice with the
Township Clerk and upon the Township Administrator's direction, to
cause the required work to be done and paid out of municipal funds.
Upon the completion of the work, the amount expended along with
labor costs shall be certified by the Chief Financial Officer to the
Township Committee. The Township Committee upon receipt of the
certification of charges shall be by resolution certify the amount of the
cost of such work and shall create same as a lien upon the property
§ 212-22 SOIL REMOVAL § 212-24
199:319
§ 212-25. Statutory authority; retroactive effect.
abutting the sidewalk where such work was done. Said lien shall
become an assessment for local improvements to the same extent and
manner as local improvement liens are in the Township and shall be
collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of such other
assessments and shall bear the interest at the same rate.
B. Nothing herein shall prohibit the Township from commencing an action
to recover the amount expended against the property owner in any
court having competent jurisdiction thereof. A certified copy of the
aforesaid amount shall in such action be prima facie evidence of the
existence of the debt due from the property owner to the Township.
A. The within provisions of Article V of Chapter 212 of the Township Code
are adopted pursuant to the statutory authority conferred by N.J.S.A.
40:65-1 et seq.
B. The within provisions of Article V of Chapter 212 of the Township Code
are remedial and shall be liberally construed in favor of the Township of
Westampton; the provisions of Article V of Chapter 212, herein, shall
have retroactive application to any sidewalk repair or maintenance
issues preexisting the adoption of Ord. No. 16-2017.
§ 212-24 WESTAMPTON CODE § 212-25
199:320
Chapter 215
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 99.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 128.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 131.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 149.
Sewers — See Ch. 192.
Site plan review — See Ch. 196.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 212-25 SOIL REMOVAL § 212-25
199:321

ARTICLE I
Title
§ 215-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Subdivision
Ordinance of Westampton Township."
§ 215-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 215-1
199:323

ARTICLE II
Purpose
§ 215-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations and
standards to guide land subdivision in Westampton Township in order to
promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the
municipality. It shall be administered to ensure the orderly growth and
development, the conservation, protection and proper use of land and
adequate provision for circulation, utilities and services.
§ 215-2 SOIL REMOVAL § 215-2
199:325

ARTICLE III
Approving Agency
§ 215-3. Approving agency. [Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No.
24-1998]
The approval provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the
governing body after favorable referral by the Westampton Township Land
Development Board in accordance with Section 14 of Chapter 433 of the
Laws of 1953, N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.14.
§ 215-3 SOIL REMOVAL § 215-3
199:327

ARTICLE IV
Definitions
§ 215-4. Definitions and interpretation.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation
of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, or required along a natural
stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the
flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage in
accordance with Chapter 1 of Title 58 of the Revised Statutes.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision,
which map is presented to the Land Development Board for final
approval in accordance with these regulations and which, if approved,
shall be filed with the proper county recording officer.[Amended
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
LOTS — A parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or
portions by description, as on a subdivision or record-of-survey map, or
by metes and bounds, for the purpose of sale, lease or separate use.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of the mapped and written proposals
recommending the physical development of the municipality which
shall have been duly adopted by the Land Development
Board.[Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision containing not more than
three lots fronting on an existing street, not involving any new street
nor an extension of municipal facilities, not adversely affecting the
development of the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property and
not in conflict with any provision or portion of the Master Plan, Official
Map, Zoning Ordinance66 or this chapter. Any rearrangement of lot
lines which does not increase the number of building lots and/or which
creates parcels which are to be consolidated with existing lots shall be
classified as a "minor subdivision," provided that it meets the applicable
criteria set forth in other parts of this definition and provided that
either a deed of consolidation or a filed plat indicating such
consolidation is presented and recorded.[Amended 9-26-1974 by
Ord. No. 11-1974]
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted in accordance with the Official Map
and Building Permit Act, Chapter 434 of the Laws of 1953, or any
prior act authorizing such adoption. Such a map shall be deemed to be
conclusive with respect to the location and width of the streets, public
parks and playgrounds and drainage rights-of-way shown thereon.
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
§ 215-4 SOIL REMOVAL § 215-4
199:329
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership
or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought
to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide
the same under this chapter.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted
in lieu of a requirement that certain improvements be made before
the Land Development Board or other approving body approves a plat,
including performance bonds, escrow agreements and other similar
collateral or surety agreements.[Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No.
24-1998]
PLAT — The map of a subdivision.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map indicating the proposed
layout of the subdivision, which map is submitted to the Township
Clerk/Administrator for Land Development Board consideration and
tentative approval and which meets the requirements of Article VI
of this chapter.[Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992;
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2-1998]
SKETCH PLAT — The sketch map of a subdivision of sufficient accuracy
to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification and meeting
the requirements of Article VI of this chapter.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway,
viaduct, alley or other way which is an existing state, county or
municipal roadway; or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore
approved pursuant to law or approved by official action; or a street
or way on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county
recording officer prior to the appointment of a Land Development
Board and the grant to such Board of the power to review plats,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved
or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters,
sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines. For the
purpose of this chapter, streets shall be classified as follows:[Amended
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
ARTERIAL STREETS — Those which are used primarily for fast or
heavy traffic.
(1)
COLLECTOR STREETS — Those which carry traffic from minor
streets to the major system of arterial streets, including the
principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets
for circulation within such a development.
(2)
MINOR STREETS — Those which are used primarily for access to
the abutting properties.
(3)
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS — Those which are parallel to and
adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access
to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
(4)
§ 215-4 WESTAMPTON CODE § 215-4
199:330
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
copartnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing
proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of land
hereunder for himself or for another.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two
or more lots, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of sale or building development; except that the
following divisions shall not be considered subdivisions, provided that
no new streets or roads are involved: divisions of land for agricultural
purposes where the resulting parcels are three acres or larger in
size; divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions; or
divisions of property upon court order. "Subdivision" also includes
resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the
process of subdividing or to the lands or territory divided.
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — A Committee of at least three Land
Development Board members appointed by the Chairman of the Board
to classify subdivisions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
and to carry out such other duties relating to land subdivision as may
be conferred on the Committee by the Board.[Amended 11-10-1998
by Ord. No. 24-1998]
ALLEYS — Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular
service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise
abutting on a street.
(5)
B. Any chapter provision calling for the construction or interpretation of
number of lots, whether for the purpose of classification of major or
minor subdivisions or for any other purpose under this chapter, shall be
interpreted as being cumulative in that prior subdivisions of the base
tract, lot, parcel, Tax Map lot or other affected piece of ground shall be
included in the computation. [Added 9-26-1974 by Ord. No.
11-1974]
§ 215-4 SOIL REMOVAL § 215-4
199:331

ARTICLE V
Procedure
§ 215-5. Subdivision fees. [Added 9-26-1974 by Ord. No. 11-1974;
amended 8-10-1987 by Ord. No. 12-1987]
The following fees shall be applicable:
A. Subdivision plans; accompanying variance or conditional use requests;
filing fees.
(1) Informal review; concept plan: $200. This amount shall be credited
toward the fee for review of the application for development.
[Amended 4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012]
(2) Minor subdivision: $200. [Amended 4-24-2012 by Ord. No.
7-2012]
(3) Preliminary subdivision plat: $200. [Amended 6-9-1998 by Ord.
No. 13-1998; 4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012]
(4) Final subdivision plat: $200. [Amended 6-9-1998 by Ord. No.
13-1998; 4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012]
(5) A request for a variance, conditional use, appeal from the decision
of the Administrative Officer or Construction Official or
interpretation of zoning map or chapter accompanying a
subdivision will require filing of a separate application and the
appropriate fee, in addition to the subdivision application and fee.67
[Amended 6-9-1998 by Ord. No. 13-1998]
B. Escrows (professional review fee). [Amended 6-9-1998 by Ord. No.
13-1998; 11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 19-2000]
(1) Informal review; concept plan: $500. The amount of escrow charge
for informal review shall be credited toward the applicant's escrow
account to be applied to the application for development.
[Amended 4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012]
(2) Minor subdivision: $1,500 or $50 per acre, whichever is greater.
[Amended 4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012]
(3) Preliminary subdivision plat: $3,000, plus $50 per acre. [Amended
4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012]
(4) Final subdivision plat: $3,000, plus $50 per acre. [Amended
4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012]
(5) Consolidated submission: $6,000, plus $100 per acre. [Amended
4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012]
67.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(6), regarding certificate as to approval of subdivision
of land, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 4-24-2012 by Ord. No.
7-2012.
§ 215-5 SOIL REMOVAL § 215-5
199:333
§ 215-6. Submission of sketch plat.
(6) Escrow for inspection: 5% of the bonded amount.
C. Sums not utilized for review and in the inspection process shall be
returned to the applicant. If additional sums are deemed necessary, the
applicant shall be notified of the required additional amount and shall
add such sum to the escrow.
D. Amendment of Tax Map. All applications requiring amendment of the
Tax Map shall pay the following amounts: [Amended 4-10-2001 by
Ord. No. 12-2001; 4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012]
(1) Minor subdivision: $200 per lot in the amended Tax Map.
(2) Major subdivision: $125 per lot in the amended Tax Map.
E. Maintenance guaranty.
(1) The municipality shall also require a maintenance guaranty for a
period not to exceed two years after final acceptance of the
improvement, in an amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the
improvement or of the cost of the original installation.
(2) To obtain release of the maintenance guaranty, the developer shall,
after all required maintenance has been completed, apply to the
governing body, in writing, by certified mail, with a copy to the
Municipal Engineer, for final inspection of the work. The Municipal
Engineer shall, within 30 days of receipt of request for inspection,
report, in writing, to the governing body indicating either approval,
partial approval or rejection of the improvements with a statement
of reasons for any objection.
(3) The governing body shall either approve or reject the
improvements and release of the maintenance bond or reduce the
amount of the maintenance bond, following the same procedures as
for performance bonds.
A. Any owner of land within Westampton Township shall, prior to
subdividing or resubdividing land, as defined in this chapter, submit to
the Secretary of the Land Development Board (or other designated
official), at least 15 working days prior to the regular meeting of the
Board, a sketch plat of the proposed subdivision for purposes of
classification and preliminary discussion. [Amended 3-4-1986 by
Ord. No. 7-1986; 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
B. If classified and approved as a minor subdivision by unanimous action
of the Subdivision Committee, a notation to that effect will be made on
the sketch plat. Where County Planning Board approval is required, it
will be forwarded to that Board for its consideration. The plat will then
be forwarded to the Mayor of the township and the Municipal Clerk/
Administrator for their signatures and returned to the subdivider within
§ 215-5 WESTAMPTON CODE § 215-6
199:334
§ 215-7. Submission of preliminary plat of major subdivision for
tentative approval.
one week following the next regular meeting of the governing body.
No further governing body approval shall be required. [Amended
9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992]
C. Copies of sketch plat.
(1) Before the Township Clerk/Administrator returns any approved
sketch plat to the subdivider, the Clerk/Administrator shall have
sufficient copies made to furnish one copy to each of the following:
[Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992]
(a) Municipal Clerk/Administrator.
(b) Municipal Engineer.
(c) Building Inspector or Zoning Officer.
(d) Tax Assessor.
(e) Secretary of the Land Development Board. [Amended
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
(f) County Planning Board.
(g) Township Solicitor.
(2) The cost of the copies will be charged to the subdivider and shall be
collected before the return of the original sketch plat to the
subdivider.
D. Either a deed description or plat map drawn in compliance with
Chapter 358 of the Laws of 1953 shall be filed by the municipality with
the county recording officer within 90 days from the date of return of
the approved sketch plat.
E. If the plat is classified as a major subdivision, a notation to that effect
shall be made on the plat which will be returned to the subdivider for
compliance with the procedure in §§ 215-7 and 215-8 of this article.
A. Number of copies required; fees. At least six black-on-white prints of
the preliminary plat, together with three completed application forms
for preliminary approval, shall be submitted to the Municipal Clerk/
Administrator two weeks prior to the Land Development Board meeting
at which consideration is desired. [Amended 9-18-1962; 9-26-1974
by Ord. No. 11-1974; 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992; 11-10-1998
by Ord. No. 24-1998]
B. Notice; filing proof of compliance. The subdivider shall be responsible
for publishing and mailing all notices required by law, including, but not
being limited to, the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.7. Mailing, when
required, shall be registered or certified. The subdivider shall file proof
§ 215-6 SOIL REMOVAL § 215-7
199:335
of compliance with this section with the Secretary of the Land
Development Board prior to the hearing. [Amended 9-18-1962;
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
C. Disposition of copies of preliminary plat. Copies of the preliminary plat
shall be forwarded by the Secretary of the Land Development Board
(who shall obtain them from the Municipal Clerk/Administrator) prior to
the hearing to the following persons: [Amended 9-18-1962;
9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992; 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
(1) Secretary of County Planning Board.
(2) Municipal Engineer.
(3) Secretary, Municipal Board of Health.
(4) Municipal Solicitor.
(5) Such other municipal or county or state officials as directed by the
Land Development Board.
D. The Land Development Board shall act on the preliminary plat within 90
days after the hearing thereon, but in no case before the expiration of
the twenty-day period within which the County Planning Board may
submit a report on said subdivision. In all cases, the recommendations
of the County Board shall be given careful consideration in the final
decision of the local Land Development Board. If the County Planning
Board has approval authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-12,68 its action
shall be noted on the plan, and if disapproved, two copies of the reasons
for disapproval shall be returned with the plat. If either the Land
Development Board or County Planning Board disapproves a plat, the
reasons for disapproval shall be remedied prior to further
consideration. The person submitting a plat shall be notified of the
action of the Land Development Board within 90 days of the hearing
thereon. If approval is required by any other officer or public body, the
same procedure as applies to submission to and approval by the County
Planning Board shall apply. [Amended 9-18-1962; 11-10-1998 by
Ord. No. 24-1998]
E. If the Land Development Board acts favorably on the preliminary plat, a
notation to that effect shall be referred to the governing body for action.
The governing body shall act within 30 days. Its action shall be noted on
the plat, signed by the Mayor and returned to the subdivider for
compliance with final approval requirements. [Amended 11-10-1998
by Ord. No. 24-1998]
F. Preliminary approval shall confer upon the applicant the following
rights for a three-year period from the date of approval:
68.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:27-12 was repealed by L.1968, c.285, § 22, eff. Dec. 31, 1969.
§ 215-7 WESTAMPTON CODE § 215-7
199:336
§ 215-8. Improvements or guaranties prior to final approval.
[Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
Before consideration of a final subdivision plat, the subdivider will have
installed the improvements required under Article VII, or the Land
Development Board shall require the posting of adequate performance
guaranties to assure the installation of the required improvements.
§ 215-9. Submission of final plat of major subdivision.
(1) That the general terms and conditions under which the preliminary
approval was granted will not be changed.
(2) That said applicant may submit, on or before the expiration date,
the whole or part or parts of said plat for final approval.
A. The final plat shall be submitted to the Municipal Clerk/Administrator
for forwarding to the Land Development Board for final approval within
three years from the date of preliminary approval. The Municipal Clerk/
Administrator shall immediately notify the Secretary of the Land
Development Board upon receipt of a final plat, and the Land
Development Board shall act upon the final plat within 45 days after the
date of submission for final approval to the Clerk/Administrator.
[Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992; 11-10-1998 by Ord.
No. 24-1998]
B. The original tracing, one translucent tracing-cloth copy, two cloth
prints, six black-on-white prints and three copies of the application form
for final approval shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Land
Development Board at least 15 working days prior to the date of a
regular Land Development Board meeting. Unless the preliminary plat
is approved without changes, the final plat shall have incorporated all
changes or modifications required by the Land Development Board.
[Amended 3-4-1986 by Ord. No. 7-1986; 11-10-1998 by Ord. No.
24-1998]
C. The final plat shall be accompanied by a statement by the Municipal
Engineer that he is in receipt of a map showing all utilities in exact
location and elevation, identifying those portions already installed and
those to be installed, and that the subdivider has complied with one or
both of the following:
(1) Installed all improvements in accordance with the requirements of
these regulations; or
(2) A performance guaranty has been posted with the Township Clerk/
Administrator in sufficient amount to assure the completion of all
required improvements. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No.
10-1992]
§ 215-7 SOIL REMOVAL § 215-9
199:337
D. Any plat which requires County Planning Board approval pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:27-1269 shall be forwarded to the County Planning Board, if
there be one, for its action prior to final approval by the governing body.
E. If the Land Development Board favorably refers a final plat to the
governing body, the governing body shall take action not later than the
second regular meeting following the referral, noting its action on the
plat and the Mayor affixing his signature thereto if said action is
favorable. [Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
F. Failure of the Land Development Board and governing body to act
within the allotted time or a mutually agreed upon extension shall be
deemed to be favorable approval and the Municipal Clerk/
Administrator shall issue a certificate to that effect. [Amended
9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992; 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
G. If any person shall be aggrieved by the action of the Land Development
Board, appeal, in writing, to the governing body may be taken within 10
days after the date of the action of the Land Development Board. A
hearing thereon shall be had on notice to all parties in interest, who
shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard. After such hearing the
governing body may affirm or reverse the action of the Land
Development Board by a recorded vote of a majority of the total
members thereof. The findings and reasons for the disposition of the
appeal shall be stated on the records of the governing body, and the
applying party shall be given a copy. [Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord.
No. 24-1998]
H. Upon final approval, copies of the final plat shall be filed by the Land
Development Board with the following: [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord.
No. 10-1992; 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
(1) Municipal Clerk/Administrator.
(2) Municipal Engineer.
(3) Building Inspector.
(4) Tax Assessor.
(5) County Planning Board.
I. The final plat, after final approval by the governing body, shall be filed
by the subdivider with the county recording officer and evidence of
filing submitted to the Municipal Clerk/Administrator within 90 days
from the date of such approval. If any final plat is not filed within this
period, the approval shall expire. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No.
10-1992]
69.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:27-12 was repealed by L.1968, c.285, § 22, eff. Dec. 31, 1969.
§ 215-9 WESTAMPTON CODE § 215-9
199:338
§ 215-10. Municipal Engineer. [Added 12-20-1962; amended
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
The Land Development Board shall not consider any plat involving a major
subdivision:
J. No plat shall be accepted for filing by the county recording officer
unless it has been duly approved by the governing body of Westampton
Township and signed by the Mayor.
A. Which has been prepared for the subdivider by the Municipal Engineer
or any associate, employee or agent of his.
B. When the subdivider has employed the Municipal Engineer or any
associate employee or agent of his to perform any services directly or
indirectly in connection with the proposed subdivision.
§ 215-9 SOIL REMOVAL § 215-10
199:339

ARTICLE VI
Plat Details
§ 215-11. Sketch plat.
The sketch plat shall be based on Tax Map information or some other
similarly accurate base at a scale (preferably not less than 400 feet to the
inch) to enable the entire tract to be shown on one sheet and shall show or
include the following information:
§ 215-12. Preliminary plat.
The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced at a
scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. Preliminary plats shall be
designed and drawn by a licensed New Jersey land surveyor or by a planner
holding full or associate membership in the American Institute of Planners.
The plat shall be designed in compliance with the provisions of Article
VIII of this chapter and shall show or be accompanied by the following
information:
A. The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to the
entire tract.
B. All existing structures and wooded areas within the portion to be
subdivided and within 200 feet thereof.
C. The name of the owner and of all adjoining property owners as
disclosed by the most recent municipal tax records.
D. The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers.
E. All streets or roads and streams within 500 feet of the subdivision.
A. A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to
surrounding areas.
B. The tract name, Tax Map sheet, block and lot number, date, reference
meridian, graphic scale and the following names and addresses:
(1) Name and address of record owner or owners.
(2) Name and address of subdivider.
(3) Name and address of person who prepared map.
C. Acreage of tract to be subdivided to nearest tenth of an acre.
D. Sufficient elevations or contours to determine the general slope and
natural drainage of the land and the high and low points and tentative
cross sections and center-line profiles for all proposed new streets.
E. The location of existing and proposed property lines, streets, buildings,
watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts, drainpipes and any natural
features such as wooded areas and rock formations.
§ 215-11 SOIL REMOVAL § 215-12
199:341
§ 215-13. Final plat.
The final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth at a scale of not less
than one inch equals 200 feet and in compliance with all the provisions of
Chapter 358 of the Laws of 1953, N.J.S.A. 46:23-1 et seq.70 The final plat
shall show or be accompanied by the following:
F. Plans of proposed utility layouts (sewers, storm drains, water, gas and
electricity) showing feasible connections to existing or any proposed
utility systems. When an individual water supply and/or sewage
disposal system is proposed, the plan for such system must be approved
by the appropriate local, county or state health agency. When a public
sewage disposal system is not available, the developer shall have
percolation tests made and submit the results with the preliminary plat.
Any subdivision or part thereof which does not meet with the
established requirements of this chapter or other applicable regulations
shall not be approved. Any remedy proposed to overcome such a
situation shall first be approved by the appropriate local, county or
state health agency.
G. A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to the
land being subdivided shall be submitted with the preliminary plat.
A. Date, name and location of the subdivision, name of owner, graphic
scale and reference meridian.
B. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, land to be reserved or dedicated to
public use, all lot lines and other site lines, with accurate dimensions,
bearings or deflection angles, and radii, arcs and central angles of all
curves.
C. The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to public
use shall be designated, and the proposed use of sites other than
residential shall be noted.
D. Each block shall be numbered, and the lots within each block shall be
numbered consecutively beginning with number one.
E. Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
F. Location and description of all monuments.
G. Names of owners of adjoining unsubdivided land.
H. Certification by an engineer or surveyor as to the accuracy of the
details of the plat.
I. Certification that the applicant is agent or owner of the land or that the
owner has given consent under an option agreement.
70.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 46:23-1 through 46-23-9 were repealed by L.1953, c.358, p.1941,
§ 7, eff. Jan. 1, 1954. See now N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.10 et seq.
§ 215-12 WESTAMPTON CODE § 215-13
199:342
J. When approval of a plat is required by any officer or body of such a
municipality, county or state, approval shall be certified on the plat.
K. Cross sections and profiles of streets, approved by the Municipal
Engineer, may be required to accompany the final plat.
L. Contours at five-foot intervals for slopes averaging 10% greater and at
two-foot intervals for land of lesser slope.
M. Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and water mains.
N. Certificate from the Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to date.
§ 215-13 SOIL REMOVAL § 215-13
199:343

ARTICLE VII
Improvements
§ 215-14. Required improvements.
A. Prior to the granting of final approval, the subdivider shall have
installed or shall have furnished performance guaranties for the
ultimate installation of the following:
(1) Streets. [Amended 2-28-1974 by Ord. No. 1-1974; 8-15-1977
by Ord. No. 6-1977]
(a) All streets shall be graded in accordance with approved
profiles and shall be paved with the following:
[1] Six-inch depth compacted Type 2, Class A or B subbase.
[2] Five-inch depth compacted bituminous stabilized base
course.
[3] Two-and-one-half-inch minimum compacted thickness
surface course of bituminous concrete FABC-2, laid in two
layers. The first course shall be one-and-one-half-inch
minimum thickness applied in one construction season.
The second course shall be one-inch minimum thickness
and applied in the second construction season. A period of
time of five months shall elapse between the first and
second courses unless a shorter period is approved by the
Township Engineer.
[4] The requirement of six-inch compacted thickness Type 2,
Class A or B subbase will not be required where the
seasonal highwater table is not within 2 1/2 feet of the top
of the proposed subgrade and where a CBR of 15 or
greater is obtained by proper testing of the existing
subgrade material. Additional depth subbase in excess of
the minimum six-inch depth required under Subsection
A(1)(a)[1] above shall be installed if, in the opinion of the
Engineer, six inches of subbase is not sufficient to provide
a stable subgrade.
[5] All low points in road profiles shall be properly
underdrained as approved by the Township Engineer.
(b) Test borings and observation wells, located at a minimum of
five-hundred-foot intervals in street areas, to determine the
types of soils and the water table shall be provided to the
Township Engineer prior to any street construction. To
ascertain the seasonal high-water table, these tests shall be
performed between December 1 and April 30. If the
performance of the tests during the above-mentioned time
period causes an undue delay upon the developer or applicant,
§ 215-14 SOIL REMOVAL § 215-14
199:345
existing available data and an inspection of the site shall be
the basis of determination by the Township Engineer of the
probable seasonal highwater table. Additional test borings
shall be supplied at any time prior to or during construction, if
requested by the Township Engineer, in areas of questionable
subgrade conditions.
(c) An underdrain system satisfactory to the Township Engineer
shall be designed and installed in all street areas where the
seasonal high-water table is within two feet six inches of the
top of the proposed subgrade or where, in the opinion of the
Engineer, subsurface conditions require underdraining to
properly protect any proposed street construction. Underdrain
systems shall consist of either combination drains, Type F
underdrains and subbase outlet drains, or a combination
thereof.
(d) All materials and methods of construction shall comply with
the New Jersey State Highway Department Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction 1961, and all
addenda and amendments thereto.
(e) All the above are minimum requirements and, based on test
borings, CBR tests, core borings, existing data, field
observation and information, the installation of underdrains,
subbase and/or alternate pavement designs may be required at
any time during construction.
(f) The costs of all soil test borings, CBR tests, core borings, field
investigation and observations and research and compilation of
existing data regarding the suitability of land for street
construction shall be the responsibility of the applicant and/or
subdivider, including any such work performed by the
Township Engineer who shall have the right to verify and/or
conduct such additional tests deemed necessary. All costs
incurred by the Township Engineer shall be paid from escrow
deposits required in § 215-16.
(2) Street signs.
(3) Curbs and/or gutters. Curbs shall be six feet by eight feet by 18
inches Class B concrete. Forms shall be set in accordance with
approved lines and grades. Radial curbing shall be formed in an arc
segment in a smooth curve, and the use of chord segments is
hereby specifically prohibited. [Amended 12-20-1960]
(4) Sidewalks.
(5) Streetlighting.
(6) Shade trees.
§ 215-14 WESTAMPTON CODE § 215-14
199:346
(7) Topsoil protection. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or
used as spoil. Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall
be redistributed so as to provide at least six inches of cover to all
areas of the subdivision and shall be stabilized by seeding or
planting.
(8) Monuments. [Amended 8-12-1997 by Ord. No. 18-1997]
(a) Monuments shall be the size and shape required by N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.12 (the Map Filing Law) and be placed in accordance
with said statute and indicated on the final plat.
(b) Each lot subdivided, individual lots which are surveyed,
construction of a fence or any construction that requires a
setback to be ascertained shall be required to be monumented
or staked to preserve lot identities.
(c) Monuments shall be the size and shape as described in the
statute above. In the alternative, all lot corners or changes in
the bearing of the line, or such other place in the lot line as is
described in the Map Filing Law set forth above, shall be
marked with a metal alloy pin of permanent character. Wooden
stakes are not permitted, and the property owner or developer
may not waive this requirement for monumentation.
(9) Water mains, culverts, storm sewers and sanitary sewers and fire
hydrants. All such installation shall be properly connected with an
approved system and shall be adequate to handle all present and
probable future development.
(a) The developers or owners shall lay all sewer mains,
connections and appurtenances in the streets, on
specifications and under the inspection of the Township
Engineer, approved by the Engineer or his representatives.
(b) The developers or owners shall make all house connections
within the street limits from the curb to the main, including the
Y-branches, and provide each house connection with a vent at
the curb.
(c) All expenses shall be paid by the developers or owners,
including plans, specifications and inspection of the
construction.
(d) The township shall receive deed for all right, title and interest
in the collection system lines, storm sewers, water mains and
culverts.
(e) Sewer mains in the street may be a greater diameter than
necessary to serve the project, in which case increased cost
shall be paid by developers situate the further distance from
§ 215-14 SOIL REMOVAL § 215-14
199:347
§ 215-15. Performance guaranties. [Amended 9-18-1962]
the treatment plant than the previous development, said
additional costs to be deposited with the township in cash.
(f) The developer or owner shall pay for all construction, including
replacement of roadway pavement materials similar to present
composition.
(g) The developer or owner shall be responsible for obtaining all
permits required in the construction.
(h) The homeowner shall pay an annual sewer rental as
established by the township.
(i) The current sewer connection charge shall be paid to the
township for each connection.
(10) Recycling containers. Developers or owners shall furnish every
new home with a recycling container for the Township curbside
recycling program. The color and size of the container will be
determined by the Township's Clerk office. [Added 4-13-2004 by
Ord. No. 7-2004]
B. All of the above-listed improvements shall be subject to inspection and
approval by the Municipal Engineer, who shall be notified by the
developer at least 24 hours prior to the start of construction. No
underground installation shall be covered until inspected and
approved.
A. No final plat shall be approved by the Land Development Board until
the completion of all such required improvements have been certified to
the Land Development Board by the Municipal Engineer, unless the
subdivision owner shall have filed with the municipality a performance
guaranty sufficient in the amount to cover the 120% of the costs of all
such improvements or uncompleted portions thereof as estimated by
the Municipal Engineer and assuring the installation of such
uncompleted improvements on or before an agreed date. Such
performance guaranty shall be in the form of cash, which may be in the
form of a deposit in a savings account upon which the owner of the
account may receive interest, provided that the principal amount
therein is available to the township to satisfy the requirements of this
chapter; a certified check; negotiable securities; or the bond of a
reputable insurance company authorized to do business in the State of
New Jersey. [Amended 3-26-1981 by Ord. No. 9-1981; 11-10-1998
by Ord. No. 24-1998]
B. Such performance guaranty shall run for a period to be fixed by the
Land Development Board, but in no case for a term of more than three
years. However, with the consent of the owner and any other persons
interested in the security guaranteeing performance, the governing
body may by resolution extend the term of such performance guaranty
§ 215-14 WESTAMPTON CODE § 215-15
199:348
for an additional period not to exceed three years. The amount of
the performance guaranty may be reduced by the governing body
by resolution when portions of the required improvements have been
installed. [Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
C. If the required improvements have not been installed in accordance
with the performance guaranty, the municipality shall install such
improvements and shall pay the cost of such installation from the cash,
certified check, negotiable securities or bond deposited hereunder.
D. The cash, certified check, negotiable securities or bond shall be
sufficient not only to guarantee the installation of the improvements but
also to guarantee the payment of all contractors and subcontractors
who supply labor or materials for the construction of the improvements.
The same shall not be released until the subdivider has presented a
sworn statement to the Township Clerk/Administrator certifying to the
payment of all such contractors and subcontractors. In the event that
improvements are not installed as required by this chapter, and claims
are made by contractors or subcontractors against the funds mentioned
herein, the municipality shall have a prior claim upon the funds for the
installation of said improvements before the same or any part thereof
shall be available to pay the claims of any such contractors or
subcontractors. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992]
E. Inspection and approval of completed improvements. [Added
3-26-1981 by Ord. No. 9-1981]
(1) Upon substantial completion of all required pertinent utility
improvements and the connection of same to the public system and
substantial completion of all other necessary and appropriate
improvements, the obligor shall notify the Township Clerk/
Administrator, in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the
completion of the aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy
thereof to the Township Engineer. The Township Clerk/
Administrator shall direct and authorize the Township Engineer to
inspect all of the aforesaid improvements. The Township Engineer
shall, thereupon, file a report, in writing, with the municipal
governing body, which report shall be detailed and shall indicate
either approval, partial approval or rejection. If said improvements
or any portion thereof shall not be approved or shall be rejected by
the Township Engineer, said report shall contain a statement of
reasons for such nonapproval or rejection. Where said report
indicates partial approval of said improvements, it shall indicate
the cost of the improvements for which approval is rejected or
withheld. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992]
(2) The municipal governing body shall accept or reject the
improvements, grant partial approval or withhold approval on the
basis of such report and shall notify the obligor, in writing, by
certified mail, of the contents of said report and the action of said
municipal governing body with relation thereto not later than 65
§ 215-15 SOIL REMOVAL § 215-15
199:349
§ 215-16. Payment of engineering fees prior to commencement of
construction. [Added 9-18-1962; amended 2-28-1974 by Ord. No.
2-1974]
The subdivider shall not commence any construction work until there is
first deposited by him with the Township Treasurer a sum estimated by
the Township Engineer to be sufficient to cover total engineering fees for
supervision, inspection and approval of all improvements to be installed in
the subdivision. The amount of said sum shall be approved by the Township
Committee after the Engineer's estimate has been received. This sum shall
be held in escrow by the Township Treasurer, who shall use said sum to pay
the Township Engineer for his engineering services. The Engineer shall be
paid not more often than monthly on vouchers presented by him and first
approved by the Township Committee. If the total amount paid the Township
Engineer is less than the escrow amount, the excess shall be returned to
the subdivider. The subdivider shall furnish the Township Engineer, on his
request, with copies of plans and profiles of all new streets and utility
layouts.
§ 215-17. Requirements for issuance of building permits. [Added
9-18-1962]
No building permit for the erection of a building on a lot fronting or abutting
on a new street in a major subdivision shall be issued unless and until the
following requirements have been satisfied:
days after receipt of the notice from the obligor of the completion
of the improvements. Where partial approval is granted, the obligor
shall be released from all liability pursuant to its performance
guaranty bond except for that portion adequately sufficient to
secure the improvements not yet approved, provided that 30% of
the amount of the performance guaranty posted may be retained to
insure completion of all improvements.
(3) If any portion of the improvements shall not be approved or shall be
rejected by the municipal governing body, the obligor shall cause
the same to be completed and, upon completion, the same
procedure of notification as outlined herein shall be followed.
F. Maintenance guaranty. The municipality shall also require a
maintenance guaranty for a period not to exceed two years after final
acceptance of the improvement, in an amount not to exceed 15% of the
cost of the improvement or of the cost of the original installation.
[Added 3-26-1981 by Ord. No. 9-1981]
G. Inspection fees. The obligor shall reimburse the municipality for all
reasonable inspection fees paid to the Municipal Engineer for
inspection of the improvements as set forth above. [Added 3-26-1981
by Ord. No. 9-1981]
§ 215-15 WESTAMPTON CODE § 215-17
199:350
A. The final plat of the subdivision shall have been filed with the Clerk of
Burlington County.
B. The subdivider shall have filed with the Township Clerk/Administrator
an adequate guaranty to maintain said new street or streets for a period
of two years after the acceptance by the township, the amount thereof
to be approved by the Township Committee on advice of the Township
Engineer and the form thereof to be approved by the Township
Attorney. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992]
C. The subdivider shall have filed with the Township Clerk/Administrator
an adequate guaranty to repair and replace all sewer mains and laterals
for a period of two years after acceptance by the township of any new
street in which they are situate or from which they extend, the amount
thereof to be approved by the Township Committee on advice of the
Township Engineer and the form thereof to be approved by the
Township Attorney. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992]
§ 215-17 SOIL REMOVAL § 215-17
199:351

ARTICLE VIII
Design Standards
§ 215-18. Single-family detached housing. [Added 3-26-1981 by
Ord. No. 9-1981]
The following provisions with respect to multifamily dwellings shall be
applicable to single-family detached housing construction within the
township: § 58-42B, Landscaping; § 58-42C, Recreational facilities; and
§ 58-43D, pertaining to building requirements and dwelling unit size.71
§ 215-19. Observance of requirements; standards enumerated.
The subdivider shall observe the following requirements and principles of
land subdivision in the design of each subdivision or portion thereof:
A. General. The subdivision plat shall conform to design standards that
will encourage good development patterns within the municipality.
Where either or both an Official Map or Master Plan has or have been
adopted, the subdivision shall conform to the proposals and conditions
shown thereon. The streets, drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public
parks and playgrounds shown on an officially adopted Master Plan or
Official Map shall be considered in approval of subdivision plats. Where
no Master Plan or Official Map exists, streets and drainage rights-ofway
shall be shown on the final plat in accordance with Section 20 of
Chapter 433 of the Laws of 1953, N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.20 et seq., and shall
be such as to lend themselves to the harmonious development of the
municipality and enhance the public welfare in accordance with the
following design standards:
(1) Streets.
(a) The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or
Official Map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate
extension of existing streets.
(b) Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through
traffic.
(c) Subdivisions abutting arterial streets shall provide a marginal
service road or reverse frontage with a buffer strip for
planting, or some other means of separation of through and
local traffic as the Land Development Board may determine
appropriate. [Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
(d) The subdivider or his agent shall provide and improve all
streets within the subdivision, including grading and surfacing
of roadways, placing curbs and gutters and laying sidewalks on
71.Editor's Note: Said references refer to sections in the 1972 version of the Zoning
Ordinance. Said Zoning Ordinance was superseded 8-10-1987 by Ord. No. 14-1987. For
design standards generally, see § 250-22.
§ 215-18 SOIL REMOVAL § 215-19
199:353
both sides of each street, all in locations and at grades
according to specifications as set forth in the municipal
chapters adopted by the Township Committee with regard to
streets, said plans to be approved by the Township Engineer.
The right-of-way width shall be measured to the lot lines and
shall not be less than the following table listed below. In all
cases streets shall be of sufficient width and design to safely
accommodate the maximum access for fire-fighting equipment.
[Amended 12-20-1960; 3-26-1981 by Ord. No. 9-1981]
Type of
Street Right-of-Way
Cartway
(feet)
Sidewalks
Required*
Parking
Permitted in
Right-of-Way
Arterial 86 46 Yes No
Collector 60 44 Yes Yes, both sides
Minor 50 34 Yes Yes, both sides
50 30 Yes Yes, one side
Marginal,
access
50 30 Yes Yes, one side
*NOTE: Where sidewalks are required above, they shall be
installed on both sides of said streets.
(e) No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to
streets shall be approved except where the control and
disposal of land comprising such strips has been placed in the
governing body under conditions approved by the Land
Development Board. [Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No.
24-1998]
(f) Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not
conform to widths as shown on the Master Plan or Official Map
or the street width requirements of this chapter shall dedicate
additional width along either one or both sides of said road. If
the subdivision is along one side only, 1/2 of the required extra
width shall be dedicated.
(g) Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed 4%.
Grades on other streets shall not exceed 10%. No street shall
have a minimum grade of less than 1/2 of 1%. [Amended
12-20-1960]
(h) Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is
possible and in no case shall be less than 60º. The block
corners at intersections shall be rounded at the curbline with a
curve having a radius of not less than 20 feet.
(i) Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited.
§ 215-19 WESTAMPTON CODE § 215-19
199:354
(j) A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between
reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
(k) When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any
one point by more than 10º and not more than 45º, they shall
be connected by a curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet
for minor streets and 300 feet for arterial and collector streets.
(l) All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of
sufficient radius to provide a smooth transition and proper
sight distance.
(m) Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac) shall not be longer than 600 feet
and shall provide a turnaround at the end with a radius of not
less than 50 feet and tangent, whenever possible, to the right
side of the street. If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature,
a similar turnaround shall be provided and provisions made for
future extension of the street and reversion of the excess rightof-
way to the adjoining properties.
(n) No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly
duplicate as to be confused with the names of existing streets.
The continuation of an existing street shall have the same
name. Street names for the proposed developments shall be
submitted to the Township Engineer and approved by him to
avoid duplication or confusion. [Amended 9-21-1987 by Ord.
No. 16-1987]
(2) Blocks.
(a) Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall
be such as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area
by the Zoning Ordinance72 and to provide for convenient
access, circulation control and safety of street traffic.
(b) In blocks over 1,000 feet long, pedestrian crosswalks may be
required in locations deemed necessary by the Land
Development Board. Such walkways shall be 10 feet wide and
be straight from street to street. [Amended 11-10-1998 by
Ord. No. 24-1998]
(c) For commercial, group housing or industrial use, block size
shall be sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for
such use.
(3) Lots.
(a) Under no circumstances shall the Land Development Board
approve a subdivision for a housing development of two or
more single-family dwellings unless the lot size of all lots on
72.Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
§ 215-19 SOIL REMOVAL § 215-19
199:355
said plan conforms to the Zoning Ordinance73 of the Township
of Westampton. In these areas, the Land Development Board
may require that test borings and percolation tests be made to
determine the suitability of the soil to provide for the proper
disposal of individual sewer systems. [Amended 11-10-1998
by Ord. No. 24-1998]
(b) Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to
straight streets and radial to curved streets.
(c) Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing
streets, lots shall begin at such extra-width line and all
setbacks shall be measured from such line.
(d) Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for
their intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood
conditions or similar circumstances, the Land Development
Board may, after adequate investigation, withhold approval of
such lots. [Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
(e) Each new residential lot shall provide an area of contiguous
uplands equal to the minimum lot size for the zoning district in
which they are proposed. [Added 8-9-2011 by Ord. No.
11-2011]
(f) For each new residential lot, minimum yard areas shall not
contain wetlands or wetland buffers as established by the
NJDEP. [Added 8-9-2011 by Ord. No. 11-2011]
(g) New reverse frontage lots shall have an increased rear yard
equal to 1.5 times the minimum rear yard requirement for the
zoning district in which they are proposed. The increased rear
yard is in addition to any required buffers. [Added 8-9-2011
by Ord. No. 11-2011]
(4) Public use and service areas.
(a) In large-scale development, easements along rear property
lines or elsewhere for utility installation or for off-street pickup
in business areas may be required. Such easements shall be at
least 20 feet wide and located in consultation with the
companies or municipal departments concerned.
(b) Natural features such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views shall
be preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision
containing such features.
(5) Sidewalks. All sidewalks shall be cement concrete at least four feet
wide and four inches thick except at driveway crossings where the
sidewalks shall be increased to six inches thick. Sidewalks are to be
73.Editor's Note: See Ch. 250, Zoning.
§ 215-19 WESTAMPTON CODE § 215-19
199:356
placed within the right-of-way and on both sides of the street and
shall be located one foot from the property and right-of-way line of
the street. All cement concrete sidewalks are to be in accordance
with the standard specifications for the road and bridge
construction of the New Jersey Department of Transportation.
[Added 3-26-1981 by Ord. No. 9-1981]
(6) Curbs and/or gutters. Curbs shall be installed along all arterial,
collector, minor or marginal access streets in accordance with the
improvement requirements set forth in Article VII. All cement
concrete curbs are to be constructed of three-thousand-fivehundred-
pound concrete or four-thousand-pound concrete if
machine laid, twenty-eight-day compressive strength portland
cement concrete with air entrainment between 5% and 7%.
[Added 3-26-1981 by Ord. No. 9-1981]
(7) Street and traffic signs. Street and traffic signs shall be placed at
each street intersection. They shall be four-way signs of such
material, size, height and location as specified by the Township
Engineer and in conformity with signs existing in the township.
[Added 3-26-1981 by Ord. No. 9-1981]
(8) Shade trees. [Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998;
8-9-2011 by Ord. No. 11-2011]
(a) Shade trees shall be installed along both sides of all streets.
(b) Separation between trees:
[1] Residential development: 35 feet.
[2] Nonresidential development: 50 feet.
(c) Minimum size: 2.5 inch caliper.
(d) Shade trees shall be planted a minimum distance of six feet
from a sidewalk, curb or street cartway edge.
(e) A shade tree easement that prohibits the removal of shade
trees shall be required for shade trees planted outside of the
street right-of-way. The easement shall be 10 feet in width.
(f) No street shade tree shall be planted within required sight
distance easements.
(g) The method of installation and location shall be approved by
the Township Planner.
(9) Streetlighting. [Added 3-26-1981 by Ord. No. 9-1981]
(a) Streetlighting shall be installed by the subdivider on locations
designated on a lighting plan which has been reviewed and
approved by P.S.E. & G. and then subsequently by both the
§ 215-19 SOIL REMOVAL § 215-19
199:357
township governing body and the Township Engineer.
[Amended 9-21-1987 by Ord. No. 16-1987]
(b) For normal street usage, thirty-foot-high poles shall be spaced
at a maximum distance of 300 feet with one-hundred-watt
mercury-vapor luminaire.
(c) At intersection, a thirty-foot-high pole shall be placed with a
one-hundred-seventy-five-watt mercury-vapor luminaire.
(d) The township will assume the operation expense for
streetlights in a particular section when that section has been
completed and the improvement has been accepted by the
municipality.
(10) Soil erosion and sediment control. A copy of the soil erosion
prevention and sediment control technique plan which is submitted
to the county shall be submitted with the preliminary plan. No
application shall be deemed complete unless such plan has been
submitted with the preliminary plat. [Added 3-26-1981 by Ord.
No. 9-1981]
(11) Recreation facilities. [Added 3-26-1981 by Ord. No. 9-1981]
(a) Tot lots. Tot lots shall be not less than 3,600 square feet in size
and shall contain as a minimum the following improvements, or
approved equivalents: [Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No.
23-1998]
[1] The tot lot shall be enclosed with a four-foot-high chain
link fence, said fence to contain one gate with a closing
latch, if such gate is found to be necessary by the Township
Engineer.
[2] Two benches not less than six feet in length with back
supports shall be located in the tot lot area.
[3] Design of tot lot and choice of equipment and apparatus is
to be made by the Westampton Township Recreation
Committee.
[4] The ground in designated portions of the tot lot as
approved by the Township Recreation Committee shall be
covered with wood carpet not less than six inches deep.
The perimeter of the designated areas of the tot lot shall
be edged appropriately to retain the wood carpet.
[5] Not less than two deciduous shade trees shall be planted
near the bench locations. Ground areas outside the fence,
if any, shall be landscaped.
§ 215-19 WESTAMPTON CODE § 215-19
199:358
[6] Concrete sidewalks not less than four feet wide shall be
constructed to connect tot lots with adjacent residential
sidewalks.
[7] Wherever possible, tot lots shall be placed adjacent to
local residential streets.
(b) Tennis courts. Tennis courts shall be regulation size for
doubles and shall contain, as a minimum, the following
improvements:
[1] Two-and-three-fourths-inch-outside-diameter posts set in
concrete with heavy-duty cotton twine net with canvas
binding with a top cable and winch.
[2] The courts shall be surrounded with a ten-foot-high chain
link fence and buffer plantings as approved by the Land
Development Board. [Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No.
24-1998]
[3] One bench per court.
[4] The courts shall be six inches of stone base, a two-inch
base course, a one-inch top course and shall be coated
with a colored sealer. The sealer shall be Laykold,
manufactured by Chevron, or an equivalent as approved
by the Township Engineer. All of the aforesaid courses
shall be subject to the review and approval for the
Township Engineer.
[5] Regulation markings shall be painted on the courts.
(c) Basketball courts.
[1] Basketball courts shall be a minimum size of 35 feet by 60
feet.
[2] The courts shall contain two regulation backsteps with
nets.
[3] The courts shall be four inches of bituminous stabilized
base course on a properly prepared subgrade acceptable
to the Township Engineer and a one-and-one-half-inch
FABC top course.
[4] Regulation markings shall be painted on the courts.
(d) Multipurpose fields.
[1] Multipurpose fields shall be a minimum size of 250 feet by
420 feet.
[2] Completely grassed field.
§ 215-19 SOIL REMOVAL § 215-19
199:359
[3] Baseball and/or softball backstops.
[4] Football and soccer goalposts with removable sleeves.
(e) Recreation facilities are required based on the number of
dwelling units for the project as is set forth in this Code.
(12)Off-site and off-tract improvements. [Added 3-26-1981 by Ord.
No. 9-1981]
(a) Before final approval of a subdivision, site plan or other
developmental plan submitted in conjunction with a variance
application, the approving authority may require in accordance
with the standards of this chapter and an adopted circulation
plan and utility service plan the installation, or the furnishing
of a performance guaranty and maintenance guaranty in lieu of
installation, for any or all of the following off-site and off-tract
improvements which are necessary or appropriate for the
protection of the public interest by reason of the development's
effect on land other than the developer's property; street
improvements, water system, sewerage, drainage facilities and
easements therefor.
(b) Where such improvements are required, the approving
authority shall refer the requirements to the governing body
for concurrence and for approval of a performance guaranty to
be followed by a maintenance guaranty, if any shall be so
required.
(c) The governing body shall determine as to each required
improvement whether it is to be constructed or paid for by the
municipality as a general improvement or as a local
improvement or whether it is to be done by the developer with
a formula providing for partial reimbursement if the
improvement specifically benefits properties other than the
subdivision. In the absence of any specific finding or
determination made by the governing body with respect to
each off-tract improvement, each off-tract improvement shall
be constructed or paid for under the general improvement
method.
(d) Once the decision as to the type of financing for the
improvement has been made, the Land Development Board
shall estimate, with the aid of the Municipal Engineer, the
Township Assessor and any other person who the Land
Development Board feels has pertinent information or
expertise in the matter: [Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No.
24-1998]
[1] The cost of the improvement.
§ 215-19 WESTAMPTON CODE § 215-19
199:360
[2] The amount by which all properties to be serviced thereby,
including the lands subject to development, will be
specially benefited therefrom.
(e) Bond, cash deposit or other surety.
[1] When the items in Subsection A(12)(d) have been
determined, the applicant shall be required to provide as a
condition for approval of this development application a
bond, cash deposit or such other surety as is satisfactory
to the municipality and the governing body thereof, to
insure payment to the municipality of the estimated
amount by which the subdivided property or property
subject to development will be specifically benefited by the
improvement of one of the following amounts:
[a] If the improvement is to be constructed by the
municipality as a general improvement, an amount
equal to the difference between the estimated cost of
the improvement and the estimated total amount by
which all properties to be serviced thereby, including
the subdivision property or property subject to
development, will be specially benefited by the
improvement.
[b] If the improvement is to be constructed by the
municipality as a local improvement, then, in addition
to the amount referred to in Subsection A(12)(e)[1][a]
above, the estimated amount by which the subdivision
property or property subject to development will be
specially benefited by the improvement.
[c] If the improvement is to be constructed by the
subdivider, site plan applicant or developer, an amount
equal to the estimated cost of the improvement.
[2] Since the amounts above are only estimated amounts, they
shall be redetermined once the improvement is completed.
The developer shall make up any deficiency in his
proportionate share and any overage will be returned to
him.
(13)Water mains, culverts, storm sewers and sanitary sewers. [Added
3-26-1981 by Ord. No. 9-1981]
(a) Water mains shall be sized for adequate delivery of pressure
and volume. All water mains to serve adjacent properties shall
be constructed of cement line cast iron. In general, the
following policies shall be followed in determining the size of
water mains:
§ 215-19 SOIL REMOVAL § 215-19
199:361
[1] Lines whose primary function is and will be to serve
adjacent property will be six inches.
[2] Lines which serve as feeder lines to several other streets
should be eight inches and should be laid out to provide
loops with other lines which enclose areas of not more
than 1/4 of a square mile.
[3] Lines which provide the main feed from present or future
sources of supply or storage shall be 12 inches or larger
and shall be laid out so as to form loops with other lines
which enclose not more than one square mile.
[4] Lines whose only purpose is to serve abutting properties
and to which there is no fire hydrant connected and which
do not serve more than four residences may be four inches
if specifically approved by the township.
(b) In any event the township shall decide upon the size of lines to
be used and the above general criteria are set forth only as a
guide to the subdivider. A blowoff shall be provided beyond the
last connection. Air relief at high points shall be provided.
(c) In general, criteria affecting valve and hydrant locations shall
be that not more than one hydrant is affected by shutting off
any one section; hydrants are located within 600 feet along
street lines of any property in the subdivision; not more than
three valves are necessary to shut off any one section; and the
number of homes affected by shutting off any one section shall
be limited to approximately 25. The developer may be required
to furnish calculations of estimated operating pressure and fire
pressure for the proposed system, including dynamic and static
tests of the existing system.
(14) Sanitary sewers. [Added 3-26-1981 by Ord. No. 9-1981]
(a) Sanitary sewer lines shall be sized for full flow from the tract.
The township may require larger pipe sized to accommodate
future extensions.
[1] Minimum grades at terminal runs of all sanitary sewer
lines shall be 1%.
[2] Manholes shall be placed at every point where the sanitary
sewer line changes direction or grade. In no instance shall
the spacing exceed 300 feet.
(b) Prior to final approval the Township Engineer shall approve all
water main and sanitary sewer designs, whether same will
become a part of the township facilities or serve any other
central or public water or sewer facility.
§ 215-19 WESTAMPTON CODE § 215-19
199:362
(15) Drainage and drainage improvements. All drainage areas are to be
piped, where feasible, rather than ditched. Where piping is not
possible and swales and/or ditches must be used, the swales and
ditch lines shall be concrete-lined. The applicant shall submit his
proposed design, which must be approved by both the Board and
the Township Engineer. [Added 8-10-1987 by Ord. No. 12-1987]
§ 215-19 SOIL REMOVAL § 215-19
199:363

ARTICLE IX
Penalties
§ 215-20. Violations and penalties.
A. If, before final approval has been obtained, any person transfers or sells
or agrees to sell, as owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a
subdivision on which, by chapter, the governing body and the Land
Development Board are required to act, such person shall be subject to
a fine not to exceed $500 or to imprisonment for not more than 90 days,
or to both such fine and imprisonment, and each parcel, plot or lot so
disposed of shall be deemed a separate violation. [Amended
2-28-1974 by Ord. No. 1-1974; 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
B. In addition to the foregoing, if the streets in the subdivision are not
such that a structure on said land in the subdivision would meet
requirements for a building permit under Section 10 of the Official Map
and Building Permit Act (1953), the municipality may institute and
maintain a civil action:
(1) For injunctive relief.
(2) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such
a contract or sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued
in accordance with Section 24 of Chapter 433 of the Laws of 1953,
but only if the municipality has a Land Development Board or a
committee thereof with power to act and which: [Amended
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
(a) Meets regularly on a monthly or more frequent basis; and
(b) Whose governing body has adopted standards and procedures
in accordance with Section 20 of Chapter 433 of the Laws of
1953.
C. In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be
entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land from which the
subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the subdivider
or his assigns or successors, to secure the return of any deposit made or
purchase price paid, and also a reasonable search fee, survey expense
and title closing expense, if any. Any such action must be brought within
two years after the date of the recording of the instrument of transfer,
sale or conveyance of said land, or within six years if unrecorded.
§ 215-20 SOIL REMOVAL § 215-20
199:365

ARTICLE X
Administration
§ 215-21. Minimum standards; granting variances. [Amended
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the minimum
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of Westampton Township. Any action taken by the governing
body and the Land Development Board for Land Development Board
operation under the terms of this chapter shall give primary consideration
to the above-mentioned matters and to the welfare of the entire community.
However, if the subdivider or his agent can clearly demonstrate that,
because of peculiar conditions pertaining to his land, the literal
enforcement of one or more of these regulations is impracticable or will
exact undue hardship, the Land Development Board and governing body for
Land Development Board operation may permit such variance or variances
as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the
rules, regulations and standards established by this chapter.
§ 215-21 SOIL REMOVAL § 215-21
199:367
Chapter 218
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tax Collector — See Ch. 71.
§ 215-21 WESTAMPTON CODE § 215-21
218:368
ARTICLE I
Tangible Household Personal Property Exemption; Fire Proceeds
[Adopted 9-5-1961]
§ 218-1. Exemption established.
All tangible household personal property and personal effects located within
the Township of Westampton shall not be assessed and taxed.
§ 218-2. Application of article.
This article shall apply to taxes on tangible household personal property
and personal effects due and payable in the year 1962, and thereafter as
long as this article shall be in effect, and shall not affect the obligation,
lien or duty to pay any taxes, interest or penalties which have accrued or
may accrue by virtue of any assessment made or which may be made with
respect to taxes levied for any year prior to the year 1962; nor shall this
article affect the legal authority to assess and correct taxes which may be
or have been due and payable prior to January 1, 1962, together with such
interest and penalties as would have accrued thereon under any provisions
of law amended or repealed hereby; nor shall this article invalidate any
assessments or affect any proceedings for the enforcement thereof pending
upon the effective date of this article or on January 1, 1962, or during the
period between said dates.
§ 218-3. Certified copies of article to be filed.
A certified copy of this article shall be filed with the Division of Taxation
in the Department of the Treasury of the State of New Jersey and with the
County Board of Taxation of Burlington County.
§ 218-4. Fire insurance proceeds. [Added 5-24-1979 by Ord. No.
4-1979
It shall be unlawful for any insurance company to pay any claim in excess
of $2,500 to a claimant for fire damage on any real property located within
the Township of Westampton pursuant to any fire insurance policy issued
or renewed after the date of the adoption of the ordinance which added
this section and after the date of the filing of said ordinance with the
New Jersey State Commissioner of Insurance, until such time as all taxes
and assessments and all other municipal liens or charges due and payable
appearing on the official certificate of search shall have been paid either by
the owner of such real property or by the insurance company pursuant to
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq.
§ 218-1 TAXATION § 218-4
218:369

ARTICLE II
Tax Abatement on Home Improvements
[Adopted 12-13-1979 by Ord. No. 19-1979]
§ 218-5. Authorization for abatement.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.72 et seq.,74 as amended and supplemented,
in determining the values of real property for the purposes of taxation
throughout the township, the first $10,000 in the Tax Assessor's full and
true value of home improvements for each dwelling unit primarily and
directly affected by a home improvement in any single-dwelling property
more than 20 years old shall not increase the value of such property for a
period of five years, notwithstanding that the value of the dwelling to which
such improvements are made is increased thereby; provided, however, that
during said period the assessment on such dwelling shall, in no case, except
that of damage through action of the elements sufficient to warrant a
reduction, be less than the assessment thereon existing immediately prior
to such home improvements.
§ 218-6. Application for tax exemption.
No exemption shall be granted or allowed except upon written application
therefor filed with and approved by the Tax Assessor. Action by the Tax
Assessor on such applications shall be in compliance with N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.72
et seq.75 and the standards, guidelines, rules and regulations promulgated
by the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs.
§ 218-7. Notice to taxpayers.
A notice describing the abatement program and the application procedure
therefor shall be included in the mailing of the annual property tax bills to
each owner of residential property during the first year following adoption
of this article.
74.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.72 to 54:4-3.78 was repealed by L.1991, c.441, § 22, eff. Jan.
18, 1992. See now N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq.
75.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.72 was repealed by L.1991, c.441, § 22, eff. Jan. 18, 1992. See
now N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq.
§ 218-5 TAXATION § 218-7
218:371
Chapter 221
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 212. Vehicles and traffic — Ch. 232.
§ 221-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRIVER — Any person who drives a taxicab within the Township of
Westampton.
LICENSEE — Any motor vehicle, as aforesaid, which has been licensed in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
OPERATION OF A TAXICAB — Transporting in such taxicab one or more
persons for hire in, on or along any of the streets or highways of the
Township of Westampton or the acceptance of a passenger to be transported
for hire within the Township of Westampton or from a point within said
township to a point outside of said township limits shall be deemed to be the
operation of a taxicab within the Township of Westampton under the terms
hereof. The operation of a taxicab, as above described, by one other than
the owner of such taxicab shall be deemed the operation by the owner as
well as the person actually driving such vehicle. The transportation of any
person other than the owner or driver in any such motor vehicle bearing a
sign or signs therein or thereon and using the words "taxi," "taxicab," "cab,"
"autocab" or "hack" shall be prima facie evidence of operation.
OWNER — Any person, corporation or association in whose name title to
any taxicab is registered with the Motor Vehicle Division of the State of New
Jersey or who appears in such records as a conditional vendee or lessee
thereof.
PERSON — Any individual, copartnership, association, corporation or jointstock
company, their lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any court
whatsoever, and shall include the plural as well as the singular.
STREET — Any street, avenue, park, parkway, highway or any other public
place in the Township of Westampton.
TAXICAB — Any automobile or motorcar, sometimes known as an "autocab,"
engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, which is held out,
announced or advertised to operate or run or which is operated or run over
any of the streets or public highways of the Township of Westampton and
particularly accepts and discharges such persons as may offer themselves
for transportation from points or places to points or places within or without
the Township of Westampton.
§ 218-7 WESTAMPTON CODE § 221-1
221:372
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Westampton.
§ 221-2. License required.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, no person shall operate
any taxicab within the Township of Westampton unless such taxicab is
licensed pursuant to this chapter and conforms in all respects to the
provisions hereof.
§ 221-3. Expiration date of license.
Any and all licenses issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall expire
at 12:00 midnight of the 31st day of March following the issuance thereof,
unless sooner surrendered, suspended or revoked.
§ 221-4. Application for license.
All applications for the issuance or renewal of any license shall be made
to the Township Committee of the township on forms provided by said
township.
§ 221-5. Application information; revocation of license; residence
change; submission of application.
A. Each applicant for a license shall supply the information requested on
the application in full and shall verify the correctness of such
information by an oath or affirmation attached to such application, and
such application shall be filed with the Township Clerk/Administrator,
together with the proper fee, as hereinafter specified. As a part of such
application, each applicant shall file a schedule of rates showing the
charges to be made for the transportation of passengers. [Amended
9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992]
B. Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall obtain from the Police
Department of said township an affidavit from an appropriate officer of
said Police Department to the effect that the applicant is of good moral
character and that he has sufficient knowledge of the traffic regulations
and geography of the township.
C. Each applicant must furnish with the application for such license a
recent photograph of himself, three inches in length and four inches in
height, in duplicate. He must also furnish evidence that he has been
fingerprinted by the Police Department.
D. Each applicant must submit the names and addresses of two
responsible property owners of the Township of Westampton as
references.
E. Every license so issued shall be revoked upon conviction of two
violations of the State Motor Vehicles Statute.76
76.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.
§ 221-1 TAXICABS § 221-5
221:373
§ 221-6. Fees.
The annual fee for each taxicab license issued, or for renewal thereof, shall
be $100 for each year for which the license is issued or renewed, except
that where any such license shall be issued on or after the 30th day of
September, the license fee shall be 1/2 of the sum, as aforesaid. No part
of such fee shall be refunded for any reason, except upon the denial of
an application for the issuance or renewal of a license by the Township
Committee of the township, in which event 60% of the fee deposited shall
be returned to the applicant, and 40% thereof shall be retained by the
township as compensation for the investigation of such application.
§ 221-7. Denial of license.
The Township Committee may, in its discretion, refuse to issue or renew or
may, after notice and hearing, revoke or suspend a license for the following
reasons:
F. All changes of residence within 10 days on the part of the holder of any
taxicab driver's license issued under this chapter shall be reported, in
writing, to the Township Committee through the Clerk/Administrator of
the township and be directed to the Police Department of the township
within 10 days. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992]
G. The Township Clerk/Administrator shall submit the applications to the
Township Committee at the next succeeding meeting for action, and
any or all applications may be granted or refused by the majority vote of
the members of said body present at such meeting. [Amended
9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992]
A. If the applicant or licensee has been convicted of a crime in this or any
other jurisdiction; or has been convicted of being a disorderly person,
or violates any provision of this chapter; or has any judgment
unsatisfied or record against him arising out of an automobile accident;
or has made false answers in his application for such license or any
renewal thereof; or has failed or fails to render reasonably prompt, safe
and adequate taxicab service; or has not complied fully with all the
requirements of this chapter.
B. If the motor vehicle licensed or to be licensed by reason of unsafe or
unsanitary conditions is dangerous to the safety or health of the
passengers or other occupants thereof, or if statutory financial
requirements (N.J.S.A. 48:16-3 et seq), as presently existing or
hereafter supplemented or amended, have not been complied with or
have lapsed, or if the financial responsibility required thereby is not
maintained at all times.
§ 221-5 WESTAMPTON CODE § 221-8
221:374
§ 221-8. Issuance and display of license plate. [Amended 9-21-1992
by Ord. No. 10-1992]
Each applicant to whom or to which a taxicab license shall be issued shall
also be given a license plate or card made of such material and in such
form as the Township Committee shall decide, which shall at all times by
kept clearly legible and be displayed on or in the taxicab so licensed. Such
license plate or card shall, at all times, be considered the property of the
Township Committee, and it shall be surrendered to and deposited with the
Clerk/Administrator of the township.
§ 221-9. Display of vehicle identification.
Every taxicab so licensed shall have displayed on both sides thereof the
word "taxi" or "cab" in letters at least four inches high or the name of the
operating owner containing the word "taxi" or "taxicab."
§ 221-10. Insurance required. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No.
10-1992]
No such consent shall become effective until the owner of the taxicab shall
have filed with the Clerk/Administrator of the Township of Westampton,
in which operation is permitted, an insurance policy of a company duly
licensed to transact business under the insurance laws of this state, in the
sum of $500,000 against loss from the liability imposed by law upon the
taxicab for damages on account of bodily injury or death suffered by any
one person and in the sum of $300,000 against loss on account of property
damage suffered by any person or persons as a result of an accident
occurring by reason of the ownership, maintenance or use of such vehicle
upon the public streets of the township, and such consent shall continue
effective and such operation be permitted only so long as such insurance
shall remain in force to the full and collectible amount during the entire
term of the policy. Such insurance policy shall provide for the payment on
any final judgment recovered by any person on account of the ownership,
maintenance and use of such taxicab or any fault in respect thereto and
shall be for the benefit of any person suffering loss, damage or injury as
aforesaid. In the event that the Legislature of the State of New Jersey shall
at any time increase the amounts of insurance coverage provided in N.J.S.A.
48:16-3, then the owner shall comply by filing a policy in the increased
amounts.
§ 221-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both.
§ 221-8 TAXICABS § 221-11
221:375
Chapter 224
TOWING AND STORAGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 212.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 232.
Recreational vehicles — See Ch. 235.
Unregistered vehicles — See Ch. 238.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
§ 224-1. Purpose and scope; applicability.
§ 224-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMOBILE — A private passenger motor vehicle or any vehicle included
in the definition of "automobile" under N.J.A.C. 11:3-38.2.
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — The removal and transportation of an
automobile from a highway, street or other public or private road or a
parking area or from a storage facility and other services normally incident
thereto, but does not include recovery of an automobile from a position
beyond the right-of-way or berm or from being impaled upon any other
object within the right-of-way or berm.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes all vehicles propelled otherwise than by
muscular power, except such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks or
motorized bicycles.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Westampton.
A. The purposes of this chapter are to:
(1) Establish a requirement and procedure for the licensing of
individuals and entities providing towing and storage services to
the Township Police Department.
(2) Establish, in the interest of public safety, a uniform policy for the
towing and storage of motor vehicles towed and stored at the
request of the Township Police Department.
(3) Establish uniform fees for towing and storage services.
B. This chapter shall apply to all motor vehicle towing and storage
operations performed at the request of the Township of Westampton
Police Department.
§ 221-11 WESTAMPTON CODE § 224-2
221:376
TOW OPERATOR — A person engaged in the business of towing and storing
motor vehicles or offering the services of a tow vehicle or tow truck and
storage services.
TOW VEHICLE or TOW TRUCK — Those vehicles equipped with a boom
or booms, winches, slings, tilt beds, wheel lifts or under-reach equipment
specifically designed by their manufacturer for the removal or transport
of motor vehicles, including flatbed vehicles, employed for the purpose of
towing, transporting, conveying and/or removing motor vehicles which are
unable to be operated under their own power from one place to another for
which a charge or fee is extracted.
§ 224-3. License required. [Amended 10-12-2010 by Ord. No.
16-2010]
§ 224-4. Application for license; application fee.
A. No person shall engage in the business of towing or storing motor
vehicles at the direction of the Township of Westampton Police
Department without first obtaining a tow operator’s license therefor.
Nothing herein shall require licensing for the rendering of road service
or for the provision of towing and storage services within the Township
other than at the request of the Township Police Department.
B. The Township Police Department is responsible for the approval and
issuance of towing and service licenses. The number of licenses issued
by the Township Police Department shall be limited to seven per year.
[Amended 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 6-2014]
C. All complete applications shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police. The
Chief of Police, or his designee, shall be responsible in deciding which
recipient towing companies will be awarded the six licenses. This
application process shall be repeated on a yearly basis.
A. Applicants for a license under this chapter shall file with the Township
Clerk/Administrator a sworn application on a form to be furnished by
the Clerk/Administrator which shall include the following information
and certification:
(1) The full name and address of the applicant. If the application is
made for a corporation, it shall state the names and addresses of
the officers and directors thereof, its registered agent and the
names and residential addresses of every stockholder owning more
than 10% of the issued stock.
(2) The year, make and type of each tow vehicle used in said business,
its serial number, registration number and registered owner.
(3) The address where the tow vehicle or vehicles shall be regularly
garaged, the telephone number or numbers and the hours during
which service is available at those numbers and the names,
addresses and New Jersey driver license numbers of all operators.
§ 224-2 TAXICABS § 224-4
221:377
§ 224-5. Application review.
(4) The location, size and security features of the storage lot or space
in which towed vehicles will be stored, including the number of
spaces available. The storage lot shall be designated either as:
(a) "Inside building": a vehicle storage facility that is completely
indoors, having one or more openings in the walls for storage
and removal of vehicles that are secured by a locking device on
each opening; or
(b) "Outside secured": a vehicle storage facility that is not indoors
and is secured by a fence, walls or other man-made barrier that
is at least six feet high. The facility is to be lighted at night so
that all vehicles may be plainly visible.
(5) The name and address of the insurance carriers and the policy
numbers of all insurance policies as required by § 224-9 of this
chapter.
(6) A copy of the operator's current fee schedule for towing and
storage services separately listing towing and storage fees for
automobiles and other motor vehicles.
(7) A certification that on-call towing and storage services will be
available 24 hours per day, every day of the year.
(8) A certification that the fees and procedures required by this
chapter shall be complied with at all times.
(9) A statement that the Chief of Police or his designee may at any
reasonable time conduct an inspection of the tow vehicles or
storage facility of any applicant or licensee for the purpose of
determining compliance with this chapter.
(10) Such other information as the Township Clerk/Administrator or
Chief of Police may reasonably prescribe.
B. All applications for a tow operator's license shall be accompanied by a
fee of $100 to cover the Township's costs in processing the application.
A. The Township Clerk/Administrator shall forward all complete
applications to the Chief of Police, who shall conduct or cause to be
conducted such investigation as he deems necessary to determine the
truth and accuracy of the information contained in the application and
whether the applicant meets the following minimum standards:
(1) Neither the applicant nor any tow vehicle operator has any criminal
convictions or prior motor vehicle infractions which might
adversely affect public safety or welfare.
§ 224-4 WESTAMPTON CODE § 224-5
221:378
§ 224-6. Issuance of license; renewal; display; transferability.
(2) The applicant has the ability to respond to the scene in response to
any request for assistance within 25 minutes after notification.
[Amended 6-9-1998 by Ord. No. 14-1998]
(3) The applicant can provide on-call towing services 24 hours per day,
every day of the year.
(4) The tow trucks and equipment are in safe and sound condition and
in compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations. All
applicants must meet minimum standards of operator
performance, including but not limited to standards concerning the
adequacy of the applicant's equipment and storage facilities and
availability.
(5) The applicant owns or has a valid lease to a storage facility within
three miles of the Township, in an area legally zoned for such use,
and such storage facility shall have a minimum of 20 spaces for
passenger automobiles and will be either an inside building or
outside secured facility as defined in § 224-4A(4) above for storage
of all vehicles towed or impounded.
(6) The applicant is in compliance with and/or has the ability to comply
with all other requirements and standards set forth herein.
(7) Storage facility must meet local zoning requirements. [Added
4-11-2006 by Ord. No. 7-2006]
B. In addition to the minimum standards of performance referred to in the
preceding subsection, all applicants are subject to disqualification if
found deficient in any one of the following areas:
(1) The applicant provided false or inaccurate information on the
application form.
(2) The applicant lacks experience and/or does not have good
references from prior customers of the applicant's towing and
storage services.
C. The Chief of Police shall endorse his approval or disapproval of the
application within 30 days of receipt by him. If the application is
disapproved, the reasons therefor shall be set forth in writing. The
Township Clerk/Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing that
the application has been granted or denied. If the application is denied,
the reasons for such denial shall be set forth in the notice, along with
the applicant's right to appeal the denial to the Township Committee
pursuant to § 224-8.
A. A tow operator's license shall be issued by the Township Clerk/
Administrator to an approved applicant upon provision of insurance
certification pursuant to § 224-9 and approval by the Chief of Police.
§ 224-5 TAXICABS § 224-6
221:379
§ 224-7. Revocation and suspension.
§ 224-8. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or the Township
Clerk/Administrator in the denial of an application for a license or in
revocation thereof or in the suspension from the Township's on-call towing
list may appeal to the Township Committee by filing with the Clerk/
Administrator, within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has
The Township Clerk/Administrator shall send a copy of the license to
the Police Department for filing and shall keep a permanent record of
all licenses issued.
B. All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire at the end of the
calendar year in which issued. Applications for renewal, certifying any
changes to the original application or certifying no change, shall be
filed with the Clerk/Administrator at least 30 days before expiration on
forms provided by the Clerk/Administrator. Renewal applications will
be forwarded to the Chief of Police for review and any necessary
investigation in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth
in § 224-5. If approved, a renewal license shall be issued upon payment
of the license fee and provision of required insurance certifications.
C. All licenses issued under this chapter, or certified copies thereof, shall
be displayed prominently on all tow vehicles and at the tow operator's
principal place of business.
D. All licenses issued under this chapter are nontransferable.
A. Licenses issued under this chapter may be revoked by the Chief of
Police after reasonable notice and hearing pursuant to § 224-8 for any
of the following reasons:
(1) False or materially inaccurate information in the application or a
change of circumstances which would have caused disapproval of
the application if existing at the time of approval.
(2) Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter, any
additional regulations promulgated by the Chief of Police or any
state, federal or local law relating to motor vehicle operation or
storage.
(3) Unsatisfactory service which jeopardizes public safety. More than
three unexcused failures to respond and/or valid complaints (as
determined by the Chief of Police after investigation) within a
twelve-month period shall be considered grounds for suspension
and/or revocation.
B. Notice of suspension and/or revocation shall be in writing and shall
include the reasons therefor and notice the licensee's right to appeal to
the Township Committee pursuant to § 224-8.
§ 224-6 WESTAMPTON CODE § 224-8
221:380
been mailed to such person's last known address, a written request for a
hearing, setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Committee will
set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice shall be served
on or mailed to the applicant or licensee at least five days prior to the
hearing. The Committee's determination shall be made by resolution and
shall become effective immediately.
§ 224-9. Insurance requirements.
A. Every licensee shall carry insurance as follows:
(1) Comprehensive automobile liability in an amount not less than
$500,000 combined single limits. [Amended 2-1-1993 by Ord.
No. 1-1993]
(2) Workers' compensation coverage as required by state law.
(3) Garage keeper's liability in an amount not less than $60,000 per
location.
(4) Garage liability in an amount not less than $500,000 combined
single limits. [Amended 2-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1-1993]
(5) Comprehensive general liability coverage in an amount not less
than $500,000 for each person and $500,000 for each accident.
[Amended 2-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1-1993]
(6) Endorsements providing for collision coverage for vehicles in tow.
(7) Endorsements incorporating the indemnification provision set forth
in § 224-9B.
(8) Endorsement naming the Township as an additional insured in all
insurance policies (except workers' compensation policies) for
licensees on the Township's on-call towing list.
B. All licensees shall hold harmless and indemnify the Township, its
officers, employees and agents from any and all liability claims, losses
or damage arising or alleged to arise from the performance of the
towing services requested of or rendered by the licensee. The foregoing
indemnification language shall be incorporated in the general
comprehensive liability policy required by § 224-9A.
C. All insurance policies shall be written by insurance companies
acceptable to the Township and authorized to do business in the State
of New Jersey.
D. No license shall be issued or renewed until the applicant has filed with
the Township Clerk/Administrator certificates of insurance evidencing
the insurance coverage and endorsements required in § 224-9A. All
certificates must provide for 30 days' prior written notice to the
Township of policy cancellation or material change.
§ 224-8 TAXICABS § 224-9
221:381
§ 224-10. On-call towing list.
E. Any license issued under this chapter will be automatically revoked
upon expiration or cancellation of the required insurance or material
change in coverage which renders that coverage not in compliance with
the requirements of § 224-9A.
A. The Chief of Police shall maintain a list of those tow operators licensed
by the Township to respond to calls from the Township Police
Department. In order to be included on the on-call towing list, an
applicant must meet all of the requirements of this chapter and shall
enter into an agreement with the Township for a term of one year, said
agreement to be prepared by the Township Attorney.
B. Calls to tow operators on the on-call list shall be made on a
nondiscriminatory rotating basis, pursuant to procedures established
by the Chief of Police. Nothing herein shall prohibit the Chief of Police
or his designee from calling a tow operator out of sequence or seeking
the services of a tow operator not on the on-call list if the circumstances
require specialized equipment or if the interests of public safety so
require. If the tow operator selected does not respond to the scene
within the 25 minutes after notification, the Chief of Police or his
designee shall be permitted to summon the next available tow operator.
When any unusual situation occurs which may be dangerous to the
safety of the public, such as a spill of toxic material or other dangerous
cargo, the Township Police Department may select any qualified tow
operator.
C. The fees to be charged for the towing and storage services of
automobiles shall be as set forth in § 224-11. The Township shall not be
liable for the cost of any towing and/or storage services unless those
services are performed on a municipal vehicle.
D. Inclusion on the on-call towing list shall be automatically revoked upon
expiration or revocation of the tow operator's license. The Chief of
Police may also suspend a licensed tow operator's inclusion on the oncall
towing list for such period of time as he considers appropriate for
violations of this chapter, after a hearing on such violations.
Suspensions may be appealed pursuant to the procedures set forth in
§ 224-8.
E. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a motorist or motor vehicle owner
from summoning a tow operator of his or her own choosing, except that
any Township police officer at the scene of an incident requiring towing
services shall be responsible for making the final determination as to
when towing shall take place and which tow operator shall be called.
F. All vehicles towed at the request of the Township Police Department
must be removed to an approved storage facility unless the owner or
operator of the vehicle specifically requests that it be towed to another
destination. Any Township police officer at the scene shall be
§ 224-9 WESTAMPTON CODE § 224-10
221:382
§ 224-11. Towing and storage fees.
responsible for making the final determination as to the towing
destination.
G. No vehicle shall be released by the tow operator until the owner or
agent of the vehicle produces a release form from the Police
Department. No verbal releases are to be accepted. The Township is not
responsible for any costs, compensation or damage which a tow
operator may suffer by the Township agreeing for a vehicle to be
released. Vehicles may only be retrieved during the normal working
hours of the tow operator. [Amended 2-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1-1993]
H. Up to 20 vehicles towed at the request of the Township Police
Department must be stored together at the approved storage facility
and not scattered throughout the premises. [Amended 2-1-1993 by
Ord. No. 1-1993]
I. No tow operator shall dispose, destroy, remove, sell or otherwise
transfer any vehicle towed at the request of the Township Police
Department without first complying with all applicable laws of the State
of New Jersey and notifying the Township Police Department of its
intention to do so, in writing, at least 14 days prior to effectuating the
same.
J. Prior to commencing any tow, the tow operator shall sign the tow report
prepared by the officer on location acknowledging receipt of the
vehicle.
K. Upon request by the Township Police Department, the tow operator
shall store a motor vehicle in an inside building as defined in
§ 224-4A(4). Vehicles designated by the police as being suspected as
being used in criminal activity shall be stored in a separate space for
the exclusive use of the Police Department and shall not be released
without the written permission of the Chief of Police, Acting Chief of
Police or Lieutenant.
L. In addition to any requirements set forth elsewhere in this chapter, all
approved towing services must provide, in writing, an employment
nondiscrimination statement prior to the issuance of said approval and
must agree to comply with all state and federal laws and regulations
concerning wages, hours and terms of employment.
M. Employees of an approved towing service shall in no way be deemed to
represent or be employed by this municipality, and all such towing
services shall be responsible for the conduct of their employees.
N. All towing and storage fees shall be disclosed in an appropriate notice
on the front or top page of all invoices and receipts. Additionally,
adequate public posting of such fees must be made at the storage area,
in easy view of the public.
§ 224-10 TAXICABS § 224-11
221:383
A. Fee schedule enumerated; restrictions.
(1) No person shall be liable to any tow operator who tows or stores an
automobile which was damaged in an accident and recovered after
being reported stolen, for any fees in excess of those fees as listed
by the fee schedule, which shall be kept on file with the Chief of
Police or his designee, as well as by the Westampton Township
Administrator. The fee schedule shall be made applicable by
resolution, which shall change from time to time according to the
prevailing rates for towing. Any changes in the fee schedule are
hereby permitted to be done by resolution, which shall be passed
by the Westampton Township Committee. The fee schedule shall
include basic towing service fees, storage fees, and miscellaneous
charges. [Amended 2-1-1993 by Ord. No. 1-1993; 6-9-1998 by
Ord. No. 14-1998; 4-11-2006 by Ord. No. 7-2006; 10-12-2010
by Ord. No. 16-2010]
(2) In no event shall any tow operator charge a towing or storage fee
for private passenger vehicles damaged in an accident or recovered
after being stolen in excess of the fees established by the
Department of Insurance as set forth in N.J.A.C. 11:3-38.1 et seq.,
or any amendments or supplements thereto. It shall be the
responsibility of the tow operators to comply with all applicable
Department of Insurance rules and regulations. The tow operator
shall submit annually as part of its application or renewal thereof
its fee schedule for the towing and storage of automobiles, which
shall be subject to the review and approval of the Township
Committee.
(3) For all towing services other than those defined as basic towing and
for all vehicles other than those defined as automobiles, the tow
operator shall set reasonable and customary fees for the Burlington
County area for the towing and storage of such vehicles. The tow
operator shall submit annually as part of its application or renewal
thereof its fee schedule for the towing and storage of all motor
vehicles other than automobiles, which shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Township Committee. [Amended
4-11-2006 by Ord. No. 7-2006]
(4) It shall be the responsibility of the tow operators to comply with all
applicable Department of Insurance rules and fee regulations.
[Amended 4-11-2006 by Ord. No. 7-2006]
(5) Towers are required to submit, monthly, to the Chief of Police, a
copy of impound reports and invoices for each vehicle towed that
month. [Amended 6-9-1998 by Ord. No. 14-199877]
77.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Subsection A(6),
pertaining to storage fees, which immediately followed this subsection.
§ 224-11 WESTAMPTON CODE § 224-11
221:384
§ 224-12. Regulations and procedures.
The Chief of Police shall promulgate such rules, regulations and procedures,
not inconsistent with this chapter, as may be reasonable and necessary to
carry out the provisions of this chapter. Copies thereof shall be provided to
all licensed tow operators and shall be made available to the public, along
with copies of current fee schedules, during normal business hours. Failure
to comply with applicable rules, regulations and procedures may be cause
for revocation of a tow operator's license.
§ 224-13. Enforcement.
The Chief of Police is hereby designated to enforce the provisions of this
chapter and any applicable rules and regulations.
Chapter 232
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 212.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 221.
Towing and storage — See Ch. 224.
Recreational vehicles — See Ch. 235.
Unregistered vehicles — See Ch. 238.
Street vacations, acceptances and name
changes — See Ch. A263.
B. No person shall be liable to any tow operator for any other towing or
storage services for any fees in excess of the licensee's approved fee
schedule. Current fee schedules shall be submitted for approval on an
annual basis at the time of application for license renewal.
C. When basic towing services are rendered for any automobile, there
shall be no additional charges other than those provided for in
Subsection A above, including but not limited to flatbedding, waiting
time, winching, cleanup costs and additional labor.
D. Tow vehicles transporting multiple vehicles at one time may charge the
applicable fee for each vehicle transported.
E. Prior to hookup or flatbedding of a motor vehicle, the tow operator shall
present a copy of its fee schedule to the owner or operator of the
vehicle. The fee schedule shall also contain the name, address and
telephone number of the tow operator and a statement of the hours
when the motor vehicle may be claimed.
§ 224-11 TAXICABS § 224-13
221:385

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 3-17-1959]
§ 232-1. Stop intersections designated; through streets. [Amended
5-21-1981 by Ord. No. 11-1981; 4-21-1983 by Ord. No. 1-1983]
A. The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near
right side of each street intersecting the through street, except where
yield signs are provided for in § 232-2: [Amended 11-7-1985 by Ord.
No. 18-1985]
Name of Street Limits
Berkshire Road Entire length
Bloomfield Drive Between Holly Lane and Devonshire
Drive
Devonshire Drive Entire length
Dover Road Entire length
Greenwich Drive Entire length
Holly Lane Entire length
Lambert Drive Entire length
Main Street Entire length
Orchard Lane Entire length
Pennington Drive Between Howell Drive and Holly Lane
Quail Hollow Drive Entire length
Sherwood Lane Entire length
Tallowood Lane Between Rancocas Road and Greenwich
Drive
Tarnsfield Drive Entire length
B. The following described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections:
Intersection Stop Sign On
Berkshire Road and Dover Road Dover Road
Berkshire Road and Glasgow
Road
Glasgow Road
Bridge Street and Second Street Second Street
Bridge Street and Third Street Third Street
Brighton Road and Brighton
Court [Added 11-7-1985 by
Ord. No.18-1985]
Brighton Court
§ 232-1 TAXICABS § 232-1
221:387
§ 232-2. Yield intersections designated.
The intersection of Smith Lane and Norwyn Lane is hereby designated a
yield intersection. Yield right-of-way signs having thirty-six-inch sides shall
be erected on Norwyn Lane.
§ 232-3. Exclusion of trucks over four tons. [Added 11-17-1978 by
Ord. No. 17-1978]
Trucks over four tons' gross weight are hereby excluded from the following
described streets, except for the pickup and delivery of materials on such
streets:
Intersection Stop Sign On
Forceville Drive and Forest View
Drive [Added 7-9-1996 by Ord.
No.12-1996]
Forceville Drive
Fort Drive and Fort Place [Added
11-7-1985 by Ord.
No.18-1985]
Fort Place
Glasgow Road and Partree Road Partree Road
Heath Drive and Dublin Drive Dublin Drive
Heath Drive and Lancaster Drive Lancaster Drive
Howell Drive and Pennington
Drive [Added 11-7-1985 by
Ord. No.18-1985]
Pennington Drive
Lancaster Drive and Lancaster
Court
Lancaster Court
New Road and Dale Road Dale Road
Olive Street and Second Street Second Street
Orchard Drive and Berkshire
Road
Berkshire Road
Orchard Drive and Seeley Drive Seeley Drive
Russo Drive and Fort Drive
[Added 11-7-1985 by Ord. No.
18-1985]
Fort Drive
Seeley Drive and Stratton Drive
[Added 11-7-1985 by Ord. No.
18-1985]
Stratton Drive
Wickham Lane and Wickham
Court [Added 11-7-1985 by
Ord. No. 18-1985]
Wickham Court
§ 232-1 WESTAMPTON CODE § 232-3
221:388
Name of Street Location
Anna Avenue [Added 12-17-1990
by Ord. No. 19-1990]
Entire length
Greenwich Drive [Added
12-17-1990 by Ord. No. 19-1990]
Entire length
Hancock Lane [Added 12-13-1994
by Ord. No. 15-1994]
From County Road 541 to
Burlington Township line
Holly Lane [Added 12-17-1990 by
Ord. No. 19-1990]
From County Road 626 to County
Road 541
Kings Road From Woodland Road to New Road
Lambert Drive [Added 12-17-1990
by Ord. No. 19-1990]
Entire length
Lancaster Drive [Added
12-17-1990 by Ord. No. 19-1990]
Entire length
Maple Tree Drive [Added
12-17-1990 by Ord. No. 19-1990]
From County Road 630 to County
Road 637
Orchard Lane [Added 12-17-1990
by Ord. No. 19-1990]
Entire length
Oxmead Road [Added 12-13-1994
by Ord. No. 15-1994]
From Burrs Road to Burlington
Township line
School House Road [Added
12-17-1990 by Ord. No. 19-1990]
Entire length
Tallowood Drive [Added
12-17-1990 by Ord. No. 19-1990]
Entire length
Tarnsfield Road [Added
12-17-1990 by Ord. No. 19-1990]
Entire length
§ 232-4. Speed limits. [Added 2-26-1981 by Ord. No. 4-1981;
amended 4-3-1984 by Ord. No. 6-1984; 7-18-1985 by Ord. No.
10-1985; 10-7-1986 by Ord. No. 13-1986; 3-3-1987 by Ord. No.
2-1987; 7-7-1987 by Ord. No. 10-1987]
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the following streets
is hereby established as follows:
§ 232-3 TAXICABS § 232-4
221:389
§ 232-4.1. No passing zones. [Added 12-14-2004 by Ord. No.
20-2004]
There shall be no passing zones established in the following locations.
Name of Street Speed limit
(mph)
Location
Bridge Street [Added
2-1-1993 by Ord. No.
2-1993]
25 Entire length
Burrs Road 40 Between Oxmead Road and
the boundary line of
Westampton and Springfield
Townships
Holly Lane 30 Entire length
Indel Avenue 40 Inductotherm property
Kings Road [Added
3-21-1988 by Ord. No.
3-1988]
40 Entire length
Main Street [Amended
2-1-1993 by Ord. No.
2-1993]
30 Between Springside Road
and Beverly-Rancocas Road
Main Street [Amended
2-1-1993 by Ord. No.
2-1993]
25 Between the Willingboro
Township - Westampton
Township Line and
Springside Road
Oxmead Road [Added
10-24-1995 by Ord. No.
17-1995]
40 Entire length
Valley Farm Road [Added
12-14-2004 by Ord. No.
20-2004]
35 Between Main Street and
Springside Road
Westampton Drive 25 Entire length and all
accessways leading thereto
located on Westampton
Court Condominium
property
Western Drive 25 Entire length
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits as authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 232-4 WESTAMPTON CODE § 232-4.1
221:390
Location Limits
Valley Farm Road Its entire length between Main
Street and Springside Road (both
directions)
§ 232-5. School parking prohibited. [Added 2-25-1982 by Ord. No.
1-1982]
It shall be unlawful at any time to stop or stand any motor vehicle at the
following locations:
School Location
Holly Hills School See attached Schedule A78
Ogden and Lambert Drive
Westampton School See attached Schedule 79
Rancocas Road, R.D. No. 1
§ 232-6. U-turns prohibited. [Added 9-23-1982 by Ord. No. 10-1982]
No person shall make a U-turn at any of the following locations:
Location Limits
Stemmer Lane (paved portion) Entire length
Intersection of Woolman Road and
Stemmer Lane with Beverly-
Rancocas Road (County Road 626)
At intersection
§ 232-7. Exclusion of trucks over 10 tons. [Added 12-6-1983 by Ord.
No. 18-1983; amended 9-4-1984 by Ord. No. 13-1984]
Trucks over 10 tons' gross weight are hereby excluded from the following
described streets, except for fire vehicles and farming vehicles or trucks
picking up and delivering material within the Township of Westampton:
Name of Street Location
Burrs Road From the intersection of Burrs Road and Springfield
Township boundary line to the intersection of Burrs
Road and New Road and Oxmead Road
§ 232-8. Parking prohibited. [Added 10-7-1986 by Ord. No. 13-1986]
It shall be unlawful at any time to stop or stand any motor vehicle at the
following locations:
78.Editor's Note: Schedules A and B are on file in the office of the Township Clerk/
Administrator.
79.Editor's Note: Schedules A and B are on file in the office of the Township Clerk/
Administrator.
§ 232-4.1 TAXICABS § 232-8
221:391
Location Limits
Fire hydrants, dumpsters, walkways
and firegates at the Westampton
Courts Condominiums
20 feet
Jacksonville Road (except for
designated Burl Link bus stop)
[Added 9-14-2004 by Ord. No.
18-2004]
West side, from the Yorkshire Lane
intersection to a point 1,000 feet
north therefrom
Springside Road (except for
designated Burl Link bus stop)
[Added 9-14-2004 by Ord. No.
18-2004]
East side, from a point 500 feet
south of Meadowbrook Drive to a
point 600 feet north of Sharpless
Boulevard
Westampton Drive Entire length
Western Drive [Added 3-3-1987 by
Ord. No. 2-1987]
Both sides , entire length
Woodlane Road (except for
designated Burl Link bus stop)
[Added 9-14-2004 by Ord. No.
18-2004]
North side, from the Kings Road
intersection to a point 850 feet
easterly therefrom
§ 232-9. Winstead Drive parking restrictions; violations and
penalties. [Added 6-3-1991 by Ord. No. 5-1991]
§ 232-10. Handicapped parking. [Added 10-11-1994 by Ord. No.
11-1994]
Pursuant to the authority granted to this municipality by N.J.S.A. 39:4-197,
the following locations are hereby designated as restricted parking spaces
for use by persons who have been issued special vehicle identification cards
by the Division of Motor Vehicles. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
A. On Winstead Drive, parking is allowed on one side of the street only. On
the southern loop of Winstead Drive, parking is prohibited on the inner
edge of the loop. On the northern loop of Winstead Drive, parking is
prohibited on the outer edge of the loop from a point 200 feet south of
Rolling Hills Drive East and continuing around the outer edge of the
loop until Winstead Drive intersects with itself.
B. A map is on file in the Township Clerk/Administrator's office further
clarifying the above. [Amended 9-21-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992]
C. Signs stating "No Parking Any Time" will be erected as required by law.
D. Penalties. Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a fine
of $15 per violation.
§ 232-8 WESTAMPTON CODE § 232-10
221:392
Location80
46 Country Lane, 20-foot frontage [Added 6-10-2014 by Ord. No.
8-2014]
120 Second Street, southerly side, beginning at a point 101 feet east of
the easterly corner of Olive Street and extending to a point 20 feet east
thereof [Added 10-8-1996 by Ord. No. 17-1996]
184 South Hill Drive, 20-foot frontage [Added 9-14-2004 by Ord. No.
17-2004]
191 South Hill Drive, 20-foot frontage [Added 10-8-1996 by Ord. No.
17-1996]
200 South Hill Drive, 20-foot frontage [Added 6-27-2000 by Ord. No.
13-2000]
204 South Hill Drive, 20-foot frontage [Added 5-11-2004 by Ord. No.
9-2004]
§ 232-11. Turn prohibitions. [Added 11-22-1994 by Ord. No.
13-1994]
No person shall make a turn at any location listed below, and only in the
manner described:
Intersection
Turn
Prohibitions
Movement
Prohibited
The 2 driveways of the Amoco
Station (Block 1204, Lot 1) along
the southerly curbline of Woodlane
Road approximately 84 feet and 166
feet east of the easterly curbline of
Burlington - Mt. Holly Road (CR
541) [Added 6-27-1995 by Ord.
No. 11-1995]
Left From the driveways
onto Woodlane Road
The access driveway on Block 203,
Lot 5 and Springside Road (CR 635)
[Added 10-2-2017 by Ord. No.
14-2017]
Left To and from
driveway onto
Springside Road (CR
635)
The access driveway on Block 1104,
Lot 3, and Woodlane Road (CR 630)
[Added 10-15-2019 by Ord. No.
11-2019]
Left From driveway onto
Woodlane Road (CR
630)
East Stokes Road and Main Street Left South on East
Stokes Road to east
on Main Street
80.Editor's Note: Entries for 146 North Hill Drive, 18 Winstead Drive, 24 Winstead Drive, and
opposite side of the street in front of 62 Winstead Drive, were repealed 6-10-2014 by Ord.
No. 8-2014.
§ 232-10 TAXICABS § 232-11
221:393
Intersection
Turn
Prohibitions
Movement
Prohibited
The driveway of Hampton Hospital
(Block 202, Lot 4.01) and Rancocas
Road [Added 6-20-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-2016]
Left Turning left into the
driveway of
Hampton Hospital
when travelling west
on Rancocas Road
The exit driveway of Hampton
Hospital (Block 202, Lot 4.01) and
Rancocas Road [Added 5-16-2016
by Ord. No. 14-2016]
Left From the driveway
westbound onto
Rancocas Road
The exit driveway of McDonalds
(Block 1204, Lots 2 and 3) along the
southerly curbline of Woodlane
Road approximately 320 feet east of
easterly curbline of Burlington - Mt.
Holly Road (CR 541) [Added
6-27-1995 by Ord. No. 11-1995]
Left From the driveway
onto Woodlane Road
§ 232-12. One-way streets. [Added 11-22-1995 by Ord. No. 13-1995]
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Green Street North Beginning at the property line of Lots
1 and 12 in Block 110 to Main Street
East Stokes Road South Beginning at the southerly driveway
to Lot 3 Block 102 to Main Street
§ 232-13. Closure of street by Chief of Police. [Added 10-24-1995 by
Ord. No. 18-1995]
A. The Chief of Police of the Township of Westampton is hereby authorized
to provide by regulation for the closing of any street or portion thereof
to motor vehicle traffic on any day or days during specified hours on any
day or days, whenever he finds that such closing is necessary for the
preservation of the public safety, health or welfare.
B. Any regulations promulgated by the Police Chief under and in
accordance with Subsection A above shall provide for the posting of
proper warning signs of such closing in any street or portion thereof
during the time the same is closed in pursuance thereof.
C. Any violation of this section or of any regulation promulgated
thereunder shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $50.
§ 232-11 WESTAMPTON CODE § 232-13
221:394
§ 232-14. Regulations applicable to IKEA Drive. [Added 11-14-1995
by Ord. No. 19-1995]
The provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey
with various traffic regulations shall be made applicable to the semipublic
road known as "IKEA Drive" located in the Township of Westampton, County
of Burlington, and the following regulations shall be enforceable:
D. Any regulation adopted under this section shall not become effective
unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Transportation, if the closing is for
more than 48 continuous hours.
A. General parking. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any
of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
IKEA Drive Both All Entire length
B. Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near
right side of each street intersecting the through street, except where
yield signs are provided for in the designation:
Name of Street Limits
IKEA Drive Entire length
C. Speed limit.
(1) The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Limits
IKEA Drive 30 Entire length
(2) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above-designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
D. Tow away. Any vehicle parked or standing so as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil
fills, any grassy area or pedestrian walkway or present in any way a
safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the
owner's or operator's expense.
E. All signs, posts or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and
N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
§ 232-13 TAXICABS § 232-14
221:395
§ 232-14.1. Regulations applicable to Highland Drive. [Added
1-26-1999 by Ord. No. 4-1999]
Brandywine Realty Trust has filed a written consent with the Township of
Westampton that the provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey with various traffic regulations be made applicable
to the semipublic road known as Highland Drive located in the Township of
Westampton, County of Burlington, and the following regulations shall be
enforceable:
F. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this section or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $500 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
A. General parking. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any
of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Highland Drive Both All Entire length
B. Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near
right side of each street intersecting the through street except where
yield signs are provided for in the designation:
Name of Street Limits
Highland Drive Entire length
C. Speed limits.
(1) The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
Name of Roadway Speed limit
(mph)
Limits
Highland Drive 30 Entire length
(2) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
D. All signs, posts or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and
N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
E. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this section or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $500 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 232-14 WESTAMPTON CODE § 232-14.2
221:396
§ 232-14.2. Regulations applicable to Dolan Group properties.
[Added 5-9-2000 by Ord. No. 4-2000]
Dolan Group has filed a written consent with the Township of Westampton
that the provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of
New Jersey be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways
and parking lots at Stemmers Lane and Relocated Springside Road (Dolan
Group properties) located in the Township of Westampton, County of
Burlington, and the following regulations shall be enforceable:
A. General parking
(1) All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
(2) No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Lots 1.02, 6, 6.02,
6.03, 7, 7.01
As indicated
on site plan
All As indicated on site
plan
Relocated
Springside Road
Both All As indicated on site
plan
Stemmers Lane Both All As indicated on site
plan
B. Reserved parking. All vehicles that are granted specialty parking in this
section, such as police vehicles, ambulances, teachers, etc., must be
properly identified, and the reserved parking spaces must be shown on
the attached site plan.
C. Through streets; stop and yield intersections:
(1) Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed
on the near right side of each street intersecting the through street
except where yield signs are provided in the designation:
Name of Street Limits
Relocated Springside Road Entire length
Stemmers Lane Entire length
D. Speed limits.
(1) The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking lot(s)
shall be 15 miles per hour.
(2) The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
§ 232-14.2 TAXICABS § 232-14.2
221:397
Name of Roadway Speed limit
(mph)
Limits
Relocated Springside
Road
30 Entire length
Stemmers Lane 30 Entire length
(3) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above-designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
E. Tow away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil
fills or any grassy area or pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a
safety or traffic hazard, may be removed by towing the vehicle at the
owner's expense.
F. Turn prohibitions (trucks over four tons' gross weight). No person shall
make a turn at any location listed and only in the manner described:
[Amended 2-27-2001 by Ord. No. 5-2001]
Intersection Turn
Prohibited
Movement
Prohibited
Lot 6.03 exits and Stemmers
Lane
Left Eastbound on Lot
6.03 to northbound
on Stemmers Lane
Lot 7 exit and Stemmers Lane Right Westbound on Lot 7
to northbound on
Stemmers Lane
G. Loading zone(s). The locations described are hereby designated as
loading zones. No person shall park a vehicle in said locations during
the times indicated other than for the loading or unloading of goods and
materials.
Name of Street Times Sides Location
Lots 6.02, 6.03, 7,
7.01
All As indicated on
site plan
As indicated on
site plan
H. Lane use reservations. The lane locations described are designated as
lane use reservations, and traffic shall move as indicated:
Intersection Movement
Relocated Springside Road and
Main Street
Southbound right lane of relocated
Springside Road reserved for right
turn only
I. Trucks over designated weight excluded from certain streets. Trucks
over the gross weight indicated are hereby excluded from the streets or
§ 232-14.2 WESTAMPTON CODE § 232-14.2
221:398
§ 232-15. Parking, stopping or standing prohibited during certain
hours on certain streets. [Added 5-14-1996 by Ord. No. 8-1996]
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle between the hours specified
on any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Second Street South 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m.; 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m./Monday
to Friday
From 88 feet west
of Bridge Street to
a point 309 feet
west of Bridge
Street
Springside Road
[Added 4-9-2002 by
Ord. No. 2-2002]
Both All, except for
designated Burl
Link bus stop
From the Woodlane
Road intersection
to a point 200 feet
northerly
therefrom
Springside Road
[Added 4-9-2002 by
Ord. No. 2-2002]
Both All, except for
designated Burl
Link bus stop
From the Woodlane
Road intersection
to a point 500 feet
southerly
therefrom
Woodlane Road
[Added 4-9-2002 by
Ord. No. 2-2002]
Both All, except for
designated Burl
Link bus stop
From the
Springside Road
intersection to a
point 365 feet
easterly therefrom
parts of streets described, except for the pickup and delivery of
materials on such streets: [Amended 2-27-2001 by Ord. No. 5-2001]
Name of Street Weight Limit Location
Stemmers Lane 4 tons From IKEA Drive to Woodlane
Road
J. All signs, posts or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and
N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
K. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute,
every person convicted of a violation of this section or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $500 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 232-14.2 TAXICABS § 232-15
221:399
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Woodlane Road
[Added 12-13-2011
by Ord. No.
15-2011]
North All From the Kings
Road intersection
to a point 150 feet
westerly therefrom
§ 232-15.1. Stopping or standing prohibited on certain streets.
[Added 9-11-2012 by Ord. No. 16-201281]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described.
Name of Street Sides Location
Dale Road Both From the Oxmead Road
intersection to the Burrs Road
intersection
§ 232-16. Parking in yards prohibited. [Added 5-14-1996 by Ord.
No. 10-1996]
No person shall park, stop or stand any motor vehicle or permit or suffer
the same to be done in any yard area of any premises, except on designated
driveways and parking areas constructed and maintained in accordance
with Township ordinances, except for service or delivery or under severe
weather conditions.
§ 232-16.1. Vehicles over designated weight excluded from certain
streets. [Added 10-22-2002 by Ord. No. 12-2002]
§ 232-16.2. Temporary parking prohibition for snowplowing and
snow removal. [Added 6-8-2004 by Ord. No. 10-2004; amended
4-4-2016 by Ord. No. 5-2016]
A. Trucks over the following gross weights are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described, except for the pickup and delivery
of materials on such streets:
Name of Street Weight Limit Location
Irick Road (CR 637) 12 tons From Beverly-Rancocas Road
(CR 626) to the southerly
intersection with Woodlane
Road (CR 630)
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained as
authorized by the Department of Transportation.
81.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it take effect upon approval by Burlington
County.
§ 232-15 WESTAMPTON CODE § 232-16.2
221:400
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
STREET — The entire width between the boundary lines of every
publicly maintained roadway which is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which a person or persons or
property is or may be transported upon a street, excepting a device
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
B. Enforcement official. The Police Department of the Township of
Westampton is hereby designated as the enforcement official of the
Township of Westampton.
C. Emergency declared. A local snow emergency is hereby declared to
exist within the municipal limits of the Township of Westampton
whenever there shall be a snowfall of four inches or more in said
Township, as determined by the Director of Public Works, or whenever
there shall be an accumulation of snow or drifts of four inches or more
as determined by said Director of Public Works, and said snow
emergency shall be presumed to continue for a period of 72 hours after
the cessation of said snowfall. During this snow emergency, all
ordinances or parts of ordinances deemed inconsistent or in conflict
with this Ordinance by the Chief of Police will not be enforced while
emergency is in effect.
D. Parking prohibited. In order that the municipality may have the
opportunity to clear the streets of snow and to open said streets in the
Township of Westampton to traffic, during the period of the snow
emergency aforesaid, no vehicles howsoever propelled shall be allowed
to stand or park, whether attended or not, upon the streets of the
Township of Westampton except for picking up or discharging
passengers in the case of an omnibus or for picking up or delivering
essential merchandise or commodities in the case of other vehicles.
E. Duration. Said snow emergency shall be presumed to continue beyond
the seventy-two-hour period provided aforesaid on those streets of the
Township of Westampton from whence the snow has not been removed,
and no vehicle shall be allowed to stand or park, whether attended or
not, on said street until the snow shall have been cleared therefrom,
provided that signs are placed or posted indicating that parking is
prohibited along said streets while the municipality is engaged in or
abut to engage in the clearance or removal of snow therefrom. Said
signs prohibiting parking to enable the clearance and removal of snow
shall be posted when work is about to commence and shall be removed
when the work is complete.
F. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this section
shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper
regulation of traffic and any police officer may provide for the removal
of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal
§ 232-16.2 TAXICABS § 232-16.2
221:401
§ 232-16.3. Depositing of snow or ice on streets. [Added 4-4-2016
by Ord. No. 5-2016]
No person, firm or corporation shall deposit, throw, place or strew, nor shall
any person, firm or corporation cause to be deposited, thrown, placed or
strewn, any snow or ice upon any Township street or roadway when clearing
their driveways or sidewalks.
§ 232-16.4. Penalties for snow-related offenses. [Added 4-4-2016 by
Ord. No. 5-2016]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation or provision of § 232-16.2 or 232-16.3 or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $200 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
§ 232-17. Violations and penalties. [Added 5-14-1996 by Ord. No.
10-1996]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall
be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues.
and storage which may result from such removal before regaining
possession of the vehicle.
§ 232-16.2 WESTAMPTON CODE § 232-17
221:402
ARTICLE II
Handicapped Parking
[Adopted 12-17-1981]
§ 232-18. Designation of parking spaces for handicapped.
The Chief of Police, with the advice and consent of the Township Committee
of the Township of Westampton, shall designate parking spaces for
handicapped persons at all public buildings. Public buildings as set forth in
this article are as defined in N.J.S.A. 52:32-6a.
§ 232-19. Spaces to conform to certain requirements.
The parking spaces so designated for physically handicapped persons shall
conform to the requirements of N.J.S.A. 52:32-12, N.J.A.C. 17:14A-4.4 and
applicable state law and regulations.
§ 232-20. Exclusive use of spaces by handicapped.
The parking spaces for physically handicapped persons as determined and
designated pursuant to this article shall be for the exclusive use of those
vehicles displaying special markers issued by the Director of the Division of
Motor Vehicles pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-206 and operated or occupied by a
handicapped person.
§ 232-21. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-17-1990 by Ord.
No. 17-1990]
The operator of any vehicle parking in the restrictive parking area for
handicapped persons and not having the required certificate pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 39:4-206 shall be subject to a fine of $100 for the first offense
and, for subsequent offenses, a fine of at least $100 and up to 90 days of
community service on such terms and in such form as the court shall deem
appropriate, or any combination thereof.
§ 232-22. Suspension of fine.
The Municipal Court Judge may, after the establishment of appropriate
medical proof, suspend the imposition of any fine for the operator of a
vehicle who was, in fact, handicapped, but did not have the certificate
as provided by N.J.S.A. 39:4-206 properly affixed to the vehicle. However,
in the event the vehicle was impounded, the owner and/or operator shall
be required to pay all fees, charges and expenses relating to the towing,
storage and impoundment prior to the release of said vehicle, as provided
herein.
§ 232-18 TAXICABS § 232-22
221:403

ARTICLE III
Designation of On-Street Handicapped Parking in Residential Zones
[Adopted 5-24-2005 by Ord. No. 9-2005]
§ 232-23. Designation of restricted parking spaces for handicapped
residents.
A. Restricted parking spaces may be established on public streets in front
of residential uses occupied by handicapped persons in accordance
with the procedures described herein.
B. An application must be filed with the Township Clerk identifying the
name and address of the handicapped individual and the specific
location of the proposed restricted parking space.
C. Upon application for a space, the applicant must provide the Township
Clerk with the following:
(1) The applicant must possess a disabled person identification card
issued by the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles.
(2) The applicant must furnish a valid motor vehicle registration for
the vehicle requiring the space and, if the applicant is the vehicle
operator, a valid motor vehicle operator license.
(3) The applicant may request a designated handicapped parking
space only for the applicant's place of residence.
(4) If the applicant is not the owner of the property at which the
handicapped parking space is to be designated, a written statement
from the property owner must be submitted stating that the owner
has no objection to the restriction of parking in front of the
property.
D. The Township Clerk shall forward said application to the Bureau of
Traffic Safety for a recommendation on whether to approve or
disapprove said permit. Said recommendation shall be made within 21
calendar days of receiving such request.
E. Upon receipt of an application to designate a restricted parking space
for handicapped persons, the Bureau of Traffic Safety shall perform a
site inspection to determine the following:
(1) Whether off-street parking is presently available on the property.
(2) The location, width, grade and physical condition of off-street
parking and sidewalk connecting said parking to the residence.
(3) Whether parking is presently prohibited in front of said residence.
(4) Whether there is a distance of 22 feet along the street where a
handicapped parking space could be designated without
interfering with the normal flow of traffic.
§ 232-23 TAXICABS § 232-23
221:405
F. An application for a handicapped space shall be denied if:
(1) Pursuant to applicable state or municipal law, the parking of motor
vehicles is prohibited at the location of the requested handicapped
parking space or the permitting of such parking would interfere
with the normal flow of traffic.
(2) The applicant or handicapped person is the owner of the property
at which the space is to be designated and has reasonable access to
a driveway on the property or reasonable access to some other area
of the property which may permit the transport of the handicapped
person.
(3) The applicant resides, either as a tenant or an owner, in a housing
complex which provides off-street parking and has reasonable
access to said parking and an on-site handicapped parking space
has been provided by the owner of the housing complex.
G. Upon receipt of a favorable recommendation for approval, the Township
Clerk shall forward the recommendation to the Township Committee for
adoption of an ordinance designating the handicapped space.
H. All permits issued under this article and prior to this article for the
establishment of a restricted handicapped parking space shall be
reviewed every year to determine the continued eligibility of the
parking space as follows:
(1) Annually, on or before July 1, written notice shall be sent by the
applicant to the Township Clerk, on forms provided by the
Township, indicating that a valid and continued need for the
handicapped parking space exists. In the event that such notice is
not received within 30 days, the handicapped parking space sign
shall be removed and the space will be repealed.
I. The addition of handicapped parking spaces in addition to the number
that are presently on the streets is a matter that the Township may
pursue on behalf of individuals who qualify fully under the article.
However, there is no obligation by the Township to create such spaces
in the event that creating the spaces would result in a shortage of
spaces for nonhandicapped drivers.
§ 232-23 WESTAMPTON CODE § 232-23
221:406
Chapter 235
VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 232.
§ 235-1. Compliance required; definitions.
§ 235-2. Parking prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation shall park a recreational vehicle upon any
road, street or highway within the Township of Westampton.
§ 235-3. Permit required to permanently affix vehicles to ground.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to remove or cause
to be removed the wheels or similar transporting devices from any
recreational vehicle or to otherwise permanently affix it to the ground in a
manner that would prevent the ready removal of such recreational vehicle
without having first obtained a permit from the Construction Official of
the township. Any such alteration to any recreational vehicle as above set
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any of the following defined
recreational vehicles on any street within the Township of Westampton,
except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The definition
of "recreational vehicles" shall not include customized vans or pickup
trucks with the top or cap on the rear portion of the pickup truck.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOAT — A watercraft propelled by oars, paddles, sail or power.
CAMPER — A separate vehicle designed for human habitation and
which can be attached to or detached from a pickup truck.
CAMPER-TRAILER — A vehicular, portable dwelling structure designed
to be used for recreational purposes. This includes a travel trailer, so
identified by the manufacturer; a pickup camper; a folding tent trailer;
and a motorized camper where the camping portion is an integral part
of the self-propelled vehicle.
MOTOR HOME — A self-contained vehicle designed for human
habitation with its own motive power and with a passageway from the
body of the home to the driver's and front passenger's seat.
TRAILER — A vehicle without motive power designed for carrying
persons or property on its own and to be drawn by a vehicle with motive
power. The term "trailer" shall include but shall not be limited to horse
trailers, boat trailers and skimobile trailers.
§ 232-23 VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL § 235-3
235:407
forth shall be construed as subjecting the same to the requirements of
the uniform construction codes and the laws of the State of New Jersey
pertaining to said uses.
§ 235-4. Storage.
No recreational vehicle shall be stored in any front yard (however, a front
yard does not include a driveway) within any residential zone within the
Township of Westampton; provided, however, that said vehicles may be
stored within the side yard and within the rear yard of the premises formed
by the extension of the side building line to the rear lot line.
§ 235-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 238
VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Towing and storage — See Ch. 224.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 232.
Recreational vehicles — See Ch. 235.
§ 238-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED — Includes any motor vehicle, omnibus, road tractor, trailer,
truck or other vehicle which:
Is parked without the current year's registration or identification
markers as required by law;
A.
Is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction of traffic and the driver
or person owning or in charge thereof neglects or refuses to move the
same to a place where it shall not obstruct traffic;
B.
Is found to be mechanically inoperative and is allowed to remain
inoperative in the street for a period of five days; or
C.
D. Is found without one or more tires.
§ 235-3 WESTAMPTON CODE § 238-1
238:408
JUNK AUTOMOBILE — Any automobile which is no longer in actual use as
a motor vehicle or which is unfit for use in highway transportation or which
has been discarded for use as a motor vehicle.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle, omnibus, road tractor, trailer, truck
or other vehicle and shall have the meaning as ascribed to the foregoing
words as contained and defined in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq. of the Revised
Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
§ 238-2. Abandonment prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or suffer or permit the
abandoning of any motor vehicle, junk automobile or junk automobile body
out of doors upon any public or private lands in the Township of Westampton
or on any public street or between the right-of-way side lines of any public
right-of-way therein.
§ 238-3. Storage prohibited.
No person shall place, keep or store any junk automobile or junk automobile
body on any public or private property within the Township of Westampton.
Nothing herein shall prohibit the placing, keeping or storage of any motor
vehicle, junk automobile or junk automobile body in an enclosed garage,
barn or other building.
§ 238-4. Exclusions.
Nothing heretofore mentioned shall be deemed to prevent any of the
following activities from being conducted on private lands under the
conditions or by the people referred to. All working agricultural vehicles are
exempt from this chapter.
§ 238-5. Exempt certificates.
Any person who possesses, owns or maintains a motor vehicle covered
under any one of the exclusions referred to above shall obtain from the
Chief of Police an exempt certificate which shall indicate that the motor
vehicle in question comes under one of the exclusions referred to in § 238-4,
Exclusions. Said exempt certificate shall be valid for one year from the
A. One motor vehicle, within the definition set forth above, which does not
possess the current year's registration may be maintained on a single
parcel of land having on it a single-family residential dwelling as long as
the motor vehicle is in a complete and operable condition. The vehicle
may not be kept in the front yard.
B. Any person may maintain motor vehicles altered for drag or stock-car
racing as long as said motor vehicles are maintained on registered
trailers. Vehicles may not be kept in the front yard.
C. Owners of antique motor vehicles which are classified as such under
state statutes are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
§ 238-1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 238-5
238:409
date of issuance. All owners of exempt certificates shall display the exempt
certificate on the windshield or other prominent place on the motor vehicle
in question so that it is readily observed by the enforcement officials under
this chapter.
§ 238-6. Violations and penalties.
Each and every person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment
in a county jail for a period of not more than six months, or both, in the
discretion of the Municipal Judge. Each day that the offense occurs shall be
deemed a separate offense.
Chapter 250
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 99.
Buildings unfit for human habitation — See
Ch. 106.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 131.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 140.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 149.
Sewers — See Ch. 192.
Site plan review — See Ch. 196.
Soil removal — See Ch. 199.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 215.
§ 238-5 WESTAMPTON CODE § 238-6
238:410
ARTICLE I
Title and Purpose
§ 250-1. Title.
This chapter, inclusive of all amendments and supplements that may be
hereafter in effect, may be cited as the "Westampton Township Zoning
Ordinance."
§ 250-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to establish a pattern for the use of land
and buildings based upon the Master Plan and enacted in order to promote
and protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and the
general welfare of the people. This chapter is intended to regulate the use
of land within zoning districts; secure safety from fire, panic and other
dangers; provide adequate light and air; promote orderly development;
avoid undue concentration of population; prevent the overcrowding of land
or buildings; establish standards of development; limit congestion in the
streets; prohibit incompatible uses; regulate the alteration of existing
buildings; protect against hazards; conserve the taxable value of land;
preserve open space, historic and natural features; permit the development
of land in accordance with the purposes of the low- and moderate-income
provisions of this chapter; and encourage the inclusion of aesthetics,
amenities of living and a balance of public services.
§ 250-3. Interpretation; greater restrictions to control.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum
requirements. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than other
provisions of law, the provisions of this chapter shall control. Where other
provisions of law require greater restrictions than this chapter, the
provisions of such other laws shall control.
§ 250-1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-3
238:411

ARTICLE II
Word Usage and Definitions
§ 250-4. Word usage and definitions.
A. Word usage. For the purpose of this chapter, all words used in the
present tense include the future tense. All words used in the plural
number include the singular number, and all words in the singular
number include the plural number, unless the natural construction of
the word indicates otherwise. The word "shall' is mandatory and
directory. The word "used" includes "designed, intended or arranged to
be used." Any word or term not defined herein shall be used with a
meaning of standard usage, unless such word or term is defined in the
Municipal Land Use Law,82 and then that definition shall apply.
B. Definitions.
(1) For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined
as follows:
ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE — A subordinate
use clearly incidental and related to the principal structure,
building or use of the land and located on the same lot as that of
the principal structure, building or use. (See § 250-22A.)[Amended
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 20-1998]
AGRICULTURE — The growing and harvesting of crops or the
raising and breeding of livestock, with accessory buildings
incidental to agricultural uses.
ALTERATIONS OR ADDITIONS, STRUCTURAL — Any change in
supporting members of a building or additions to a structure
requiring walls, foundations, columns, beams, girders, posts or
piers or the moving of a structure; any enlargement, whether by
extension of a side or by increased height.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and
all accompanying documents required by the provisions of this
chapter or the Township's Subdivision Ordinance or Site Plan
Ordinance83 or by the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law,
Chapter 291 of the Laws of 1975, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., as
heretofore or hereafter amended, which may be required for the
approval of a subdivision plot, site plan, conditional use, zoning
variance or direction for the issuance of any permit for
development approval.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A portion of a residential dwelling
containing sleeping accommodations without individual cooking
facilities which are used, let or hired out for compensation for the
82.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
83.Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Subdivision of Land, and Ch. 196, Site Plan Review,
respectively.
§ 250-4 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-4
238:413
use of temporary guests. A central dining area may be utilized to
furnish meals only to the guests, but individual kitchen facilities
and restaurant service to the general public are prohibited. The
owner of the establishment must reside on the premises.[Added
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 22-1998]
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof, supported by such things
as columns, posts, piers or walls, including tents, lunch wagons,
trailers, dining cars, camp cars or other structures on wheels or
having other supports.
BUILDING AREA (GROUND COVERAGE) — The area occupied by
all the buildings on a lot, measured on a horizontal plane around
the periphery of the foundation and including the area under the
roof of any structure supported by columns but not having walls,
as measured around the outside of the outermost extremities of the
roof above the columns.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured to the
highest point of the building or structure from the average
elevation of the finished grade at the perimeter of the foundation.
No building or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height, with the
exception of the following structures, provided that such structures
are compatible with uses in the immediate vicinity: silos, barns
and other agricultural structures, church spires, cupolas, domes,
monuments, water towers, fire observation towers, transmission
towers, windmills, chimneys, smokestacks, derricks, conveyors,
flagpoles, masts, aerials, solar energy facilities and other similar
structures required to be placed above the roof level and not
intended for human occupancy. The height of multifamily housing
where low- and moderate-income housing is provided shall be
governed by those specific provisions.
BUILDING LINE — A line formed by the vertical projection to the
ground of the exterior surface of the building on any side. In case
of a cantilevered or projected section of a building, the vertical
projection will coincide with the surface nearest the lot line. A
building line shall not be closer to the street line than the required
front yard depth.
CELLAR — A story partly or completely underground, having more
than 1/2 of its clear height below the average level of the finished
grade at the perimeter of the building. A cellar shall not be
considered a half-story.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A paper certifying that the
premises complies, both as to construction and use, with the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and Building Code of the
Township of Westampton.84 No certificate of occupancy will be
issued until the finished grading of the lot has been completed
and verified by the Township Engineer and until the asphalt base
84.Editor's Note: See Ch. 99, Building Construction.
§ 250-4 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-4
238:414
course for the street abutting the lot has been installed, in a
manner satisfactory to the Township Engineer, the subbase for
the drive has been installed and all curbs, aprons, utilities, if any,
gutters, other necessary storm drainage to ensure proper drainage
of the lot and surrounding land and sidewalks to serve the lot and
structure for which the permit is requested have been installed.
Verification of the grading and improvements shall be made either
by the Township Engineer making a field inspection or by the
developer's engineer furnishing an as-built drawing, which drawing
is approved by the Township Engineer. The sight triangle shall be
cleared, and measures taken for soil stabilization, including topsoil
and seeding, are required.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning
district, only upon a showing that such use in a specified location
will comply with the conditions and standards for the location
or operation of such use, as contained in the Zoning Ordinance,
and upon the issuance of an authorization therefor by the Land
Development Board. The term "conditional use" was previously
referred to as a special exception or a use permitted with a special
use permit.
CONFERENCE CENTER — A building or combination of buildings
with meeting rooms, dining facilities and guest rooms and
accessory uses such as recreation areas, pools and spas in which
the guest rooms are occupied only by those who are attending
the conference or using the meeting rooms.[Added 4-28-1998 by
Ord. No. 8-1998]
CONVENIENCE STORE — A food market containing not more
than 6,000 square feet where prepared foods, magazines and
newspapers, cigarettes, dairy products and/or similar foods and
items sold for consumption or use elsewhere, including those
establishments where, as an accessory use of the premises,
prepared foods (e.g., meats, cheeses, soups, salads and like
products) may be sold over the counter in sandwiches or are
packaged to take out. The retail sale of gasoline and fuel to the
motoring public when combined with the convenience store use
shall constitute the operation of a service station and shall be
considered a principal use of a lot. When combined with a motor
vehicle service station, the minimum lot size of the convenience
store and service station shall be two acres.[Added 5-8-2001 by
Ord. No. 13-2001; amended 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 1-2017]
DECK — A flat open platform usually constructed of wood.[Added
7-22-1997 by Ord. No. 15-1997]
DECK, ATTACHED — If constructed more than 30 inches above
finish grade and attached to the principal building, shall be subject
to the setback requirement as outlined in § 250-7, Schedule of
Yard, Area and Bulk Requirements, for that zone for the principal
building.[Added 7-22-1997 by Ord. No. 15-1997]
§ 250-4 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-4
238:415
DECK, DETACHED — If constructed more than 30 inches above
finished grade, but not attached to the principal building, the deck
shall be subject to § 250-7, Schedule of Yard, Area and Bulk
Requirements, for that zone as an accessory structure.[Added
7-22-1997 by Ord. No. 15-1997]
DECK, GRADE LEVEL — If constructed less than 30 inches in
height above grade (measured from finished grade to the top of
the deck), not covered by a permanent roof, is not subject to
§ 250-7, Schedule of Yard, Area and Bulk Requirements, for that
zone.[Added 7-22-1997 by Ord. No. 15-1997]
DWELLING, DETACHED — A building detached from other
buildings for residence purposes by one family and which has its
own cooking, sleeping, sanitary and general living facilities.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE — A building containing two or more
dwelling units.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A detached building and dwelling unit
designed for and occupied by one family.[Amended 2-13-1996 by
Ord. No. 1-1996]
ESSENTIAL UTILITIES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities, telephone or municipal or other
governmental agencies of underground or overhead gas, electric,
steam, water or sewerage transmission or distribution systems,
including buildings, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes,
conduits, cables, fire company alarm boxes, police call boxes,
traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and
accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the
furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities, telephone
companies or municipal or other government agencies or for the
public health, safety or general welfare.
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit as a
single, nonprofit housekeeping unit, who are living together as a
stable and permanent living unit, being a traditional family unit or
the functional equivalent thereof.[Amended 2-13-1996 by Ord.
No. 1-1996]
FARM — One or more adjoining lots with at least five acres used
for agricultural purposes, including the residence and associated
outbuildings necessary for farming.
FARM STANDS — Farm stands for the sale of agricultural products
raised on the premises may be established, provided that the
setback of the stand is at least 30 feet from the curbline or edge of
pavement and that off-street parking is provided for at least three
vehicles. One temporary sign of not more than 24 square feet shall
be permitted only when stand is in operation and shall be placed in
a position which creates no traffic hazard or impediment.[Added
4-22-2003 by Ord. No. 12-2003]
§ 250-4 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-4
238:416
FENCE and WALL — A structure which permanently or temporarily
prohibits or inhibits unrestricted travel between properties or
portions of properties or between the street or public right-of-way
and a property.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The sum of the area of all floors of buildings
or structures compared to the total area of the site.[Added
4-28-1998 by Ord. No. 8-1998]
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building or space accessory to a residence
which provides the storage of motor vehicles and in which no
occupation, business or service for profit is carried on.
GRADE, FINISHED — The completed surfaces of lawns, walks and
roads brought to grades as shown on official plans. No certificate
of occupancy will be issued until the finished grade has been
completed.
GROSS ACRES — All of the acres within the boundaries of a site or
tract of land.[Added 6-14-2005 by Ord. No. 16-2005]
HISTORIC RESOURCE — Any site, building, area, structure or
object significant in American history, architecture, archaeology
and culture at the national, state, county, local or regional level.
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation being conducted wholly
or in part from a residence or its residential lot as an accessory
use. Such occupations shall be conducted solely by the resident
occupants of the residential building, except that no more than
one person not a resident of the building may be employed, and
provided also that no more than 900 square feet or the equivalent
of the first-floor area of the building, whichever is smaller, shall be
used for such purposes. No display of products shall be visible from
the street; the residential character of the building shall not be
changed; no sign shall be displayed exceeding a maximum of two
square feet; no occupational sounds shall be audible outside the
buildings; no article shall be offered for sale from the premises nor
shall any article be displayed outside; no machinery or equipment
shall be used which will cause interference with radio and
television reception in the neighboring residences; and the use
shall not reduce the parking or yard requirements of the principal
residential use.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — Buildings, structures and paved
surfaces which reduce the natural absorption of water.[Added
4-28-1998 by Ord. No. 8-1998]
INDUSTRIAL PARK — A tract comprehensively planned for
industrial uses, whether or not the buildings are erected in one
development stage or over a period of time.
JUNKYARD — Any area of land, with or without buildings, devoted
to the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk or debris, whether
§ 250-4 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-4
238:417
or not it is in connection with the dismantling, processing, salvage,
sale or other use or disposition thereof of any material whatsoever.
LAND — Includes the surface and the subsurface of the earth, as
well as improvements and fixtures on, above or below the surface
and any water found thereon.
LANDOWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
copartnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity having
legal title to the land. The holder of an option or contract to
purchase or other person having an enforceable proprietary
interest in such land may file an application as the landowner for
the purposes of this chapter.
LIGHT INDUSTRY — An activity which involves the fabrication,
reshaping, reworking, assembly or combining of products from
previously prepared materials and which does not involve the
synthesis of chemicals or chemical products or the processing
of any raw materials. This category includes light industrial
operations such as electronic, machine parts and small component
assembly.[Added 4-28-1998 by Ord. No. 8-1998]
LOADING SPACE — An off-street berth within a structure or in the
open, but on the same lot with a building or group of buildings,
for the temporary parking of a vehicle while loading or unloading.
Such space will have dimensions of not less than 12 feet in width,
35 feet in length and 14 feet in height.
LOT — A parcel of land abutting a street, but not including any
portion of a street, which is separate from any other parcel of
land. Any lot which is to be offered for sale and which is part
of an approved subdivision must adhere to the same standards
for cleanliness and removal of debris as are set forth under the
definition of "open space," which is part of this chapter.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the lot lines. Minimum
lot area for a single-family detached dwelling shall be computed
excluding any existing lakes, streams, floodways, floodplains, flood
hazard areas, wetlands, environmentally sensitive land, slopes
exceeding 20%, areas of the tract which contain an historic
resource and/or areas of the tract encumbered by either easement
or deed restriction which would prohibit construction of structures
normally allowed as either a principal or accessory use in that
zoning district.[Amended 5-15-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-9]
LOT, CORNER — A lot bounded on two or more sides by a public
right-of-way. Yards on both streets shall meet the front yard
requirements for that particular zone. The other two yards shall
meet the side yard requirements.
LOT DEPTH — A mean horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines, measured at right angles to a chord connecting the
intersectional points of the side lot lines and the front lot line.
§ 250-4 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-4
238:418
LOT FRONTAGE — The distance between the side lot lines,
measured along the street line. The minimum lot frontage shall
be 50 feet for a single-family detached residence.[Amended
9-21-1987 by Ord. No. 15-1987]
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line of a street on which a lot fronts or
abuts.
LOT LINE, REAR — A lot line other than another front lot line on
another street and which is the farthest lot line from the street.
Where there is any question, the Building Inspector shall designate
the rear lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line not a front lot line or a rear lot line,
including a lot line of the offset portion of a lot.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between the side lot lines, measured
at right angles to its depth at the building line. No lot shall be
less than 50 feet at the street line for a single-family detached
residence.[Amended 9-21-1987 by Ord. No. 15-1987]
MANDATORY DEVELOPMENT FEE — The fee paid pursuant to
a mandatory fee ordinance.[Added 12-14-2004 by Ord. No.
21-2004]
MANDATORY FEE ORDINANCE — An ordinance that prohibits
development pursuant to an existing permitted use in this chapter
or pursuant to a variance therefrom without compelling the
affected developer to contribute monies to the municipality’s
affordable housing fund.85[Added 12-14-2004 by Ord. No.
21-2004]
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — A place where gasoline or
other motor fuel or lubricating oil or grease for operating motor
vehicles is offered for sale at retail to the public, which may
include, but is not required to include, the sale of accessories,
oiling, greasing, washing and light motor vehicle repairs on the
premises; provided, however, that automobile wrecking, major
repairing of automobiles, including paint spraying or body fender
work, parking or storing of automobiles at the site, shall be deemed
part of the principal use or a permissible accessory use of a motor
vehicle service station. The term shall include a "gas and go" or
any other gasoline dispensing use where gasoline and/or alternate
fuels, including but not limited to diesel fuel, are sold from pumps
at retail to the motoring public even if no further service is
provided for the vehicle at the site. When combined with a
convenience store, a motor vehicle service station shall be
presumed the principal use on the lot upon which it is
located.[Added 5-8-2001 by Ord. No. 13-2001; amended
3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 1-2017]
85.Editor's Note: See § 250-58.1, Mandatory development fees.
§ 250-4 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-4
238:419
NET ACRES — Gross acres of a site or tract of land minus existing
ponds, lakes or streams; land containing slopes exceeding 15%;
and land classified as freshwater wetlands or wetland buffer acres
based on a wetlands delineation conducted in accordance with
the rules and regulations of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.[Added 6-14-2005 by Ord. No.
16-2005]
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building or
structure whose location upon a lot or size does not conform to the
regulations of this chapter.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot of record not having the minimum
width, frontage, depth or area for the zone in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use occupying a building, structure
or lot which does not conform to the use regulations of this chapter.
OFF-SITE COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING SIGN — A sign which
directs attention to a business, commodity, service or
entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than
the premises on which the sign is located.
OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENTS — Improvements made outside the
original tract to accommodate conditions generated inside the
original tract that are transferred off site as the result of the
proposed development.
OPEN SPACE — Open space, as defined in the Municipal Land Use
Law,86 which is to be offered to the Township for dedication or
presented to a homeowners' organization must, in either case, be
improved with good-quality grass rather then weeds. The property
must be cleaned, and all low brush, briars and debris must be
removed. No dead trees shall either be standing or lying on the
site. In some cases, appropriate compensatory plantings and/or
landscaping may be necessary, particularly where active recreation
facilities are proposed to be installed by the developer on the open
space. If any of the aforesaid open space includes either ponds
or streams, or both, said ponds or streams must be cleaned and
desilted prior to their offer of dedication to the municipality or
presentation to the homeowners' organization.
PARKING SPACE — An area either within a structure or in the
open for the parking of motor vehicles. The area of a parking
space is intended to be of sufficient area to accommodate the
exterior extremities of the vehicle, whether in addition thereto
wheel blocks are installed within this area to prevent the bumper
from overhanging one end of the parking space. The width and
length of each space shall be measured perpendicular to each
other and shall be as required by the provisions of this chapter,
86.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 250-4 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-4
238:420
regardless of the angle of the parking space to the access aisle or
driveway.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be
accepted by the Township Committee to guarantee the completion
of the required improvements before approval of the proposed
development, including performance bonds with responsible surety
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey, irrevocable
letters of credit or escrow agreements secured by cash or certified
check.
PONDS —
PORTABLE STORAGE UNIT — A unit greater in dimension than
three feet in length by three feet in width by three feet in height
rented or owned or for use by the property owner or occupant
for storage of personal items or used for the packing or storage
of items for permanently moving to or from the residence or for
temporarily storing items during a renovation to the main
residences or for the disposal of demolition debris. Portable storage
Ponds, streams and detention and retention basins offered
for dedication to the municipality or presented to the
homeowners' association must be cleaned and desilted prior to
their dedication or presentation. On any pond constructed in
the municipality for either detention, retention as an aesthetic
amenity or for recreational purposes, banks shall be no steeper
than 1 to 5, unless the developer can present during the
presentation of the plan sufficient reasons for deviation from
these standards.
(a)
It is the municipal policy not to accept for dedication manmade
structures made necessary by the development for
detention and retention. These structures should be proposed
for dedication to a homeowners' association to be formed
within the development which the drainage structure serves
or should be a part of one or more lots with maintenance
responsibility solely upon those residential building lots on
which the drainage structure is located or to be undertaken
by the homeowners' association. Appropriate documentation
assuring the continued maintenance of these structures must
be presented to the Land Development Board and reviewed
and approved by its Solicitor at the time of preliminary plat
submission and prior to approval of the preliminary plat.
Documentation must include the right of the Township to go
onto the lands in question, providing for adequate access,
to correct a deficient situation. It must be clearly expressed
that the municipality has the right but not the responsibility
to make said correction and that any costs incurred by the
municipality will constitute a lien upon those lands
encumbered by the maintenance responsibility. [Amended
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
(b)
§ 250-4 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-4
238:421
units include, but are not limited to, sea boxes, bulk storage
containers, portable on-demand storage containers, store-to-door
mobile transportation storage containers, roll-off containers or
other such similar containers. For purposes of this chapter, trash
dumpsters shall be deemed a portable storage unit.[Added
11-10-2009 by Ord. No. 14-2009]
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which is conducted the
main or principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.
Commercial and industrial developments and multifamily housing
developments may have more than one principal building per lot.
Any other form of residential development containing buildings
used for residential use may not have more than one principal
building per lot.
PRINCIPAL USE — A use which is the main or principal use of
the lot; it is the lot's first, chief or most important use. While
commercial or industrial developments and multifamily housing
developments may have more than one principal building per lot,
they may have only one principal use; however, mixed uses of more
than one principal commercial or industrial use may be located
on one lot if the Planning Board finds that the uses are part of a
single site plan, with cross easements for utilities and stormwater
management, and access, ingress and egress utilizing shared,
common driveways.[Added 5-8-2001 by Ord. No. 13-2001;
amended 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 1-2017]
PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT — Development, including subdivision, by
any Township or other governmental agency.
PUBLIC PURPOSE — The use of land by the Township Committee,
School Board or some officially created municipal agency or
authority.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES — Boats, campers, trailers, selfpropelled
mobile homes and related vehicles.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The total width and length of the course of
property along a street, watercourse, utility alignment or other
way and within which all improvements and rights-of-access are
confined.
SETBACK — The location of a building, as measured from the
foundation line of a building, including chimney and covered
porches, to the foundation line of another building or to the front,
side and rear yard property lines, whichever the case may be, the
distances being hereinafter specified.
SIGN — Any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display,
illustration or insignia used to advertise or promote the interest of
any person or product when the same is placed in a position to be
seen by the general public from any street or public way.
§ 250-4 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-4
238:422
SIGN, AREA OF — The area included within the frame or edge of
the sign. Where the sign has no such frame or edge, the area shall
be defined by an enclosed four-sided (straight sides) geometric
shape which most closely outlines said sign.
SOIL QUALITY — Due to the highly acidic soil frequently found in
the Township of Westampton, the following requirements must be
met with respect to all development in those locations where yards
or open space is proposed or required. Neutralizing highly acidic
soil with lime is not possible when pH levels are below 4.0. The soil
must be covered with 12 inches of soil having a pH of 5.0 or higher.
"Highly acidic soil" is soil defined as soil with a pH level below 4.0.
Soil tests will be required for each lot of a development where dark
clay soil, which is indicative of low pH, appears to exist or on any
lots which are filled with excavated material.
STORY — That part of a building between the surface of any floor
and the next floor above it or, in its absence, then the finished
ceiling or roof above it.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway,
viaduct, alley or other way which is an existing state, county or
municipal roadway, or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore
approved pursuant to law or approved by official action pursuant to
the Municipal Land Use Act, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., as amended,
or a street or way on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of
the County Clerk prior to the appointment of a Land Development
Board and the grant to such Board of the power to receive plats. It
shall include the lands between the street lines, whether improved
or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters,
sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines.
Street classifications shall be those set forth in the adopted Master
Plan.[Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
STREET LINE — The edge of the street right-of-way forming the
dividing line between the street and a lot.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed, assembled or erected with a
fixed location above, on or below the ground or an attachment to
something having such fixed location.
SWIMMING POOLS — Facilities constructed above or below
ground having a depth of more than two feet or a water surface
of 100 square feet or more and designed and maintained for
swimming purposes. "Swimming pools" shall include all buildings,
structures, equipment, aprons and appurtenances, all of which
shall be considered part of the total improvement constructed on
the site.
TEMPORARY BUILDING — An enclosed or semienclosed structure
utilized by contractors, architects or materialmen during the
construction of projects. The use of said building must be affiliated
with the construction of the project and shall not be a temporary
§ 250-4 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-4
238:423
use for the use which will ultimately occupy the permanent
building. In no event shall the use made of such temporary building
be residential. "Temporary buildings" may include construction
trailers. No temporary building or construction trailer shall be
present on the site for a period which exceeds six months from its
inception. If a longer period of time is deemed necessary by the
contractor or developer, a use variance for such extended period of
time must be obtained.
WETLANDS — Those areas which are designated as such by either
the United States Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands
Inventory or which meet the definition for wetlands set forth by
the State of New Jersey in either statute or administrative
regulation.[Amended 5-15-1989 by Ord. No. 9-1989]
YARD — An open space extending between the closest point of any
building and a lot line or street line. All yard dimensions shall be
measured horizontally and at right angles to either a straight street
line, lot line or building facade or perpendicular to the point of
tangent of curved lines and facades. The front yard shall be the
area extending across the full width of a lot line between the street
line and the building. The rear yard is the open space extending
across the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and the
building. The side yard is an open space extending from the front
yard to the rear yard and lying between each side lot line and the
closest point of a building.
(2) General. Any word or term not defined above but defined in §§ 3,
3.1, 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4 of the Municipal Land Use Law, Chapter 291 of
the Laws of New Jersey 1975 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-3 to 40:55D-7), shall
be defined as the same is defined in those sections. In the case of
conflict with this chapter, the definitions contained in the Municipal
Land Use Law shall prevail.
§ 250-4 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-4
238:424
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 250-5. Land use procedures. [Amended 6-9-1998 by Ord. No.
13-1998]
Administrative provisions dealing with this chapter and applications to
the Land Development Board are set forth in the Land Use Procedures
Ordinance of the Township of Westampton, Chapter 149 of the codified
ordinances of the Township.
§ 250-6. Fees and escrows. [Amended 6-9-1998 by Ord. No.
13-1998]
A. For each application (includes variance, conditional use, appeal from
decision of Administrative Officer or Construction Official or
interpretation of a zoning map or ordinance) to the Land Development
Board not accompanied by a subdivision or site plan application, the fee
will be $100. [Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998;
4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 8-2012]
B. A request for subdivision or site plan approval accompanying the above
application will require filing of a separate application and the
appropriate fee.
C. Escrows; professional review fee. Each of the above applications to the
Land Development Board shall be accompanied by an escrow in the
amount of $500. [Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998;
4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 8-2012]
(1) Sums not utilized in the review process shall be returned to the
applicant. If additional sums are deemed necessary, the applicant
shall be notified of the required additional amount and shall add
such sum to the escrow.
(2) If the application for any of the above is accompanied by a request
for a subdivision or site plan, the appropriate escrow amount shall
accompany that application.87
87.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, regarding certificates of nonconformity, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 8-2012.
§ 250-5 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-6
238:425

ARTICLE IV
Schedule of Yard, Area and Bulk Requirements
§ 250-7. Schedule.88
The schedule of regulations entitled "Schedule of Yard, Area and Bulk
Requirements, Township of Westampton Zoning Ordinance," attached
hereto, applying to the uses of land and buildings, the yards and other open
spaces to be provided contiguous thereto and all other matters contained
therein, as indicated for the various zones established by this chapter, is
hereby declared to be part of this chapter. The regulations listed for each
zone, as designated, are hereby prescribed for such zones, subject to the
other provisions in this chapter, and shall be deemed to be the minimum
requirements in every instance of their application.
88.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Yard, Area and Bulk Requirements is located at the end of
this chapter.
§ 250-7 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-7
238:427

ARTICLE V
Establishment of Zones; Map
§ 250-8. Zones established. [Amended 4-28-1998 by Ord. No.
8-1998; 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 1-2006; 10-12-2010 by Ord. No.
12-2010; 6-23-2015 by Ord. No. 8-2015]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Township of Westampton is divided into
the following zones:
R-1 Residential
R-2 Residential
R-3 Residential
R-4 Residential
R-5 Residential - governmental office building
R-6 Residential
R-7 Residential
R-8 Residence District
B-1 Business
C Commercial
OR-1 Office Research
MCD Medical Campus District Overlay Zone
OR-2 Office Research
OR-3 Office Research
I Industrial
§ 250-9. Zoning Map.89
The boundary lines of all zones shall be shown on a map attached to and
made a part of this chapter and known as the "Zoning Map of the Township
of Westampton." Said map and all notations and references thereon are
hereby incorporated into and declared to be a part of this chapter.
89.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 250-8 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-9
238:429

ARTICLE VI
Use Regulations
§ 250-10. R-1 Residential Zone.
The following regulations shall apply in the R-1 Residential Zone:
§ 250-11. R-2 Residential Zone.
The following regulations shall apply in the R-2 Residential Zone:
A. Permitted uses:
(1) One-family detached dwellings on one-acre lots where public water
and sewers are available. On-site water and sewers will be
permitted where public facilities are unavailable. Density of
development shall not exceed one dwelling unit per net acre.
[Amended 6-14-2005 by Ord. No. 16-2005]
(2) Farms. If the farm exceeds 100 acres in size, one additional
dwelling unit for agricultural employee housing shall be allowed
without necessity of subdivision or variance.
B. Permitted accessory buildings and structures:
(1) Private garages and carports.
(2) Private greenhouses not operated for profit.
(3) Animal shelters for domestic pets, provided that the building area
does not exceed 25 square feet.
(4) Storage buildings of 200 square feet or less in area.
(5) Private swimming pools accessory to the residential use.
(6) Solar energy systems, subject to § 250-22.1. [Added 8-9-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-2011]
C. Permitted conditional uses: [Amended 11-14-2000 by Ord. No.
18-2000]
(1) Churches.
(2) Satellite antennas.
(3) Planned retirement communities.
A. Permitted uses: [Amended 6-14-2005 by Ord. No. 16-2005]
(1) One-family detached dwellings on one-acre lots where public water
and sewers are available. On-site water and sewers will be
permitted where public facilities are unavailable. Density for
projects developed under this subsection should not exceed one
unit per net acre.
§ 250-10 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-11
238:431
§ 250-12. R-3 and R-4 Residential Zones.
The following regulations shall apply in the R-3 and R-4 Residential Zones:
(2) One-family detached dwellings on lots of 20,000 square feet with
both public water and sewers required. Density for projects
developed under this subsection shall not exceed two units per net
acre.
B. Permitted accessory buildings and structures:
(1) Private garages and carports.
(2) Private greenhouses not operated for profit.
(3) Animal shelters for domestic pets, provided that the building area
does not exceed 25 square feet.
(4) Storage buildings of 200 square feet or less in area.
(5) Private swimming pools accessory to the residential use.
(6) Solar energy systems, subject to § 250-22.1. [Added 8-9-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-2011]
C. Uses permitted with a conditional use permit:
(1) Churches.
(2) Satellite antennas.
(3) Bed-and-breakfast facilities. [Added 11-10-1998 by Ord. No.
22-1998]
A. Permitted uses. [Amended 8-12-1997 by Ord. No. 14-1997]
(1) One-family detached dwellings on one acre lots, provided that no
more than three dwelling units are involved if the development
application is not classified as a major subdivision. Each dwelling
unit must be served by public water and sewer where available. Onsite
water and sewers will be permitted where public facilities are
unavailable.
(2) One-family detached dwellings on lots of 20,000 square feet with
both public water and sewers required, provided that no more than
three dwelling units are involved if the development application is
not classified as a major subdivision.
(3) Multifamily housing at a net density of 10 dwelling units per acre
containing a fifteen-percent mandatory set-aside for low- and
moderate-income rental housing built pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter. All affordable rental units constructed under this
provision shall help satisfy the Township’s rental obligation, as
specified in the fair share plan. It is the intent of the Township to
§ 250-11 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-12
238:432
§ 250-13. R-5 Residential Zone.
The following regulations shall apply in the R-5 Residential Zone:
delete this subsection upon the approval by COAH, or the Courts,
of a housing element and fair share plan that demonstrates that
the Township’s rental obligation has been satisfied. [Amended
2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 1-2006]
(4) One-family detached dwellings on lots of less than 20,000 square
feet or larger lots which are part of a major subdivision, when a
mandatory set-aside for low- and moderate-income housing is
provided according to the requirements of § 250-27.
B. Permitted accessory buildings and structures for single-family detached
housing:
(1) Private garages and carports.
(2) Private greenhouses not operated for profit.
(3) Animal shelters for domestic pets, provided that the building area
does not exceed 25 square feet.
(4) Storage buildings of 200 square feet or less in area.
(5) Private swimming pools accessory to the residential use.
(6) Solar energy systems, subject to § 250-22.1. [Added 8-9-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-2011]
C. Permitted accessory buildings and structures for multifamily housing:
[Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 20-1998]
(1) Private swimming pools accessory to the residential use.
(2) Storage buildings of 200 square feet or less in area.
D. Uses permitted with a conditional use permit:
(1) Hospitals and nursing homes, subject to the regulations contained
in this chapter.
(2) Churches.
(3) Satellite antennas.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) One-family detached dwellings on one-acre lots where public water
and sewers are available. On-site water and sewers will be
permitted where public facilities are unavailable. Density of
development shall not exceed one dwelling unit per net acre.
[Amended 6-14-2005 by Ord. No. 16-2005]
§ 250-12 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-13
238:433
§ 250-14. R-6 Residential Zone.
The following regulations shall apply in the R-6 Residential Zone:
(2) Schools, parks and office buildings for governmental entities or
agencies, including state, county and Township.
(3) Golf courses.
(4) Cemeteries.
B. Permitted accessory buildings and structures for single-family detached
housing:
(1) Private garages and carports.
(2) Private greenhouses not operated for profit.
(3) Animal shelters for domestic pets, provided that the building area
does not exceed 25 square feet.
(4) Storage buildings of 200 square feet or less in area.
(5) Private swimming pools accessory to the residential use.
(6) Solar energy systems, subject to § 250-22.1. [Added 8-9-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-2011]
C. Uses permitted with a conditional use permit:
(1) Hospitals and nursing homes, subject to the regulations contained
in this chapter.
(2) Churches.
(3) Satellite antennas.
A. Permitted uses: [Amended 6-14-2005 by Ord. No. 16-2005]
(1) One-family detached dwellings on one-acre lots where public water
and sewers are available. On-site water and sewers will be
permitted where public facilities are unavailable. Density for
projects developed under this subsection should not exceed one
unit per net acre.
(2) One-family detached dwellings on lots of 20,000 square feet with
both public water and sewers required. Density for projects
developed under this subsection shall not exceed two units per net
acre.
(3) One-family detached dwellings, cluster type, on lots of a minimum
of 15,000 square feet with all public water and sewers required.
The land saved as a result of building under the cluster provisions
of this chapter shall be set aside as open space in accordance with
the provisions for the preservation of open spaces as set forth in
§ 250-13 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-14
238:434
§ 250-14.1. R7 Residential Zone. [Added 2-28-2006 by Ord. No.
1-2006]
The purpose of the R-7 Residential Zone is to provide for the construction
of a residential development consisting of a total of 578 dwelling units that
is intended to assist the Township of Westampton in satisfying a portion
of its fair share housing obligation. The development shall consist of a
combination of age-restricted, detached, single-family dwelling units; nonage-
restricted, attached, dwelling units; and age-restricted, attached,
rental, dwelling units set aside for low- and/or moderate-income
households. The R-7 Residential Zone shall encompass the following
properties, all of which are currently located within the I Industrial Zone
and which shall hereafter be referred to as the "tract": Block 402, Lot 7;
Block 403, Lot 10; Block 806, Lot 2; Block 402, Lots 6 and 6.01; and Block
403, Lots 7, 8, and 9. The following regulations shall apply in the R-7 Zone.
the Municipal Land Use Law. Said open space so set aside shall
not be less than 10% of the total tract under development. The
computation of density for development under the cluster provision
is not to exceed two units per net acre.
B. Permitted accessory buildings and structures:
(1) Private garages and carports.
(2) Private greenhouses not operated for profit.
(3) Animal shelters for domestic pets, provided that the building area
does not exceed 25 square feet.
(4) Storage buildings of 200 square feet or less in area.
(5) Private swimming pools accessory to the residential use.
(6) Solar energy systems, subject to § 250-22.1. [Added 8-9-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-2011]
C. Uses permitted with a conditional use permit:
(1) Hospitals and nursing homes.
(2) Lodges and fraternal organizations.
(3) Churches.
(4) Satellite antennas.
A. Definitions. The following terms shall apply to the R-7 Residential Zone:
AGE-RESTRICTED DWELLING — A residential dwelling unit that
qualifies as "55 and over" restricted housing in accordance with the
Federal Fair Housing Act, as amended, and the regulations
promulgated thereunder.
COAH — The New Jersey State Council on Affordable Housing.
§ 250-14 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-14.1
238:435
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached building and dwelling unit
designed for and occupied by one family.
DWELLING, ATTACHED — A building consisting of two or more
dwelling units, such as but not limited to townhouses, row houses,
garden apartments or flats.
HUD — The United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development.
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — May include items such as but not
limited to clubhouse(s) and other buildings for recreational uses, bike
path(s), walking path(s), tennis court(s), bocce court(s), swimming
pool(s) and similar recreational improvements and related parking.
SIGN, DEVELOPMENT IDENTIFICATION — A one-sided or two-sided
sign located at an entrance from a public street to a development within
the R-7 Zone, the purpose of which is to provide the name and other
identifying information about said development.
B. Permitted principal uses:
(1) Age-restricted, detached, single-family dwelling units shall
comprise approximately 276 market-rate dwelling units within the
R-7 Zone.
(2) Non-age-restricted, attached, market-rate dwelling units shall
comprise a maximum of 228 dwelling units within the R-7 Zone. Of
this total, a maximum of 112 may be twenty-four-foot-wide attached
dwelling units and approximately 116 shall be twenty-eight-footwide
attached dwelling units.
(3) Age-restricted, attached, dwelling units shall comprise a total of 24
dwelling units within a single building and with all such units set
aside for low- and/or moderate-income households as per current
COAH regulations (N.J.A.C. 5:93).
(4) A minimum of 50 dwelling units set aside for low- and/or moderateincome
households as per current COAH regulations (N.J.A.C.
5:93). These units are not limited to age-restricted rental units, nor
must the units be all attached units. A regional contribution
agreement (RCA) for some or all of the 50 affordable units may be
substituted in lieu of constructing the units on site, subject to the
approval of Westampton Township and a receiving municipality and
in compliance with COAH rules and regulations. The substitution is
also conditioned that the RCA, or a combination of an RCA and onsite
construction, shall total 50 dwelling units.
C. Permitted accessory uses and structures:
(1) Recreational facilities.
(2) Off-street parking facilities.
§ 250-14.1 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-14.1
238:436
(3) Utility structures.
(4) Development identification signs.
(5) Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal permitted uses.
D. Conditional uses permitted: none.
E. Tract requirements.
(1) Number of units: The maximum number of residential dwelling
units shall be 578 minus any units that are included in an approved
regional contribution agreement.
(2) Buffers:
(a) Buffer strips shall be provided along all tract property lines as
set forth in this subsection, except where a watercourse and
related regulatory buffer comprise the property boundary line.
However, streets and driveways providing access to any
development in the R-7 Zone may traverse a buffer strip. A
pipeline or other utility easement and stormwater
management structures or facilities of any kind whatsoever
may be located within a required buffer area.
(b) Minimum buffer to all tract property lines: 25 feet.
(c) Minimum buffer to the New Jersey Turnpike: 100 feet.
(d) A twenty-foot portion of a required buffer shall be comprised of
a six-foot-high visual barrier of evergreen plantings set in a
double row, staggered and spaced to accomplish this purpose
or, at the developer's option, landscaped with a mixture of
evergreen and deciduous plantings designed to accomplish
this goal.
(3) Projections into required yards. Ornamental building features, such
as bay windows, fireplaces and chimneys and building overhangs,
may project up to two feet into required yards (attached decks,
patios, canopies, awnings, etc. may project within the required rear
yard setback to a distance not to exceed 1/2 of the required rear
yard setback for the type of building to which it is attached).
(4) Open space: A total of 20% of the tract shall be reserved for a
combination of open space and recreational facilities. Wetland
areas, wetland transition areas, detention basins and required
buffers may be considered open space for the purposes of this
requirement.
(5) Recreational facilities. The following recreational facilities shall be
provided for the exclusive use of residents of age-restricted
dwellings within the R-7 Zone: a clubhouse, outdoor swimming
§ 250-14.1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-14.1
238:437
pool, bocce court(s), tennis court(s), decorative and safety fencing,
and related parking. Recreational facilities for non-age-restricted
dwellings shall be provided in conformance with § 250-22W of the
Zoning Ordinance, except that a contribution in the amount of
$2,000 per non-age-restricted market unit shall be paid in lieu of
constructing some or all of the required facilities, which sum shall
be paid to the Recreational Trust Fund. In the event that some
but not all of the recreational facilities set forth in § 250-22W of
the Zoning Ordinance are constructed, the value of those facilities
shall be deducted from the per-unit Recreational Trust Fund
contribution on a pro-rata basis.
(6) Development identification signs:
(a) The sign regulations in § 250-25 of this chapter shall not apply
to development identification signs within the R-7 Zone.
(b) A maximum of 2 single-sided or a single two-sided development
identification sign(s) shall be permitted at each entrance from
a public street to a development within the R-7 Zone.
(c) The maximum area of a development identification sign shall
not exceed 25 square feet on the face of the sign, which shall
include all lettering, wording, coloring and accompanying
designs and symbols, together with background, but excluding
any associated decorative elements or supporting framework,
such as landscaping, berming, fencing, stone or masonry
columns or walls, or any combination of the above or other
ornamentation or materials, provided that any sign and
associated decorative elements shall not exceed six feet in
height above finished grade.
(d) The minimum setback of a development identification sign
from a public street shall be 15 feet from the curbline.
(e) A development identification sign may be located a minimum of
10 feet from a private road or driveway providing access to a
development within the R-7 Zone, or it may be located on a
boulevard or other island or median, and shall be permitted a
minimum of 15 feet from the projected intersection of the
curblines of cross streets. All signs, including those within
public street rights-of-way, shall be maintained by a
homeowners' association.
F. Area, yard and building requirements:
(1) Age-restricted one-family dwellings.
(a) Minimum lot area: 5,500 square feet.
§ 250-14.1 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-14.1
238:438
(b) Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet. At least 18 feet in length
shall be provided from a garage door to the outside edge of
street sidewalks.
(c) Minimum side yard setback (one/both): four feet/10 feet.
(d) Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet.
(e) Minimum distance between buildings: 10 feet.
(f) Maximum building height: 35 feet/2 1/2 stories.
(g) Lot frontage: 36 feet at the right-of-way line.
(h) Lot width: 50 feet at the building setback line.
(2) Non-age-restricted attached dwellings.
(a) Minimum lot area: 2,500 square feet.
(b) Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet. At least 18 feet in length
shall be provided from a garage door to the outside edge of
street sidewalks.
(c) Minimum side yard setback: 15 feet, except zero feet to a
common wall.
(d) Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet.
(e) Minimum distance between buildings:
[1] Side to side: 30 feet.
[2] Rear to rear: 60 feet.
[3] Side to rear: 45 feet.
(f) Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
(g) Minimum lot frontage: 15 feet at the right-of-way line.
(h) Minimum lot width: 24 feet at the building setback line.
(i) Maximum dwelling units per structure: eight.
(3) Age-restricted attached dwellings.
(a) Minimum building setback from all property lines, including
streets: 40 feet.
(b) Minimum building setback from parking areas: 15 feet.
(c) Minimum distance between principal buildings: 35 feet.
(d) Maximum building height: 45 feet/3 1/2 stories.
(e) Maximum dwelling units per structure: 24.
§ 250-14.1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-14.1
238:439
(4) Accessory buildings and structures.
(a) Any accessory building or structure attached to the principal
building shall adhere to the yard requirements for the principal
building.
(b) No accessory building or structure shall be closer to the front
property than the rear building line of the principal building.
(c) No accessory building, structure or use shall be located within
six feet of a rear or side yard property line.
(5) Utility structure lot.
(a) Minimum lot size: 2,500 square feet.
(b) Minimum setback from all property lines, including streets: 10
feet.
(c) Minimum setback from parking areas: five feet.
(d) Maximum height: 20 feet.
G. Minimum parking requirements.
(1) Residential uses: In accordance with the requirements of the New
Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1
et seq.).
(2) Clubhouses: One space per 100 square feet.
(3) Common swimming pools: 20 spaces, except that this figure may be
reduced to 10 spaces for a pool that is located within 100 feet of a
clubhouse serving the development.
H. Site plan standards and review.
(1) The standards set forth in Chapter 196 of the Code of Ordinances of
the Township of Westampton shall apply to all development within
the R-7 Zone, except for the following subsections:
(a) Section 196-8A, parking and loading.
(b) Section 196-8B(5), fencing around parking lots in residential
zones.
(c) Section 196-9A(18), submission of elevations and floor plans.
(d) Section 196-10, fire lanes in relation to attached age-restricted
housing.
(2) Building elevations and floor plans shall be submitted with
applications for final site plan and/or subdivision approval.
I. Design standards and improvements.
§ 250-14.1 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-14.1
238:440
(1) All of the following improvements, including but not limited to
streets, curbs and/or gutters, pavement, street grades, sidewalks,
street signs, water mains, sanitary sewers and storm sewers and
any other improvements subject to the requirements of the New
Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards, shall be in
accordance with said New Jersey Residential Site Improvement
Standards, as amended.
(2) For all other improvements not controlled by the New Jersey
Residential Site Improvement Standards, as amended, the
standards set forth in Chapter 215 of the Code of Ordinances of the
Township of Westampton shall apply, except for the following
subsections:
(a) Section 215-7F shall be modified to provide for a ten-year
period of vesting.
(b) Section 215-9B shall be modified to require documents in
conformance with Burlington County filing requirements, as
amended.
(c) Section 215-12G, submission of protective covenants and/or
deed restrictions.
(d) Section 215-13K, cross sections and profiles of streets.
(e) Section 215-14A(7), topsoil protection.
(f) Section 215-14A(9)(h), annual sewer rental.
(g) Section 215-14A(9)(i), sewer connection charge.
(h) Section 215-14B, inspection of improvements.
(i) Section 215-15, performance guarantees, inspection of
improvements, maintenance guarantees and inspection fees
shall be submitted and/or completed in conformance with
Section 40:55D-53 of the Municipal Land Use Law.
(j) Section 215-16, engineering fees shall be paid in conformance
with Section 40:55D-53 of the Municipal Land Use Law.
(k) Section 215-19A(10), soil erosion and sediment control.
(l) Section 215-19A(14)(a)[2], manholes.
(m) Section 215-19A(15), drainage and drainage improvements.
(3) Additional standards:
(a) Copies of any protective covenants or deed restrictions
applying to the land being subdivided should be submitted with
the final application for approval.
§ 250-14.1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-14.1
238:441
(b) The homeowner or property owner shall pay an annual sewer
fee to the sewer authority or agency having jurisdiction over
the sanitary sewer collection system. The developer shall pay
the sewer connection charge to the Willingboro Sewer
Authority.
(c) Soil erosion and sediment control plans shall be submitted to
the Burlington County Soil Conservation District for
certification as part of the final application for each section of
the development.
(d) Manholes shall be spaced in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:14A-23.8.
(e) Drainage and ditch swales shall be stabilized in accordance
with the Soil Conservation District standards.
(f) Preliminary subdivision submissions shall include all
engineering information that is necessary and normally
required to produce a complete set of properly engineered
construction plans of the proposed improvements.
(g) All of the improvements required by this subsection shall be
subject to inspection and approval by the Township Engineer,
who shall be notified by the developer at least 24 hours prior to
the start of construction.
(h) Streetlighting shall be designed in conformance with
§ 215-19A(9), except that an alternative design may be
approved subject to the payment of all installation costs by the
developer and the payment of all maintenance and operating
costs by the homeowners' association.
J. General performance standards.
(1) Swimming pools shall be constructed in conformance with all
applicable construction and building codes.
(2) Recreation facilities shall be provided in conformance with
§ 250-22W of the Zoning Ordinance, except that a contribution in
lieu of constructing some or all of the required facilities may be
paid to the Township Recreation Trust Fund. The contribution shall
be $2,000 per non-age-restricted, market-rate dwelling unit.
(3) Restrictions on similarity of design. With regard to attached
housing units, the developer shall, to the extent feasible, alter the
exterior of the buildings or structures in order to provide variation
in appearance (accent elements, color, material or design), except
where the similarity in appearance is an element of the design. The
front facade of any attached housing dwelling unit shall not
continue on the same plane for a distance of more than the width of
two connected dwelling units and all offsets between front facades
§ 250-14.1 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-14.1
238:442
shall be at least two feet in depth. If garages are to be provided,
they shall be an integral part of the structure and design scheme.
K. Age-restricted housing. A minimum of 50% of all dwelling units in a
housing development within the R-7 Residential Zone shall be
designated as age-restricted dwellings. Approval of an age-restricted
housing project shall be conditioned upon the submission by the
applicant to the approving board attorney of form-restrictive covenants
to be included in the deeds to any and all age-restricted dwelling units
to ensure that qualifications under the Federal Fair Housing Act, as
amended, shall at all times be maintained.
L. Affordable housing requirements.
(1) Low- and moderate-income housing units within developments in
the R-7 Zone shall comply with the following subsections of Article
VIII of the Zoning Ordinance unless such subsections are not in
compliance with current Council of Affordable Housing rules and
regulations:
(a) Section 250-50, Affordability guidelines.
(b) Section 250-51, Administrative procedures.
(c) Section 250-52, Foreclosure.
(d) Section 250-53, Covenants.
(e) Section 250-54, Exemptions.
(f) Section 250-56, Breach of provisions.
(2) Inclusionary development set-aside. A total of 24 age-restricted
affordable attached dwelling units in a development in the R-7 Zone
shall be set aside for low- and/or moderate-income rental
households in accordance with the provisions of this section. An
additional 50 dwelling units in a development in the R-7 Zone shall
be set aside for low- and/or moderate-income households in
accordance with the provisions of this section. These units are not
restricted to age-restricted rental and/or attached dwelling units.
(3) The developer of a housing development constructed in accordance
with this section may fund the transfer of up to 50 affordable
housing units to a receiving municipality through Westampton
Township's participation in a regional contribution agreement
(RCA), in lieu of constructing the same number of units in an RCA
on site. The per-unit fee for transferred units shall be up to a
maximum of $35,000, subject to the terms of the judgment of
repose.
(4) Phasing plan:
§ 250-14.1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-14.1
238:443
§ 250-14.2. R-8 Residence Zone.
The purpose of the R-8 Residence Zone is to provide for the construction
of residential development consisting of a maximum of 75 dwelling units
that is intended to assist the Township of Westampton in satisfying a portion
of its fair share housing obligation. The development shall consist of nonage-
restricted, attached, rental, dwelling units primarily for persons with
disabilities and their families and set aside for low- and moderate-income
households. The following regulations shall apply in the R-8 Residence
Zone:
(a) For developments subject to the judgment of repose, the
developer shall, within ninety (90) days of the execution of the
judgment of repose, provide to the Township either a cash
payment or a letter of credit in a form acceptable to the
Township in an amount equal to funding the entire fifty-unit
regional contribution agreement. In addition, prior to the
construction of the last unit comprising 75% of the market
units, the 24 age-restricted affordable attached rental units
shall be completed.
(b) For developments not subject to the judgment of repose,
affordable units to be constructed on site shall satisfy the
schedule set forth in § 250-42 of this Code.
A Regional Contribution Agreement proposed to satisfy a
portion of the on-site affordable housing obligation shall be
funded by the developer within 90 days of final site plan or
subdivision approval of any section of the development. The
developer shall provide to the Township either a cash payment
or a letter of credit in a form acceptable to the Township in
an amount equal to funding the entire regional contribution
agreement.
M. Relationship to other sections of the combined land use ordinance: The
regulations of the R-7 Zone are intended to guide the orderly
development of this zone district in accordance with the parameters of
the referenced settlement agreement. Where there is a conflict
between the R-7 Zone regulations and any other regulations of the
Westampton Township Site Plan Review Ordinance, Land Subdivision
Ordinance or Zoning Ordinance, the regulations contained in this
section for the R-7 Zone shall apply unless otherwise specified in the
regulations of the R-7 Zone.
A. Definitions. The following terms shall apply to the R-8 Residence Zone:
COAH — The New Jersey State Council on Affordable Housing.
DWELLING, ATTACHED — A building consisting of two or more
dwelling units, such as, but not limited to, town houses, row houses,
garden apartments or flats.
§ 250-14.1 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-14.2
238:444
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — Includes, but is not limited to, items
such as clubhouse(s) and other buildings for recreational uses, bike
path(s), walking path(s), tennis court(s), bocce court(s) and similar
recreational improvements and related parking.
SIGN, DEVELOPMENT IDENTIFICATION — A one-sided or two-sided
sign located at an entrance from a public street to a development within
the R-8 District, the purpose of which is to provide the name and other
identifying information about said development.
B. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Non-age-restricted, attached dwelling units primarily for persons
with disabilities and their families in multiple buildings, with all
such units set aside for low- and moderate-income rental
households as per current COAH regulations.
C. Permitted accessory uses and structures.
(1) Recreational facilities.
(2) Off-street parking facilities.
(3) Utility structures.
(4) Development identification signs.
(5) Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal permitted uses.
(6) Gatehouses and guardhouses.
D. Conditional uses permitted: none.
E. Tract requirements.
(1) Density: Seven dwelling units per gross acre.
(2) Buffers:
(a) Buffer strips shall be provided along all tract property lines as
set forth in this subsection, except where a watercourse and
related regulatory buffer comprise the property boundary line.
However, streets and driveways providing access to any
development in the R-8 District may traverse a buffer strip. A
pipeline or other utility easement and storm water
management structures or facilities of any kind whatsoever
may be located within a required buffer area.
(b) Minimum buffer to all tract property lines: 25 feet.
(c) A twenty-foot portion of a required buffer shall be comprised of
a visual barrier of evergreen plantings set in a double row,
staggered and spaced to accomplish this purpose or, at the
developer's option, landscaped with a mixture of evergreen
§ 250-14.2 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-14.2
238:445
and deciduous plantings designed to accomplish this goal.
Evergreen trees shall be six feet high at the time of initial
planting.
(3) Encroachments into required yards. Ornamental building features,
such as bay windows, fireplaces and chimneys, and building
overhangs, may project up to two feet into required yards.
(Attached decks, patios, canopies, awnings, etc., may project within
the required rear yard setback to a distance not to exceed 1/2 of the
required rear yard setback for the type of building to which it is
attached.)
(4) Open space. A total of 50% of the tract shall be reserved for a
combination of open space and recreational facilities. Wetland
areas, wetland transition areas and required buffers may be
considered open space for the purposes of this requirement.
(5) Recreational facilities. A community building/indoor recreation
facility that may contain on-site administrative and/or rental offices
shall be provided for the exclusive use of residents of the
development.
(6) Development identification signs. All signs shall comply with the
requirements contained in § 250-25.
F. Area, yard and building requirements.
(1) Non-age-restricted, attached dwellings.
(a) Setback requirements.
[1] Minimum setback from front property lines: 50 feet.
[2] Minimum setback from side and rear property lines: 35
feet.
(b) Minimum distance between buildings.
[1] Front to front: 60 feet.
[2] Side to side: 35 feet.
[3] Rear to rear: 50 feet.
[4] Side to rear: 50 feet.
(c) Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
(d) Minimum lot frontage: 800 feet.
(e) Maximum dwelling units per structure: 15.
(f) Minimum building setback from parking areas: 10 feet.
§ 250-14.2 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-14.2
238:446
(g) Minimum distance from garage door to outside edge of
sidewalk: 20 feet.
(2) Accessory buildings and structures.
(a) Any accessory building or structure attached to the principal
building shall adhere to the yard requirements for the principal
building.
(b) No accessory building or structure shall be closer to the front
property line than the rear building line of the principal
building.
(c) No accessory building, structure or use shall be located within
six feet of a rear or side yard property line.
(3) Utility structure lot.
(a) Minimum lot size: 2,500 square feet.
(b) Minimum setback from all property lines, including streets: 10
feet.
(c) Minimum setback from parking areas: five feet.
(d) Maximum height: 20 feet.
(e) Fence height: Security and perimeter fencing may be seven
feet high.
G. Minimum parking requirements.
(1) Parking spaces per dwelling unit: 1.8.
H. General requirements.
(1) Facilities for the placing, collection and removal of trash, garbage
and recyclables shall be provided for attached housing units.
Structures shall screen the facilities so that trash, garbage and
recyclables are not visible to the general public. Facilities shall
demonstrate compliance with recycling requirements.
(2) All installation of utilities on-site shall be underground.
(3) Pedestrian walks shall not be less than four feet in width and shall
be provided wherever normal pedestrian traffic will occur.
Pedestrian walks adjacent to parking space overhang areas shall be
at least six feet in width.
I. Low- and moderate-income requirements.
(1) All units classified as low- and moderate-income qualified units
shall satisfy all current COAH requirements as contained in N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1 et seq., as amended. These regulations include, but are
not limited to, the following:
§ 250-14.2 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-14.2
238:447
§ 250-15. Business 1 (B-1) Zone. [Added 4-28-1998 by Ord. No.
8-199890]
The following regulations shall apply in the Business 1 Zone:
(a) Fifty percent of all such units shall be affordable to low-income
households.
(b) Bedroom mix.
(c) Affordability controls.
(d) Affirmative marketing.
(2) Developments in the R-8 Residential Zone District that provide a
one-hundred-percent set-aside for low- and moderate-income units
shall be exempt from § 250-29, Mandatory development fees..
(3) All COAH-qualified units shall be constructed as rental units.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Retail sales establishments, limited to meat markets, seafood
markets, bakeries, specialty food stores and delicatessens,
convenience stores, art galleries and frame shops, antique stores,
jewelry stores, drug stores, home furnishing stores, sporting good
stores, gift shops, hobby shops, toy stores, book and magazine
stores, record and tape stores, video stores, camera stores, pet
shops, art supply stores, clothing stores, consignment shops, shoe
stores, hardware stores, package liquor stores, office supply stores,
fabric stores, paint and wall covering stores, electronic equipment
stores, appliance equipment stores and florists.
(2) Retail service establishments, limited to barber and beauty shops,
tailoring and dressmaking shops, dry-cleaning and laundering
operations, appliance repair shops, shoe repair shops, optical
services and optical clinics, printing and copying shops, mail
service, dance instructors, photography studios and upholsterers.
(3) Restaurants.
(4) Hotels and motels.
(5) Indoor recreation facilities limited to children's recreation
facilities, skating racquet clubs, health clubs, miniature golf and
golf learning centers.
(6) Flex space or office/service center involving at least 20% of the
total floor area as office, with the remaining floor area as
warehouse or light industry.
90.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 250-15, HOC Historic Office
Commercial Zone, as amended.
§ 250-14.2 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-15
238:448
(7) Light industry.
(8) Warehousing.
(9) Offices for business, executive, professional and administrative
purposes.
(10) Laboratories dedicated to research, design and experimentation.
(11) Computer and data processing centers and facilities.
(12) Banks and financial institutions.
(13) Conference centers.
(14) Medical and dental clinics and laboratories.
(15) Child-care centers.
(16) Agricultural uses.
(17) Public buildings and uses.
(18) Solar energy systems as a secondary principal use in addition to an
existing industrial or warehouse use, subject to § 250-22.1. [Added
8-9-2011 by Ord. No. 11-2011]
B. Accessory uses permitted:
(1) Off-street parking, loading and unloading.
(2) Signs.
(3) Accessory uses customarily incidental and subordinate to the
permitted uses, provided that the sale of gasoline from pumps at
retail to the motoring public shall not be allowed as an accessory
use to a convenience store. [Amended 5-8-2001 by Ord. No.
13-2001]
(4) Solar energy systems, subject to § 250-22.1. [Added 8-9-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-2011]
C. Conditional uses permitted (see § 250-26 for standards): office or
research park development.
D. Area, yard and bulk requirements are provided in the Schedule of Area,
Yard and Bulk Requirements - Table II, attached hereto.91
E. General zoning requirements:
(1) Buildings used for flex space or office/service center, light
industrial and warehousing shall be located at least 250 feet from
the right-of-way of Rancocas Road (County Route 626) and Route
541.
91.Editor's Note: Said table is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 250-15 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-15
238:449
§ 250-16. Commercial (C) Zone. [Added 4-28-1998 by Ord. No.
8-1998]
The following regulations shall apply in the Commercial Zone:
(2) Buildings used for retail sales establishments shall not exceed
60,000 square feet.
(3) Any application for subdivision shall include a concept plan
delineating the following:
(a) The relationship of the proposed lot to the potential future
development of the remainder of the tract, including any
provisions for shared or common access.
(b) Proposals for future circulation improvements for the entire
tract, with the goals of providing limited access to existing
streets and providing safe and efficient circulation between or
among parcels.
F. Parking and loading requirements:
(1) One space per 250 square feet of gross floor area for all uses except
laboratories, light industry, warehouses and restaurants.
(2) One space per 400 square feet of gross floor area for laboratories
and light industry.
(3) One space per 5,000 square feet of gross floor area for warehouses.
(4) One space per three seats for restaurants.
(5) Parking for flex space or office/service center shall be based on the
proposed mix of uses, with additional reserve parking provided as if
the buildings were completely occupied by office uses.
(6) See § 250-22Q for additional parking requirements.
(7) See § 250-22R for off-street loading requirements.
G. Screening and buffering requirements:
(1) Front yard buffers shall be planted to a depth of 25 feet from the
front lot line.
(2) Screen plantings shall be provided to a depth of 25 feet along
property lines where a nonresidential use abuts another
nonresidential use.
(3) Where nonresidential uses abut residential uses along a side or a
rear lot line, the landscaped screen shall be planted to a depth of 50
feet.
A. Permitted uses:
§ 250-15 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-16
238:450
(1) Retail sales establishments, limited to meat markets, seafood
markets, bakeries, specialty food stores and delicatessens,
convenience stores, art galleries and frame shops, antique stores,
jewelry stores, drug stores, home furnishing stores, sporting good
stores, gift shops, hobby shops, toy stores, book and magazine
stores with associated instructional activities, record and tape
stores, video stores, camera stores, pet shops, art supply stores,
clothing stores, consignment shops, shoe stores, hardware stores,
package liquor stores, office supply stores, fabric stores, paint and
wall covering stores, electronic equipment stores, appliance
equipment stores and florists.
(2) Retail service establishments, limited to barber and beauty shops,
tailoring and dressmaking shops, dry-cleaning and laundering
operations, appliance repair shops, shoe repair shops, optical
services and optical clinics, printing and copying shops, mail
service, dance instructors, health and physical activities,
photography studios and upholsterers.
(3) Restaurants.
(4) Banks and financial institutions, including drive-in facilities.
(5) Offices for professional, quasi-professional and business uses.
(6) Medical and dental clinics and laboratories.
(7) Theaters and bowling alleys.
(8) Car washes.
(9) Funeral homes and mortuaries.
(10) Lodges and fraternal organizations.
(11) Shopping centers.
(12) Child-care centers.
(13) Public buildings and uses.
B. Accessory uses permitted:
(1) Off-street parking.
(2) Garages to house delivery trucks or other commercial vehicles.
(3) Accessory uses customarily incidental and subordinate to the
permitted uses, provided that the sale of gasoline from pumps at
retail to the motoring public shall not be allowed as an accessory
use to a convenience store. [Added 5-8-2001 by Ord. No.
13-2001]
(4) Solar energy systems, subject to § 250-22.1. [Added 8-9-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-2011]
§ 250-16 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-16
238:451
§ 250-16.1. Medical Campus District Overlay Zone (MCD). [Added
6-23-2015 by Ord. No. 8-2015]
C. Conditional uses permitted (see § 250-26 for standards):
(1) Motor vehicle service stations.
(2) Hotels and motels.
(3) Hospitals and nursing homes.
D. Area, yard and bulk requirements are provided in the Schedule of Area,
Yard and Bulk Requirements - Table II, attached hereto.92
E. Parking and loading requirements:
(1) One space per 250 square feet of gross floor area for all uses except
for restaurants, theaters and bowling alleys.
(2) One space per three seats for restaurants and theaters.
(3) Four spaces per alley for bowling alleys.
(4) See § 250-22Q for additional parking requirements.
(5) See § 250-22R for off-street loading requirements.
F. Screening and buffering requirements:
(1) Front yard buffers shall be planted to a depth of 20 feet from the
front lot line.
(2) Screen plantings shall be provided to a depth of 20 feet along
property lines where a nonresidential use abuts another
nonresidential use.
(3) Where nonresidential uses abut residential uses along a side or
rear lot line, the landscaped screen shall be planted to a depth of 30
feet.
A. Purpose.
(1) To promote appropriate and controlled development along Route
541 in Westampton Township.
(2) To encourage large-scale master-planned medical campus
development to assist with developing a viable town center along
Route 541 as envisioned as a goal and objective of the Township
Vision Plan.
(3) To encourage such master-planned development on tracts of land
of adequate size which will include sufficient buffers, limitations on
signage, provision of pedestrian amenities, integration of
92.Editor's Note: Said table is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 250-16 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-16.1
238:452
architecture and flexibility in meeting the needs of medical-related
tenants, clients/customers and Township residents.
B. Applicability; effect on existing zoning.
(1) Property affected hereunder is limited to Block 804, Lot 7, and all
other lots with a minimum frontage of 2,000 feet along Route 541;
frontage along at least two existing public streets, one of which
shall be Route 541; and a minimum tract size of 100 acres.
(2) Such lands are hereby eligible for the Medical Campus
Development Zone, provided that the lot to be developed shall
satisfy the criteria hereinafter articulated. All existing underlying
zoning shall remain unchanged.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY — A licensed multiunit facility containing
individual dwelling units varying in area from 200 to 900 square feet
which provides a residential living environment assisted by congregate
meals, housekeeping and personal care services for persons 55 years
of age or older who have temporary or permanent difficulties with one
or more essential physical activities of daily living, such as feeding,
bathing, dressing or mobility or memory disorders. In addition to the
residential units, the facility may include customarily incidental
accessory uses for the residents, including, but not limited to, common
dining rooms, bathing areas, common areas, recreation and/or
rehabilitation facilities and equipment offices and other space
necessary to provide the above services.
BUFFER — An area within a property or site, generally adjacent to
and parallel with the property line, either consisting of trees, shrubs
or other landscaping and/or berms, designed to continuously limit the
view and control other impacts of the site from adjacent sites,
properties or roadways.
COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL FACILITY — Any residential arrangement,
public or private, other than an institution, in which one or more
developmentally disabled person resides under the sponsorship of the
New Jersey Department of Human Services pursuant to N.J.S.A.
30:6D-13, et seq., as amended. A family home in which all of the
developmentally disabled persons residing within are related to the
head of the household by blood, marriage or adoption is not a
community residential facility.
COMPREHENSIVE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY (CRC) — A facility
which has a primary purpose of providing housing and continuing care
for people 55 years of age or older or where either the husband or
wife is 55 years of age or older, and consists of independent apartment
units, assisted living units, skilled care nursing units and single-family
detached and attached residential dwelling units and which must
include comprehensive retirement community accessory uses.
§ 250-16.1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-16.1
238:453
COMPREHENSIVE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY ACCESSORY USES —
Within a comprehensive retirement community, any use reasonably
necessary for, or incidental to, the operation of the facility or for the
benefit or convenience of the residents and their guests, including, but
not limited to, kitchen and dining facilities, exercise and vocational
rooms, places of worship, indoor and outdoor recreational buildings
and uses, including swimming pools, retail and banking facilities,
beauty salons and barber shops, gift shops, classrooms, security
facilities, conference rooms, common areas, guest rooms,
administration, general, medical and other offices associated with the
CRC, postal center, pharmacy, maintenance facilities, hobby, craft and
music rooms, library, computer and television rooms, and heating and
cooling equipment structures, off-street parking signs as permitted
and garages, provided that the comprehensive retirement community
accessory use is for the use and benefit of the comprehensive
retirement community.
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY (CCRC) — A facility
which has a primary purpose of providing housing and continuing care
for people 55 years of age or older or where either the husband or
wife is 55 years of age or older, and consists of independent apartment
units, assisted living units, skilled care nursing units and/or continuing
care retirement community accessory uses all as defined herein and
as regulated by N.J.S.A. 52:27D-330 through 357, known as the
"Continuing Care Retirement Community Regulation and Financial
Disclosure Act." For purposes of this section, continuing care means the
provision of lodging, nursing, medical or other health-related services
at the same or another location to an individual pursuant to an
agreement effective for the life of the individual or for a period greater
than one year, including mutually terminable contracts, and in
consideration of the payment of an entrance fee with or without other
periodic charges to an individual who is 55 years of age or older, or
where either the husband or the wife is 55 years of age or older.
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY ACCESSORY USES
— Within a continuing care retirement community, any use reasonably
necessary for, or incidental to, the operation of the facility or for the
benefit or convenience of the residents and their guests, including, but
not limited to, kitchen and dining facilities, exercise and vocational
rooms, places of worship, indoor and outdoor recreational buildings
and uses, including swimming pools, retail and banking facilities,
beauty salons and barber shops, gift shops, classrooms, security
facilities, conference rooms, common areas, guest rooms,
administration, general, medical and other offices associated with the
CCRC, postal center, pharmacy, maintenance facilities, hobby, craft and
music rooms, library, computer and television rooms, and heating and
cooling equipment structures, off-street parking and loading areas as
required for the use of occupants of the CCRC and signs as permitted
and garages, provided that the continuing care retirement community
§ 250-16.1 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-16.1
238:454
accessory use is for the use and benefit of the continuing care
retirement community.
HOSPICE CARE FACILITY — A licensed facility providing at-home or
in-facility, or both, care services focused upon care and comfort of the
patient rather than cure, including medical care, pain management
and emotional and spiritual support to persons facing life-limiting or
terminal illness or injury.
NURSING HOME; LONG-TERM CARE FACILITY — A licensed facility
providing extended, intermediate or temporary skilled nursing and
related full-time convalescent or chronic care to persons who, by reason
of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for
themselves in addition to lodging and board or other health-related
services, or any combination of the foregoing.
PASSIVE OPEN SPACE or PASSIVE RECREATION AREAS — An
unimproved area of land which may include water set aside, dedicated,
designated, or reserved for public or private use and enjoyment which
utilizes and depends on the natural environment and requires no
significant modifications of that environment other than to provide
access. It permits such low-density uses as hiking, fishing, canoeing,
nature study, horseback riding, and bicycling. Passive open space
typically includes wooded areas, streams, lakes, and other varieties of
natural vegetative areas. For the purpose of this definition, detention
and retention basins represent a developed use of the land and are not
considered passive open space.
SKILLED CARE NURSING UNIT — A nursing bed or individual room
which provides board, shelter and twenty-four-hour skilled nursing and
medical care to chronic or convalescent patients. Subject to applicable
professional licensing requirements, skilled care nursing units may be
located in a nursing home, long-term care facility or continuing care
retirement community (CCRC).
D. Permitted principal uses.
(1) All types of medical and health-care-related uses, including, but not
limited to, hospitals, ambulatory surgical centers, medical clinics,
rehabilitation facilities, medical centers and similar uses, including
laboratories, conference facilities and other support services.
(2) Long-term care facility, nursing home, assisted living facility,
hospice care facility, continuing care retirement community.
(3) Health and fitness facility.
(4) Restaurants, hotels, medically related retail uses, pharmacies,
drugstores, flower and gift shops, banks and similar uses, subject
to the following special regulations:
(a) Drive-through restaurant facilities are prohibited.
§ 250-16.1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-16.1
238:455
(b) The sum of all nonmedical and non-health-care-related retail
uses shall not exceed 25% of the gross floor area of all
buildings on the tract.
(5) Hotels, subject to the standards set forth in § 250-26J.
E. Permitted accessory uses. Restaurants, day-care centers and lodging
for use only by employees, staff, visitors, conferees and patient families
shall be permitted as accessory uses without the limitations set forth in
Subsection D(4)(b) above. In addition to such accessory uses, air
transport (heliport) landing areas may be permitted to support health
care operations, provided that there will not be hangars, repair
facilities or temporary or permanent staging or storage areas. The
transportation by air transport shall be exclusively for the emergency
exportation of patients to other medical facilities. Landing areas must
meet the setbacks set forth herein and must comply with all other
federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations. Parking garages,
parking lots and multilevel parking structures when accessory to other
permitted uses are permitted.
F. Tract requirements.
(1) General development plan (GDP) approval. The development of a
medical campus should utilize the general development plan
procedure in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45 et seq. as follows:
(a) Purpose. The opportunity to submit the GDP is intended to
provide a means to coordinate long-range public and private
planning of projects for the medical campus use. Approval of
the GDP is intended to provide protections as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.1 prior to preliminary and final site plan
and/or subdivision approvals. A GDP may have a term up to 20
years. Approval of the GDP is separate, and must be acted
upon separately, from preliminary and final site plan or
subdivision approvals, but nothing herein shall be deemed to
prohibit the simultaneous processing of separate applications
for subdivision and/or site plan approval, or both, for one or
more constituent components of the overall campus facilities.
(b) Eligibility.
[1] A GDP application shall be submitted prior to, or
simultaneously with, the filing of a preliminary subdivision
or site plan application, provided that all the requirements
are met for each form of application.
[2] The applicant may submit GDP plans for review and
approval simultaneously with separate site plan and/or
subdivision applications that may or may not contain
variance requests for any phase of the GDP.
§ 250-16.1 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-16.1
238:456
[3] The parcel of land of the medical campus for which GDP
approval is being sought shall be no less than 100 acres in
size; provided, however, that this provision shall not be
deemed to prohibit or limit the area of any lot to be created
within the medical campus and upon which shall be
located one or more permitted uses, so long as access and
parking consistent with § 250-22, except as modified
herein, are assured through cross-easements for access
and parking.
(2) Special mixed use requirement. In no event shall development of
the medical campus consist solely of hospital uses which are
exempt from real estate property taxation. Except for the acute
care hospital, hospice care residence and long-term-care facilities
(to a maximum of the first 800,000 square feet of area), there shall
be a one-to-one proportion between exempt and nonexempt uses
for all subsequent development within the medical campus, and the
developer shall use diligent efforts to attract nonexempt users to
the medical campus. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event
that the developer proposes to construct further development of
exempt uses within the medical campus and construction of a like
amount of nonexempt use has not commenced, then in that event
the developer and the Township shall negotiate a suitable
agreement in accordance with applicable law for payment in lieu of
taxes (PILOT) for the proposed exempt use until such time as the
one-to-one ratio provided herein has been restored.
G. Area and bulk standards.
(1) Minimum tract area: 100 acres.
(2) Maximum building coverage: 30%.
(3) Maximum impervious surface: 80%.
(4) Yards. Notwithstanding any other provision or any definition of
"lot" or "yard" in this section, there shall be a single front yard
which shall be along Route 541 and a single rear yard along
Woodlane Road. There shall be two side yards.
(5) Building setbacks.
(a) Front and rear: minimum of 50 feet, subject to adjustment in
accordance with Subsection G(6) below.
(b) Side yard: 50 feet.
(6) Maximum height.
(a) At minimum building setbacks: 50 feet.
§ 250-16.1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-16.1
238:457
(b) Nonhospital buildings may have a maximum height of 75 feet
with a minimum setback of 100 feet from Route 541 or from
Woodlane Road.
(c) The acute care hospital building may have a maximum height
of 150 feet with a minimum setback of 200 feet from Route 541
or from Woodlane Road.
(d) Rooftop building/architectural elements, including, but not
limited to, penthouses, elevator overrides, mechanical rooms,
screen walls, parapets, equipment towers, spires, antennae
and cupolas shall not be included in any calculation of height.
H. Parking standards.
(1) Hospitals: minimum of 3.5 spaces per bed.
(2) Long-term-care center: 0.5 space per bed.
(3) Hospice care facility: 2.5 spaces per bed.
(4) Assisted living facility, community residential facility,
comprehensive retirement community or community care
retirement community: one space per individual residential unit.
(5) All other permitted uses except for restaurants: one space per 250
square feet of gross floor area.
(6) Restaurants: one space per three seats.
(7) Parking stall size.
(a) Employee parking: nine feet by 18 feet.
(b) Nonemployee parking: 9.5 feet by 18 feet.
I. Buffers. Except where prohibited by applicable regulations, there shall
be a buffer 40 feet wide along the side and rear tract boundary lines.
Within the buffer, the first 20 feet measured inward from the tract
boundary shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs that are designed
to conceal parking and loading areas. Retention of existing vegetation
with appropriate augmentation as well as the use of sustainable
landscaping materials and techniques requiring minimum or no
artificial irrigation is encouraged. Berms, walls and fences may be
incorporated into the design.
J. Pedestrian circulation.
(1) A comprehensive pedestrian circulation system shall be provided.
The system shall connect all permitted uses, parking areas, open
spaces, public transit stops and sidewalks and multiuse paths along
all exterior roadways.
§ 250-16.1 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-16.1
238:458
§ 250-17. Office Research 1 (OR-1) Zone. [Added 4-28-1998 by Ord.
No. 8-1998]
The following regulations shall apply in the Office Research 1 Zone:
(2) A multiuse path shall be provided along all existing exterior
roadways and along the Burrs Road extension. Any new multiuse
path shall be at least eight feet wide and constructed to provide a
hard surface. All other sidewalks shall be at least six feet wide,
except four-foot-wide sidewalks/paths are permitted to connect
parking lots to individual buildings.
K. Signage.
(1) A Master Sign Plan for the entire medical campus shall be required.
Once approved, the Master Sign Plan shall supersede the
requirements of § 250-25. Future variances shall be requested from
the Master Sign Plan.
(2) The Master Sign Plan shall specify the number, sizes and locations
of all signs. Primary and secondary facade signs, medical campus
ID signs, individual building monument ID signs, directory signs,
directional signs and all other required signs should be addressed.
(3) Electronic, changeable-copy signs shall be permitted as a
component of the Master Sign Plan.
(4) The Master Sign Plan shall provide for common design elements,
including, but not limited to, design, shape, construction materials
and colors where appropriate. The method of all sign lighting shall
be addressed.
L. Community uses.
(1) The applicant must provide for complementary community benefits
and uses which may include, but not be limited to, jogging and
biking paths, interpretive trails, sidewalks, multipurpose fields,
amphitheaters, gazebos, seating areas and plaza(s).
(2) Design and location of these community use facilities shall be
developed in conjunction with appropriate Township agencies.
M. Design standards. The provisions of § 250-22 of the Township Code,
entitled "Performance standards," shall be generally applicable to the
Medical Campus District, recognizing that such standards shall be
intended to guide the general parameters of the overall project. Where
it is concluded that deviation from specific standards is appropriate,
such relief shall be granted as waivers from the standards and not as
variances.
A. Permitted uses:
§ 250-16.1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-17
238:459
(1) Offices for business, executive, professional and administrative
purposes.
(2) Laboratories dedicated to research, design and experimentation.
(3) Computer and data processing centers and facilities.
(4) Banks and financial institutions.
(5) Conference centers.
(6) Medical and dental clinics and laboratories.
(7) Child-care centers.
(8) Agricultural uses.
(9) Public buildings and uses.
B. Accessory uses permitted:
(1) Off-street parking, loading and unloading.
(2) Signs.
(3) Dining and recreational facilities, banks and mailing services for
the use of employees and visitors to the building or buildings,
provided that such uses are planned as an integral part of the
principal use and are located on the same site.
(4) Accessory uses customarily incidental and subordinate to the
permitted uses.
(5) Solar energy systems, subject to § 250-22.1. [Added 8-9-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-2011]
C. Conditional uses permitted (see § 250-26 for standards): office or
research park development.
D. Area, yard and bulk requirements are provided in the Schedule of Area,
Yard and Bulk Requirements - Table II, attached hereto.93
E. Parking and loading requirements:
(1) One space per 250 square feet of gross floor area for all uses except
laboratories.
(2) One space per 400 square feet of gross floor area for laboratories.
(3) See § 250-22Q for additional parking requirements.
(4) See § 250-22R for off-street loading requirements.
F. Screening and buffering requirements:
93.Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 250-17 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-17
238:460
§ 250-18. Office Research 2 (OR-2) Zone. [Added 4-28-1998 by Ord.
No. 8-1998]
The following regulations shall apply in the Office Research 2 Zone:
(1) Front yard buffers shall be planted to a depth of 50 feet from the
front lot line.
(2) Screen plantings shall be provided to a depth of 25 feet along
property lines where a nonresidential use abuts another
nonresidential use.
(3) Where nonresidential uses abut residential uses along a side or a
rear lot line, the landscaped screen shall be planted to a depth of 50
feet.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Offices for business, executive, professional and administrative
purposes.
(2) Laboratories dedicated to research, design and experimentation.
(3) Computer and data processing centers and facilities.
(4) Banks and financial institutions.
(5) Medical and dental clinics and laboratories.
(6) Child-care centers.
(7) Agricultural uses.
(8) Public buildings and uses.
B. Accessory uses permitted:
(1) Off-street parking, loading and unloading.
(2) Signs.
(3) Accessory uses customarily incidental and subordinate to the
permitted uses.
(4) Solar energy systems, subject to § 250-22.1. [Added 8-9-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-2011]
C. Conditional uses permitted (See § 250-26 for standards): office or
research park development.
D. Area, yard and bulk requirements are provided in the Schedule of Area,
Yard and Bulk Requirements - Table II, attached hereto.94
94.Editor's Note: Said table is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 250-17 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-18
238:461
§ 250-19. Office Research 3 (OR-3) Zone. [Added 4-28-1998 by Ord.
No. 8-1998]
The following regulations shall apply in the Office Research 3 Zone:
E. Parking and loading requirements:
(1) One space per 250 square feet of gross floor area for all uses except
laboratories.
(2) One space per 400 square feet of gross floor area for laboratories.
(3) See § 250-22Q for additional parking requirements.
(4) See § 250-22R for off-street loading requirements.
F. Screening and buffering requirements:
(1) Front yard buffers shall be planted to a depth of 25 feet from the
front lot line.
(2) Screen plantings shall be provided to a depth of 25 feet along
property lines where a nonresidential use abuts another
nonresidential use.
(3) Where nonresidential uses abut residential uses along a side or a
rear lot line, the landscaped screen shall be planted to a depth of 50
feet.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Flex space or office/service center involving at least 20% of the
total floor area as office, with the remaining floor area as
warehouse or light industry.
(2) All of the uses permitted in the Office Research 2 (OR-2) Zone.
B. Accessory uses permitted: all of the accessory uses permitted in the
Office Research 2 (OR-2) Zone.
C. Conditional uses permitted (see § 250-26 for standards): all of the
conditional uses permitted in the Office Research 2 (OR-2) Zone.
D. Bulk standards: same as Office Research 2 (OR-2) Zone.
E. Parking and loading requirements:
(1) One space per 250 square feet of gross floor area for all uses except
for laboratories.
(2) One space per 400 square feet of gross floor area for laboratories.
(3) Parking for flex space or office/service center shall be based on the
proposed mix of uses, with additional reserve parking provided as if
the buildings were completely occupied by office uses.
§ 250-18 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-19
238:462
§ 250-20. Industrial (I) Zone. [Added 4-28-1998 by Ord. No. 8-1998]
The following regulations shall apply in the Industrial Zone:
(4) See § 250-22Q for additional parking requirements.
(5) See § 250-22R for off-street loading requirements.
(6) One space per 800 square feet of gross floor area for light industry.
[Added 2-13-2001 by Ord. No. 3-2001]
(7) One space for 5,000 square feet of gross floor area for warehouses.
[Added 2-13-2001 by Ord. No. 3-2001]
F. Screening and buffering requirements: same as Office Research 2
(OR-2) Zone.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Offices.
(2) Manufacturing plants of a type which carry on processes within
completely enclosed buildings, including the manufacture,
assembly or treatment of products from previously prepared
materials.
(3) Distribution centers and warehouses.
(4) Light industry.
(5) Laboratories dedicated to research, design and experimentation.
(6) Repair garages and body shops, subject to the standards of
§ 250-26E.
(7) Solar energy systems, subject to § 250-22.1. [Added 8-9-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-2011]
(8) Solar energy systems as a secondary permitted use in addition to
an existing industrial or warehouse use, subject to § 250-22.1.
[Added 8-9-2011 by Ord. No. 11-2011]
B. Accessory uses permitted:
(1) Off-street parking.
(2) Garages and storage buildings.
(3) Solar energy systems, subject to § 250-22.1. [Added 8-9-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-2011]
C. Conditional uses permitted (see § 250-26 for standards):
(1) Hospitals and nursing homes.
(2) Hotels and motels.
§ 250-19 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-20
238:463
§ 250-21. Planned Unit Development Overlay District. [Added
3-5-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
D. Area, yard and bulk requirements are provided in the Schedule of Area,
Yard and Bulk Requirements - Table II, attached hereto.95
E. Parking and loading requirements:
(1) One space per 250 square feet of gross floor area for offices, repair
garages and body shops.
(2) One space per 800 square feet of gross floor area for
manufacturing plants and light industry. [Amended 2-13-2001 by
Ord. No. 3-2001]
(3) One space for 5,000 square feet of gross floor area for distribution
centers and warehouses. [Amended 2-13-2001 by Ord. No.
3-2001]
(4) See § 250-22Q for additional parking requirements.
(5) See § 250-22R for off-street loading requirements.
F. Screening and buffering requirements: same as Office Research 2
(OR-2) Zone.
A. Permitted uses. The following uses are added as permitted uses in the
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, C and OR-1 Zoning Districts subject to the following
provisions: [Amended 4-28-1998 by Ord. No. 8-1998]
(1) Golf courses and related golf course and user support facilities and
accessory buildings and structures, to include but not be limited to
the clubhouse, banquet hall facilities, pro shop, maintenance and
supply garages, golf cart maintenance and storage garages,
swimming pool facilities and accessory structures, irrigation and
pump house structures, rest areas and player shelters, gatehouses
and administrative, social, cultural and recreational structures. The
minimum area for this facility shall be 100 acres.
(2) Golf courses and related golf course and user support facilities and
accessory buildings and structures, to include but not be limited to
the clubhouse, banquet hall facilities, pro shop, maintenance and
supply garages, golf cart maintenance and storage garages,
swimming pool facilities and accessory structures, irrigation and
pump house structures, rest areas and player shelters, gatehouses
and administrative, social, cultural and recreational structures.
(a) Dwelling units. Dwelling units in detached, semidetached,
attached or clustered multistoried structures or any
combination thereof as accessory to said golf course.
95.Editor's Note: Said table is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 250-20 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-21
238:464
[1] No maximum or minimum percentages of any one
residential unit type are applied. A variety of unit types
and models as permitted in this section are encouraged in
accordance with the statements of objectives and intent. A
portion of the residential units may be age-restricted as
defined in the Zoning Ordinance.
[2] Residential development types permitted include, but are
not limited to, multifamily garden-style units, townhomes
and detached patio-style, Z-lot-style or zero lot line singlefamily
detached units.
[a] "Garden-style multifamily units" are defined as
architecturally designed units placed one on top of
another up to two units in height and having common
open spaces.
[b] Townhomes have no fewer than two nor more than 10
one-family adjacent units erected in a row as a single
building and have either condominium or fee-simple
ownership.
(b) Commercial and office uses and buildings, including the
private operation of a golf course. Commercial and office uses
must be incidental to the residential and recreational
character of the development.
(c) Permitted accessory buildings and structures for residential
areas, to include garages and carports, decks and attached
private greenhouses not operated for profit.
(d) Community oriented support facilities, such as guardhouses, a
community house, swim club, tennis club or other private or
public recreational facility.
(e) The golf course with accessory residential, commercial and
recreational facilities shall be administered under the laws of
the State of New Jersey as a planned unit development and
shall be referred to hereinafter in this chapter as a "planned
unit development." No planned unit development shall be
developed unless the residential, commercial and recreational
uses are ancillary and accessory to the golf course and related
golf course support facilities as set forth above.
B. Development objectives. The development objectives for the planned
unit development are as follows:
(1) In order that the public health, safety, morals and general welfare
be furthered to provide for housing and necessary office and
commercial facilities conveniently located to such housing.
§ 250-21 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-21
238:465
(2) To provide for well located, clean, safe, pleasant office and
commercial sites involving a minimum of strain on transportation
facilities.
(3) To ensure that the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law,
Chapter 291 of the Laws of 1975, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., which
direct the uniform treatment of dwelling type, bulk, density and
open space within each zoning district are met.
(4) To encourage innovations in residential types and forms of
ownership and office and commercial development so that the
growing demands of the population may be met by greater variety
in type, design and layout of buildings and by the conservation and
more efficient use of open space ancillary to said buildings so that
greater opportunities for better housing and recreation, shops and
offices conveniently located to each other may extend to all citizens
and residents of the Township.
(5) In order to encourage a more efficient use of land and of public
services in lieu thereof and to reflect changes in the technology of
land development so that resulting economies may benefit those
who need housing
(6) To lessen the burden of traffic on streets and highways.
(7) To conserve the value of the land.
(8) In aid of these purposes, to provide a procedure which can relate
the type, design and layout of residential, commercial and office
development to the particular site and the particular demand for
housing and other facilities, including the foregoing, at the time of
development in a manner consistent with the preservation of the
property values within established residential areas and to ensure
that the increased flexibility of substantive regulations over land
development authorized herein is subject to such administrative
standards and procedures as shall encourage the disposition of
proposals for land development without undue delay.
C. Development intent. The Township of Westampton hereby adopts the
following Statement of Intent for Planned Unit Development: It is the
intent of this section to make possible, as a planned unit development, a
modification of lot density, lot area, lot width and use requirements in
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, C and OR-1 Zones. These provisions are hereby
established in order to accomplish the following objectives: [Amended
4-28-1998 by Ord. No. 8-1998]
(1) To encourage the provision, conservation and more efficient use of
open space in new residential communities.
(2) To encourage the creation of new recreational facilities in
Westampton Township, including golf courses and swimming
facilities.
§ 250-21 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-21
238:466
(3) To encourage a pattern of development which promotes the best
interest of the Township regarding aesthetics, cultural resources,
ecological considerations and the preservation of natural
resources, including wetlands, floodplains, streams, tree masses
and natural topography.
(4) To allow for innovation in residential development to meet the
demands for a variety of housing types, sizes, designs and forms of
ownership.
(5) To provide a method for developing land for residential and
recreational use to allow the clustering of dwelling units to provide
a variety of housing types and to encourage flexible designs
enabling the preservation of open space in selected areas while
providing other associated benefits.
(6) To buffer new housing units from high-speed, high-volume
roadways and potentially conflicting nonresidential uses.
(7) To address the growing need for senior citizen housing.
(8) To provide for well located, clean, safe, pleasant office and
commercial uses incidental to the permitted residential uses,
involving a minimum strain on transportation facilities.
D. Standards of development.
(1) Minimum number of units, land size and location. No planned unit
development adopted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall be authorized that contains less than 150 contiguous acres, of
which the golf course shall be a minimum of 100 acres, and 300
residential units. R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, C and OR-1 Zoning Districts
within the Township may be used as a site for an overlay planned
unit development. In existing C and OR-1 Zones, golf courses are
permitted as part of the planned unit development overlay since
they may be operated as a commercial use. Residential uses as part
of the planned unit development are prohibited in existing C and
OR-1 Zones in order to maintain the consistency and integrity of
the adjacent commercial zone. Properties which adjoin an
approved planned unit development and which contain a minimum
of five acres may also be considered for application if the plan for
the parcel offers a logical continuation of the existing planned unit
development's streets, utilities, open space and overall lot layout.
[Amended 4-28-1998 by Ord. No. 8-1998]
(2) Residential density and associated standards. In consideration of
the amount, location and proposed use of common open space,
exclusive of the building area, for recreation and natural areas not
necessarily being contiguous; the location and existing physical
characteristics of the site of the proposed planned community; and
the location, design and type of dwelling units and other uses, the
densities may be varied on a net per-acre basis for construction of
§ 250-21 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-21
238:467
units. However, gross densities and related development and bulk
standards for residential use shall be the following:
(a) "Developable or buildable land" shall mean the gross acreage
of the tract, subtracting floodplains and wetlands and such
other developmentally restricted lands as are described below.
The remaining net acreage of the development shall then be
multiplied by 2.5 dwelling units per acre to achieve the
allowable number of units throughout any planned unit
development. Residential density calculations for a planned
unit development are inclusive of currently zoned residential,
commercial and commercial-industrial properties.
(b) The density of the site or tract shall be calculated based upon
the buildable acreage contained in the site or tract. Existing
lakes, streams, floodways, floodplains, flood hazard areas,
wetlands, environmentally sensitive land, slopes exceeding
15%, soils which do not have the necessary stability coefficient
to support the building or structure proposed, any land
encumbered by an easement where the right to build has been
precluded and areas of the tract which contain an historic
resource must all be excluded from the buildable acreage when
calculating density.
(c) No more than two townhomes may be attached in a straight
line. Consideration must be given to facade treatment with an
air toward variety and/or breaks in the line of the facade. The
maximum building length in any one plane for any multifamily
housing structure, excluding congregate care and nursing
home facilities, shall be 250 feet. "Plane" shall be defined as
the general building line, including facades or rooflines, with
breaks and/or projections. It is not intended to be interpreted
as only those perfectly straight lines.
(d) The lot on which each townhome is located shall be a minimum
of 20 feet in width at its narrowest point.
(e) No unit shall exceed three stories in height from ground level.
Where topography permits, three-story buildings shall be
constructed with the first story dwelling unit at ground level on
one side of the structure and the second tier of units fronting
on the other side of the structure at ground level. There shall
be no dwelling units below ground or below the first story
unless those units front on one side of the structure at ground
level with the second tier of units fronting on the other side at
ground level.
(f) The maximum number of garden-style units per structure shall
be 24, and the maximum number of townhomes per structure
shall be 10 units.
§ 250-21 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-21
238:468
(g) The maximum height of any building shall be 35 feet, as
measured from the high point of the ridge line to the average
elevation of the building at the grade line.
(h) Setbacks from perimeter property lines, from streets and one
building from the other.
[1] Setbacks. No multifamily building shall be closer than 25
feet to any perimeter property line of the tract or 35 feet
where a buffer is required. No paved or otherwise
improved impervious surface shall be closer than 10 feet
to any perimeter property line or 20 feet where a buffer is
required.
[2] The distances between multifamily buildings shall be as
follows:
Position Minimum Distances
(feet)
Front-to-front 60
Rear-to-rear 50
End-to-end or side-to-side 20
Where buffers are required 35
[3] No multifamily structure shall be located closer than 25
feet to the roadway right-of-way line or, if a private drive is
involved, 25 feet to the cartway from which access is
obtained.
[4] Setbacks; additions to existing multifamily structures.
Setbacks shall be measured in accordance with the
definition of setbacks, subject to the exception that any
dwelling unit being part of a multifamily structure shall be
held to have a minimum rear yard which runs from the
original rear building line to the rear lot line of the
property, and no structure may be erected therein, which
structure has either walls or is covered, without a
variance. This provision is intended to protect the
availability of light and air to adjacent structures and
properties and is not intended to prohibit or apply to the
construction of fences or patios.
(i) Building coverage and impervious surface coverage. Not less
than 20% of the gross area of the multifamily development
shall be devoted to green area. Twenty percent open space
may include detention basins and wetlands to the extent of 1/2
of said open space but shall not include retention basins, lakes,
streams, other areas of water, floodways, floodplains or flood
hazard areas. The eighty-percent impervious surface coverage
§ 250-21 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-21
238:469
can be apportioned in any manner among building coverage,
accessory building coverage, paving coverage, including
parking lot coverage, cartways and sidewalks, retention
basins, lakes, streams, etc.
(j) Outside lighting for security purposes shall be provided and
shall be so arranged as not to affect adversely the enjoyment of
any adjacent residential buildings or streets, sidewalks and
pedestrian walkways.
(k) No commercial, business or professional use shall be permitted
in any multifamily building unless approved by the Township
Land Development Board after review as being a use
compatible with the general residential nature of the building
and compatible with the appropriate use of adjoining lands.
[Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
(l) To encourage flexibility of housing density and type intended
by the planned unit development enabling legislation, in cases
of planned unit development proposed to be developed over a
period of years, deviations in the net density per acre may be
authorized from the density or intensity of use established for
the entire planned unit development. The Township Land
Development Board may allow for a greater concentration of
density or intensity of land use within some section or sections
of development, whether it be earlier or later in the
development, than upon others subject to the overall gross
density of the planned unit development. [Amended
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
(m) Single-family residential buildings.
[1] For single-family residential buildings, no individual lot
shall contain less than 6,000 square feet nor have a lot
width of less than 40 feet. Building setbacks shall be as
follows:
[a] Front yard: 20 feet from the curbline of the street.
[b] Side yard: five feet each side or 10 feet on one side
when zero lot lines are used.
[c] Rear yard: 20 feet from the rear of each building to the
property line.
[2] Notwithstanding other regulations to the contrary,
setbacks for single-family homes shall be measured from
the nearest point of the building foundation. Eave
overhangs, chimneys, box windows and other building
protrusions extending from the vertical plane of a building
foundation shall not be considered in calculating building
setbacks. The developer shall be permitted to create lot
§ 250-21 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-21
238:470
easements to address building encroachments on
contiguous lots and for building maintenance where the
wall of a single-family home abuts or is in close proximity
to a property line.
(n) Required utilities. All units, residential, commercial or
recreational, located within the planned unit development shall
be served by public sewer and water facilities. The only
permitted exceptions shall be isolated residential properties on
existing roadways with lot sizes of greater than one acre.
(o) The planned unit development shall address fire protection and
make adequate provisions to minimize the risk and exposure to
fire in light of the type of housing and proposed layout of the
development.
(3) Commercial and office density and associated standards.
Commercial and office development serving the needs of nearby
residential areas shall have a building coverage such as described
by the Zoning Ordinance of the Township of Westampton.
(4) Common open space, buffer, recreation and access easement
requirements.
(a) A minimum of 20% of the planned unit development shall be
open space. Open space requirements may include credit of up
to 50% for the preservation of environmentally sensitive areas
such as wetlands and floodplains of equal or greater area. An
additional credit of 50% may be given for commercial golf
course open space when special benefit is offered to
homeowners within the planned unit development in the form
of reduced annual membership fees.
(b) Ownership arrangements of common open space areas shall be
as determined by the Land Development Board at the time of
approval. Ownership arrangements may include public
dedication or private ownership such as a homeowners'
association or proprietorship. [Amended 11-10-1998 by
Ord. No. 24-1998]
(c) Buffer areas are required between residential and
nonresidential development and also between multifamily
development, including townhome development, garden-style
multifamily units and single-family dwellings, whether part of
the same project or on an adjacent tract. A buffer area will also
be required between multifamily development of the nature set
forth above from one another or single-family dwelling areas,
developed or proposed, whether on the multifamily housing
tract or adjacent thereto. For uses within the same project, the
Land Development Board shall waive this buffer requirement if
appropriate transitional uses or open space are employed or if
§ 250-21 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-21
238:471
topography eliminates the need for said buffer. Buffers are
required where the perimeter property line abuts a public
roadway and the setbacks set forth in this chapter are adhered
to. Where a buffer is required along a side or rear property
line, a strip of land at least 20 feet wide in the yard or setback
area shall be designated as a buffer area. Buffer areas shall
adjoin residential property lines and be of uniform width. The
buffer area shall contain a landscape screen consisting of a
six-foot-high visual barrier of plantings of suitable materials
set in a double row, staggered and spaced to accomplish this
purpose, or a landscaped earthen berm parallel to the lot
line and set back an appropriate distance, said berm to be
improved with a suitable landscape buffer treatment. Plant
materials, spacing and location of the plant materials as set
forth elsewhere in the developmental ordinances of
Westampton Township shall be controlling. [Amended
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
(d) With respect to any multifamily dwelling structure, which
structure has interior units as opposed to end units, the
developer shall provide pedestrian access easements along the
front, side and rear lot lines or building lines nearest to and
surrounding the structure so as to provide unobstructed access
to the occupant of the interior unit to his rear yard. It shall be
unlawful for said pedestrian accessway or easement to be
obstructed in any manner, such as by fences, landscaping, etc.
(e) Recreation facilities are required for planned unit
developments. Recreational facilities shall be provided in
accordance with ordinance requirements for subdivisions96 as
set forth in the Township developmental standards and in
accordance with the overall character of the planned unit
development. Recreation requirements may be met by the
inclusion of a golf course, swimming pool, tennis court,
playground and related amenities connected to the commercial
operation of these facilities when special benefit is offered to
homeowners within the planned unit development in the form
of reduced annual membership fees.
(f) Recreation facilities shall be reasonably accessible to the
residents of the planned unit development and located in an
area which will not be detrimental to adjacent properties or
residents by virtue of noise, light and glare. Recreational
facilities shall be completed before 50% of the building permits
are issued for the entire project and before any building
permits are issued for abutting residential uses. A sign shall be
provided on the site of all future recreational facilities alerting
96.Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Subdivision of Land.
§ 250-21 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-21
238:472
future area homeowners of pending construction of
recreational improvements.
(g) Open space design. The design, location and use of proposed
open space areas must seek, to the greatest extent possible, to
meet the objectives included in the statements of objectives
and intent and the following criteria:
[1] Separate parcels of open space must be interconnected
and well planned in relation to housing facilities.
[2] Open space must be reasonably accessible to all housing
units. Pedestrian links shall be provided where excessively
long blocks require a circuitous route to the open space or
would require an individual to utilize main thoroughfares
for access.
(h) Open space development restrictions. All open space shall be
restricted against future development, except for
improvements that are designed to be incidental to the natural
openness of the land, by the filing of restrictive covenants and
restrictions on the filed plat.
(5) Golf course standards.
(a) All open space in the golf course shall be restricted against
future development by the filing of restrictive covenants and
restrictions on the filed plat. Each filed plat shall identify all
open space areas and shall contain appropriate language
restricting said areas.
(b) The clubhouse and associated golf-related structures shall not
be located within 150 feet of any residential lot line.
(c) The center point of each tee-off area shall be located not less
than 75 feet from any residential building line.
(d) The center line of each fairway at the first landing area or
turning point shall be at least 150 feet from the closest
residential building line.
(e) The center of each putting green shall be located a minimum
radial distance of 120 feet from the closest residential building
line.
(f) Off-street parking for the clubhouse shall be provided at one
space for each 200 square feet of floor area. Each off-street
parking space shall be a minimum of nine feet by 18 feet with a
two-foot overhang. A limited number of compact spaces
measuring nine feet by 16 feet with a two-foot overhang may
be provided for the clubhouse as approved by the Land
Development Board. [Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No.
24-1998]
§ 250-21 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-21
238:473
(g) A performance bond shall be posted by the developer
guaranteeing construction of nine complete holes of the golf
course at the same time as the posting of the performance
bond for the first section of residential or commercial
development, unless said nine holes have been previously
constructed.
(6) General site development standards.
(a) The minimum size of an off-street parking space to serve
residential housing shall be nine feet by 18 feet with a two-foot
overhang. A limited number of compact spaces serving
residential housing measuring nine feet by 16 feet with a twofoot
overhang may be provided as approved by the Land
Development Board. The minimum size of an off-street parking
space to serve commercial uses other than golf course facilities
shall be 10 feet by 18 feet with a two-foot overhang, with no
provision for compact parking spaces. [Amended 11-10-1998
by Ord. No. 24-1998]
(b) Minimum parking requirements for single-family detached and
multifamily development, except for age-restricted housing,
shall be two parking spaces of off-street parking per unit.
Garden-style condominiums shall provide a minimum of 1 1/2
spaces of off-street parking per unit. If individual on-site
garages are proposed as containing spaces which count toward
the satisfaction of this off-street parking requirement, a deed
restriction prohibiting the conversion of the garage to living
space will be required. Each garage space shall be counted as
1/2 of a parking space.
(c) Collector streets shall have sidewalks or pedestrian
accessways four feet in width on one side.
(d) Minor streets shall have a sidewalk four feet wide on one side.
Culs-de-sac shall have a four-foot-wide sidewalk all around the
same.
(e) Curbs shall be installed in accordance with Westampton Code,
Chapter 215, Article VII, § 215-14A(3).
(f) Minimum widths of cartways and rights-of-way:
Street
Classification
Travel
Lanes
Parking
Lanes Shoulder
Cartway
(feet)
Right-of-
Way
(feet)
Minor 2 at 11
feet
1 at 8
feet
-- 30 40
Collector 2 at 12
feet
1 at 8
feet
-- 32 50
§ 250-21 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-21
238:474
Street
Classification
Travel
Lanes
Parking
Lanes Shoulder
Cartway
(feet)
Right-of-
Way
(feet)
Primary and
entrance
2 at 12
feet
No 2 at 5 feet 34 50
(g) The minimum pavement thickness design for roadways shall be
two-and-one-half-inch minimum compacted thickness of
FABC-2 over a five-inch bituminous stabilized base placed upon
a subbase suitable to the Engineer, unless soil and drainage
conditions permit different paving which must be based upon
suitable, recognized testing procedures. Underdrains shall be
provided as required by the Township Engineer. Streets shall
be installed in accordance with Westampton Code, Chapter
215, Article VII, § 215-14A(1).
(h) Paving for private parking areas and aisles within the same
shall be a three-inch stabilized base with 1 1/2 inches of
FABC-1 top, where the subbase has a CBR value greater than
10.
(i) Street gradients shall be in accordance with the Township's
development ordinances.
(7) Architectural and design requirements.
(a) Any addition, exterior alteration, modification or change to an
existing building shall be compatible with the design,
character and color of the original building. Any new detached
structure shall also be compatible with the design, character
and color of the parent structure.
(b) All exterior painting and roofing, woodwork, trim work and
siding shall be kept the same color and style as that established
in homeowners' association documents.
(c) Storm and screen windows and doors shall conform to the
architectural character and color scheme of the home.
(d) Retaining walls, other structures, mounds, changes of grade
and drainage are prohibited, except as originally approved by
the Land Development Board. [Amended 11-10-1998 by
Ord. No. 24-1998]
(e) Extensions, widening or rerouting of existing driveways is
prohibited. Walkways are permitted, provided that they do not
exceed 30 inches in width and are constructed of concrete, laid
brick or patio stone in sand. Larger patios are permitted if the
drainage is not affected and they are constructed to conform to
§ 250-21 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-21
238:475
the architectural character and scheme of the home as
determined by the homeowners' association.
(f) Exterior antennas and satellite dishes of any type are
prohibited.
(g) Any and all local, county or state zoning and building approvals
and permits for permitted additions under these restrictions
and all homeowners' association requirements must also be
met prior to commencement of any work.
(h) Careful attention must be given to the quality of design of all
buildings, land uses and streets (such as streetlighting,
outdoor equipment and signs) by the Township Land
Development Board. Among the elements that the Township
Land Development Board must comment upon are the design
of residential and nonresidential land uses and buildings;
community facilities; parks and landscape; and the design of
streets and roadways. The nature, size, shape, lighting and
style of all outdoor signs must be found to be in harmony with
the purpose of this chapter. [Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord.
No. 24-1998]
(i) To improve the quality of the environment and to reduce the
possibility of danger and inconvenience during bad weather
conditions, the underground installation of electrical and
telephone equipment shall be required.
(j) Professional treatment of vegetation in the development of
sites shall be required.
(k) Favorable aesthetic and community appearance factors shall
be encouraged by the Township Land Development Board.
[Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
(l) The visual relationships between buildings shall be examined
by the Township Land Development Board. [Amended
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
(m) The space between buildings as it relates to the visual
character of an area shall be examined by the Township Land
Development Board. [Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No.
24-1998]
(n) Nonresidential uses that are noxious, emit objectionable odors,
loud noises, vibrations, fumes or otherwise result in violating
the purposes and provisions of this chapter shall not be
permitted.
(o) Siting of housing.
§ 250-21 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-21
238:476
[1] All housing shall be designed with regard to topography
and natural features of the site and the focal points of the
project.
[2] To create identity and interest in the layout of housing
fronting streets, variations in setbacks shall be required.
[3] All housing shall be sited so as to preserve privacy and to
ensure natural light.
[4] Orientation for sun and wind shall be considered.
[5] Routes for vehicular and pedestrian access and parking
areas shall be convenient without creating nuisances or
detracting from privacy.
(p) Planting.
[1] Planting shall be regarded as an essential feature of every
planned residential, commercial or office area.
[2] In order to enhance the appearance and marketability of
housing, provide protection from wind and sun and from
depreciating effecting of roads, parking areas and nearby
nonresidential land uses and buildings, the type, size and
location of trees and shrubs shall be consistent with the
Township's development ordinances.
[3] Where possible, natural features such as watercourses,
trees and rock outcrops should be preserved so that they
may be incorporated into the layout to enhance the overall
design of the planned unit development.
E. Administering agency. The local public agency which shall administer
this section and the powers hereunder is the Township Land
Development Board. [Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
F. Application procedures.
(1) Application procedure for conceptual or general development
approval.
(a) The conceptual or general development plan shall set forth the
permitted number of dwelling units and the amount of
nonresidential floor space for the planned unit development in
its entirety. A schedule shall be set forth generally establishing
the timing of the various sections of the development.
(b) The planned unit development shall be developed in
accordance with the conceptual or general development plan
approved by the Land Development Board and in accordance
with those provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law
governing planned unit developments. Protection from
§ 250-21 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-21
238:477
ordinance change shall be provided in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-45 et seq. [Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No.
24-1998]
(c) The term of the effect of the conceptual or general
development plan approval shall not exceed 10 years from the
date upon which the developer receives final approval of the
first section of the planned unit development pursuant to P.L.
1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
(d) The conceptual or general development plan shall include the
following.
[1] A general land use plan indicating the tract area and
general locations of the land uses to be included in the
planned unit development. The total number of dwelling
units and amount of nonresidential floor area to be
provided and proposed land area to be devoted to
residential and nonresidential use shall be set forth. In
addition, the proposed types of nonresidential and
residential uses to be included in the planned unit
development shall be set forth, and the land area to be
occupied by each proposed use shall be estimated.
[2] A circulation plan showing the general location and types
of transportation facilities within the planned unit
development and any proposed improvements to the
existing transportation system outside the planned unit
development.
[3] An open space plan showing the proposed land area and
general location of parks and any other land area to be set
aside for conservation and recreational purposes and a
general description of improvements proposed to be made
thereon.
[4] A utility plan indicating the need for and showing the
proposed location of main sewage and water lines,
proposed methods for handling solid waste disposal and a
plan for the operation and maintenance of proposed
utilities.
[5] A stormwater management plan setting forth the proposed
method of controlling and managing stormwater on the
site.
[6] An environmental constraints inventory, including a
general description of the vegetation, wetlands,
floodplains, soils, topography, surface hydrology and the
probable impact of the development on the environmental
attributes of the site.
§ 250-21 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-21
238:478
[7] A local service plan indicating those public services which
the applicant proposes to provide and which may include
but not be limited to water, sewer, cable and solid waste
disposal.
(2) Submission and approval prior to grant of preliminary approval of
planned development. [Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No.
24-1998]
(a) Any developer of a parcel of land seeking approval of a planned
unit development pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.), shall submit a conceptual or general
development plan to the Land Development Board prior to the
granting of preliminary approval of that development by the
Land Development Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45,
40:55D-46 and 40:55D-48.
(b) The Land Development Board shall grant or deny general
development plan approval within 95 days after submission of
a complete application to the administrative officer or within
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Failure of the Land Development Board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute general development plan approval
of the planned unit development.
(c) In order to provide maximum growing time for the
establishment of golf course grasses and landscaping prior to
initial play, which may require in excess of two years,
preliminary plans for golf course development only may be
submitted to and processed by the Land Development Board
simultaneously with the conceptual or general development
plan.
(d) In the event that the developer seeks to modify the proposed
timing schedule, such modification shall require the approval
of the Land Development Board. The Land Development Board
shall, in deciding whether or not to grant approval of the
modification, take into consideration prevailing economic and
market conditions, anticipated and actual needs for residential
units and nonresidential space within the municipality and the
region and the availability and capacity of public facilities to
accommodate the proposed development.
(e) Except as provided hereunder, the developer shall be required
to gain the prior approval of the Land Development Board if,
after approval of the conceptual or general development plan,
the developer wishes to make any variation in the location of
land uses within the planned unit development or to increase
the density of residential development or the floor area ratio of
nonresidential development in any section of the planned unit
development.
§ 250-21 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-21
238:479
(f) Further terms and conditions as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45
et seq. shall apply.
(3) Application procedure for preliminary and final development
approval. Preliminary and final development approval for a planned
unit development shall follow procedures for major subdivision and
site plan approval as set forth in the Code for Westampton
Township.
(4) Fees for conceptual or general development plan review.
(a) At the time of submission of the conceptual or general plan, the
applicant shall pay a fee of $500.
(b) Each applicant who shall submit a conceptual or general plan
for approval shall agree in writing and shall pay all reasonable
costs for professional review of said plan.
(5) Outside entity approval of planned unit development. All approvals,
permits and licenses of state, county and local or regional entities
having jurisdictional requirements for a planned unit development
within Westampton Township shall be obtained.
§ 250-21 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-21
238:480
ARTICLE VII
General Provisions
§ 250-22. Performance standards.
The following provisions and performance standards shall apply to all zones:
A. Accessory buildings and portable storage units. [Amended 6-13-2000
by Ord. No. 12-2000; 4-22-2003 by Ord. No. 13-2003; 11-10-2009
by Ord. No. 14-2009]
(1) Accessory buildings. Any accessory building attached to a principal
building is part of the principal building and shall adhere to the
yard requirements for the principal building. No building permit
shall be issued for an accessory building prior to the issuance of a
building permit for the principal building. Construction of the
principal building shall precede or coincide with the construction of
the accessory building, otherwise the building permit for the
accessory building may be revoked. The accessory building shall be
compatible in appearance with the area in which it is located. No
accessory building in any zone or district shall exceed 600 square
feet unless the lot exceeds three acres in size. No accessory
building shall be located closer to the front property line than the
rear building line of the principal building. No accessory building
shall be located any nearer to any rear or side yard property line
than that number of feet specified on the Schedule of Yard, Area
and Bulk Requirements,97 except that sheds 120 square feet or less
can have a three-foot side and rear setback.
(2) Portable storage units.
(a) Permit required; application fee; exception for new residential
construction. Before placing a portable storage unit on his, her
or its property, a person or other owner of residential property
must submit an application and receive a permit from the
Township. There shall be a fee of $25 for a thirty-day permit.
Applications shall be obtained from the Zoning Officer.
Excepted from the permitting requirements of this subsection
shall be units utilized for new residential construction;
however, any unit shall be removed from the new residential
dwelling lot within 30 days of the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy.
(b) Duration. Permits will be granted for a period of 30 days. Prior
to the expiration of the thirty-day period, applicants may seek
to extend their permits for an additional 30 days by seeking an
extension with the Zoning Officer. Extension of a permit will
cost $25 for each 30 days granted. In no event shall a permit
97.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Yard, Area and Bulk Requirements is located at the end of
this chapter.
§ 250-22 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-22
238:481
with extensions be granted for more than 90 days except upon
application to the Westampton Land Development Board for
approval upon good cause shown.
(c) Public property. No temporary storage unit shall be placed or
maintained by any private party on any Township property,
street or right-of-way, except that such a unit may be placed in
a street right-of-way subject to the following conditions:
[1] Approved by the Westampton Police Department.
[2] Limited to a maximum of seven days; no extensions are
permitted.
[3] Unit shall be marked with reflective striping.
[4] Applicant must demonstrate there are no viable locations
on-site.
(d) Private property. Portable storage units are prohibited from
being placed on or in the front yard of a property and shall only
be permitted in the driveway of the property at the furthest
accessible point from the street. All locations must be paved
off-street surfaces.
(e) Number of units. Only one portable storage unit may be placed
on any residential property at one time. In addition, one trash
dumpster may be placed on a residential property.
(f) No portable storage unit shall be used to store solid waste,
construction debris, demolition debris, recyclable materials,
business inventory or commercial goods, except as may be
approved by permit.
(g) Storage of hazardous materials within the portable storage
unit is prohibited.
(h) Portable storage units shall be locked and secured by the
property owner, tenant or property manager at all times when
loading or unloading is not taking place.
(i) Portable storage units shall be no greater than eight feet in
height, 18 feet in length and eight feet in width or no greater
than a total of 1,200 cubic feet.
(j) In an emergency situation, such as storm, fire or flood damage,
the Zoning Officer may approve a temporary location for a
portable storage unit subject to the owner or tenant of the
property making an application for the required permit within
five business days of the emergency. In emergency situations,
the Zoning Officer may also approve more than one storage
unit and more than one trash dumpster per residential
property.
§ 250-22 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-22
238:482
B. Buffers.
(1) Where multifamily housing projects, commercial or industrial uses
or conditional uses abut any residential district or zone or existing
residential use, the multifamily housing project, commercial,
industrial or conditional use must buffer along the abutting
property line along such other property lines as are necessary in
order to effectively screen and buffer its use from the residential
districts and/or uses.
(2) Where specified above or as it is determined necessary as a result
of site plan review and/or the applicant's landscape plan, a buffer
strip shall be provided along property lines adjacent to a zone of
lesser degree of use so as to provide protection to adjacent
properties, except where such lot lines abut or are along street
frontages and the relaxation of the buffer requirements is
necessary to provide for the safe access to and from a public street.
Buffer strips shall be free from structures, accessory buildings,
signs, driveways, parking areas, outdoor storage areas, recreation
facilities or other active uses.
(3) Buffer areas shall require site plan approval and are required along
all lot lines and street lines which separate a townhouse, apartment
or nonresidential use from either an existing residential use or a
residential zoning district. Buffer areas shall be developed in an
aesthetic manner for the primary purposes of screening views or
reducing noise perception beyond the lot. Buffer widths shall be
measured horizontally and perpendicular to lot and street lines. No
structure, activity, storage of materials or parking of vehicles shall
be permitted in a buffer area. The location and design of buffer
areas are intended to provide flexibility in providing effective
buffers. The location and design of buffers shall consider the use of
the portion of the property being screened, the distance between
the use and the adjoining property line, difference in elevations, the
type of buffer, such as dense planting, existing woods, a wall or
fence, buffer height, buffer width and other combinations of manmade
and natural features. The buffer shall be designed, planted,
graded, landscaped and developed with the general guideline that
the closer a use or activity is to a property line or the more intense
the use, the more effective the buffer area must be in obscuring
light and vision and reducing noise beyond the lot. Parking areas,
trash collection and utility areas and loading and unloading areas
shall be screened around their perimeters by either a landscape
screen, fence or grass buffer area, whichever is appropriate for the
use involved.
(4) All buffer areas shall be planted and maintained with either grass
or ground cover maintained at a maximum height of eight inches,
together with a screen or scattered planting of trees, shrubs or
other plant material meeting the following requirements:
§ 250-22 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-22
238:483
(a) The preservation of all natural wooded tracts shall be an
integral part of all site plans and may be calculated as part of
the required buffer area, provided that the growth is of a
density and the area is of a width to serve the purpose of a
buffer. Sizes and varieties of plants in newly established
plantings shall be grouped so as to screen 75% of the headlight
glare within three years and be a minimum of eight feet in
height within three years. Ground cover of mulch, grass or
other plant material shall be used to reduce collecting debris
and present a pleasant appearance. Ground elevations shall
require adjustments of plant height and shall relate to adjacent
parking areas; loss in elevation in planting areas in relation to
parking areas will necessitate proportionate increases to plant
sizes. Where additional plantings are necessary to establish an
appropriate tone for an effective buffer, the plantings may be
required. [Amended 4-28-1998 by Ord. No. 8-1998]
(b) The buffer planting shall be so placed that, at maturity, it will
not be closer than 10 feet to any cartway. [Amended
4-28-1998 by Ord. No. 8-1998]
(c) Shade trees shall be of nursery stock, free of insects and
disease, as shown by valid nursery inspection certificates, a
minimum of 10 feet to 12 feet in height and 1 1/2 inches to two
inches in caliper, with grading quality and balling standards in
accordance with the USA Standard for Nursery Stock, as
sponsored by the American Association of Nurserymen, Inc.
(1967).
(d) Any plant material which does not live shall be replaced within
one year or one growing season.
(e) Screen plantings and landscaping shall be broken at points of
vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress to assure a clear
sight triangle at all street and driveway intersections.
(5) Species and varieties of plantings recommended for planting
Township streets and buffer areas shall be those approved by the
Township Engineer and/or the Township Planning Consultant,
using the following guidelines for development of the landscape
plan:
(a) Screening shall be provided with buffer strips so as to provide
a visual or partial accoustical barrier to conceal the view or
sounds of various utilitarian operations and uses from the
street or adjacent properties. Screening may consist of the
following:
[1] Landscape berms planted with attractive vegetative
covering.
§ 250-22 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-22
238:484
[2] A solid masonry wall not less than five feet, six inches
above ground level.
[3] A solid fencing, uniformly painted or of a naturally durable
material such as cedar, cypress or redwood, not less than
six feet above ground level and open to the ground to a
height of not more than four inches above ground level.
[4] Dense hedges of shrubbery or evergreens planted at 30
inches on center in a single row or at five feet on center in
two staggered rows. Evergreens or shrubs shall be a
minimum of five feet above ground level at the time of
planting and permitted to grow to a minimum of six feet
above ground level.
(b) Living buffers and screens shall be maintained by the owner of
the property where the use requires a buffer or a screen. Any
failure to maintain the buffer or screen in the future
constitutes a violation of this chapter subjecting the owner of
the property to penalties imposed herein and revocation of a
certificate of occupancy which will require a new submission of
site plan to the Land Development Board with particular
emphasis on the buffer and screen area and a resolution of the
problems involved by replacing the living buffer with screening
of solid fencing and masonry, as set forth above. [Amended
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
(c) Size of buffer strips. Buffers in nonresidential districts shall be
as provided in the standards for the individual nonresidential
zoning district. In other cases where buffers are required,
pursuant to § 250-22B(1), the buffer shall be 50 feet in width.
[Amended 4-28-1998 by Ord. No. 8-1998]
C. Corner lots. Any principal or accessory building located on a corner lot
shall have a minimum setback from both street right-of-way lines equal
to the required front yard and shall not interfere with a required sight
triangle. The remaining yards shall both be considered as side yards
with respect to setback. Corner lots shall meet the requirements of the
zone where located both as to frontage and setback. In no case shall the
frontage be less than 200 feet on any street. Measurement shall be
made from the ends of the connecting curve.
D. Energy conservation. All development shall be carried out in a manner
which promotes energy conservation and maximizes active and passive
solar energy in accordance with any applicable statutes. Such measures
may include orientation of buildings, landscaping to permit solar access
and the use of energy-conserving building materials.
E. Fences and walls.
(1) Fences and walls shall not be located in any required sight triangle.
Fences and walls in any residential district or around any
§ 250-22 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-22
238:485
residential use shall not be higher than four feet unless set back
from the street line the minimum setback required for the zone.
Fences and walls shall not exceed six feet in height when located
more than the required setback from the street line in a residential
zone district or around a residential use.
(2) Fences and walls located in the required setback area from the
street line shall have open space for light and air representing at
least 50% of the fence area. This provision shall apply to fences and
walls in any zoning district and surrounding any use.
(3) Fences and walls around commercial, utility and industrial uses are
limited to eight feet in height. There shall be no height limitations
for fences around agricultural uses, nor shall there be any height
limitations for vegetative fences around any use, unless the same
are located in a sight triangle or setback area where related to a
street.
(4) Fences on corner properties. Fences in the street frontage
considered the front of the house shall follow Subsection E(1) and
(2) above. The street frontage considered the side yard shall be
allowed to have up to a six-foot-high fence, beginning at the front
setback of the house and along the property line on the side of the
house. However, the fence must be set back at least one foot from a
sidewalk and may not be in any sight triangle. [Added 6-8-2004
by Ord. No. 12-2004]
(5) Except where a fence or wall has specifically been approved by the
Board of Directors, or a committee established by the Board of
Directors, of a homeowner’s association operating within and for a
residential community in the Township of Westampton, in which
case the decision of the homeowner’s association shall control, all
fences and walls constructed within the Township shall be a wood
board-on-board type with a natural finish. (Clear weatherproofing
or varnish is permitted.) [Added 7-10-2007 by Ord. No.
12-2007]
F. Grading. Lots where fill material is deposited shall have clean fill or
topsoil graded to allow complete surface drainage of the lot into local
storm sewer systems or natural drainagecourses. No regrading of a lot
shall be permitted which would create or aggravate water stagnation or
a drainage problem on site or on adjacent properties or which will
violate the provisions regulating soil erosion and sediment control, soil
removal, development in wetlands or floodplains contained in the state
law or any developmental ordinance of the Township. Grading shall be
limited to areas shown on the approved site plan or subdivision. Any
topsoil disturbed during approved excavation and grading operations
shall be redistributed throughout the site.
G. Lighting. All area lighting shall provide for nonglare, color-corrected
lights focused downward or translucent fixtures with shields around the
§ 250-22 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-22
238:486
light source. The light intensity provided at ground level shall average
a maximum of 0.5 footcandle over the entire area. For each fixture
and lighted sign, the total quantity of light radiated above a horizontal
plane passing through the light source shall not exceed 7 1/2% of
the total quantity of light emitted from the light source. Any other
outdoor lighting shall be shown on the site plan in sufficient detail to
allow determination of the effects at the property line and on nearby
streets, driveways, residences and overhead sky glow. The objective
of these specifications is to minimize undesirable off-site effects. No
lighting shall shine directly or reflect into windows or onto streets
and driveways in such a manner as to interfere with driver vision.
No lighting shall be of a yellow, red, green or blue beam nor be of a
rotating, pulsating beam or other intermittent frequency. The intensity
of such light sources, light shielding, the direction and reflection of the
lighting and similar characteristics shall be subject to site plan approval
by the Land Development Board. [Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No.
24-1998]
H. Lot areas. Where two or more adjoining lots are under the same
ownership and one or more of said lots do not conform to the minimum
area or dimension requirements for the zone in which they are located,
the lots shall be considered as a single lot, and the provisions of this
section shall apply.
I. Multiple uses for commercial and industrial sites; multiple buildings for
multifamily housing projects. Shopping centers and industrial
complexes receiving site plan approval where all buildings are designed
as a united and comprehensive plan in accordance with the applicable
zoning district standards may have more than one building on a lot and
more than one use within a building. Multifamily residential housing
developments may have more than one principal residential building on
the site.
J. Nonconforming uses, structures or lots. The lawful use of land,
buildings or structures existing on the effective date hereof may be
continued upon the lot or in the structure so occupied, and any such
structure may be restored or repaired in the event of partial destruction
thereof. However, none shall be enlarged, extended, relocated,
converted to another use or altered, except in conformity with this
chapter, except as permitted below.
(1) The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee or any other
person interested in any land upon which a nonconforming use or
structure exists may apply, in writing, for the issuance of a
certificate certifying that the use or structure existed before the
adoption of this chapter, which rendered the use or structure
nonconforming. The applicant shall have the burden of proof.
Applications pursuant hereto may be made to the administrative
officer within one year of the adoption of this chapter, which
rendered the use or structure nonconforming, or at any time to the
Board of Adjustment. The administrative officer shall be entitled to
§ 250-22 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-22
238:487
demand and receive for such certificate issued by him a reasonable
fee not in excess of $10. The fees collected by the official shall be
paid by him to the municipality. Denial by the administrative officer
shall be appealable to the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(2) Abandonment. A nonconforming use shall be adjudged as
abandonment when the tenant or owner displays intent of cessation
and/or the nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of at
least 12 consecutive months.
(3) Conversion to permitted use.
(a) Any nonconforming building, structure or use changed to
conform to the provisions of this chapter shall not be changed
back to a nonconforming status.
(b) Any nonconforming use or structure existing at the time of the
passage of this chapter may be continued upon the lot or in the
structure so occupied, and any such structure may be restored
or repaired in the event of partial destruction thereof.
(4) Repairs and maintenance. Repairs and maintenance may be made
to a nonconforming use, structure or lot, provided that the repair
and maintenance work does not change the use of the building,
increase the area of a lot used for a nonconforming purpose or
otherwise increase the nonconformity in any manner.
(5) Sale. Any nonconforming use, structure or lot may be sold and
continue to function in the same nonconforming manner.
(6) Nonconforming lots and structures. In all residential zones, any
lawfully existing nonconforming structure which has been and will
continue to be used for a permitted principal use may be expanded
without further relief subject to the following limitations:
[Amended 5-11-1999 by Ord. No. 9-1999]
(a) Lots developed with single-family or duplex dwellings which
are nonconforming relative to a yard or lot area requirement
may have an addition to the conforming portion of the
dwelling, provided that the addition conforms with applicable
yard requirements.
(b) Lots developed with single-family or duplex dwellings which
are nonconforming relative to bulk requirements may have an
addition to the nonconforming portion of the dwelling,
provided that any additions that violated a setback
requirement may be constructed to continue the existing
building setback but shall not be permitted to encroach further
into the required setback than the existing structure.
(c) The gross floor area of the addition referred to in
§ 250-22J(6)(b) which would otherwise violate the bulk
§ 250-22 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-22
238:488
requirements of the zone shall not exceed 25% of the lawfully
existing nonconforming building.
(d) Regardless of the size of the expansion or the number of
existing nonconformities, only one such expansion shall be
permitted without relief from the Land Development Board.
(7) Existing lots. Any vacant lot, as recorded at the time of passage of
this chapter, that is located in Residential Districts R-2, R-3, R-4 or
R-6 and fails to comply with the minimum requirements of this
chapter may be used for any permitted principal use in the district
in which it lies, provided that the following requirements are
complied with: [Added 5-11-1999 by Ord. No. 9-1999]
(a) In unsewered areas, the lot shall be at least one acre in size
and the bulk requirements shall be as specified for one-acre
lots in the R-1 Zone.
(b) In sewered areas, the lot shall be at least 10,000 square feet,
and the bulk requirements shall be in accordance with the
following schedule:
10,000 to 14,999
Square Feet
15,000 to 19,999
Square Feet
Minimum lot
width at building
75 feet 100 feet
Minimum front
yard
25 feet 30 feet
Minimum rear
yard
25 feet 25 feet
Minimum side
yard both
20 feet 30 feet
Minimum side
yard one
8 feet 12 feet
Maximum height 35 feet 35 feet
Maximum
building coverage
30% 20%
K. Commercial and recreational vehicles in residential zones.
(1) No person shall park on any street in the municipality any truck,
bus, trailer or tractor, the gross registered weight of which exceeds
8,000 pounds. Trucks over four tons registered gross weight are
hereby excluded from municipally owned residential streets except
for the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets. [Amended
8-11-1998 by Ord. No. 17-1998]
(2) Nothing within this chapter shall be construed as preventing
vehicles exceeding a gross registered weight of 8,000 pounds from
§ 250-22 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-22
238:489
making deliveries of merchandise within a residential zone or as
prohibiting any vehicle exceeding the gross registered weight of
8,000 pounds used by any public utility company in connection
with the construction, installation, operation or maintenance being
used for such purposes. Neither shall this chapter be construed as
preventing vehicles exceeding a gross registered weight of 8,000
pounds from being used in cases of emergencies within a
residential zone of the Township in order to preserve and protect
persons and property within the residential zone.
(3) Recreation vehicles may be parked outside, in the driveway or in
side or rear yard areas only, with a limit of one recreation vehicle
per family permitted outside a building. Recreation vehicles so
parked shall not be used for temporary or permanent residential
purposes. Further guidelines are outlined in Chapter 235, Vehicles,
Recreational. [Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 18-2001]
L. Performance standards.
(1) Electricity. Electronic equipment shall be shielded so there is no
interference with any radio or television reception beyond the
operator's property as the result of the operation of such
equipment.
(2) Glare. No use shall direct or reflect a steady or flashing light
beyond its lot lines. Exterior lighting and lighting resulting from
any manufacturing or assembly operations shall be shielded,
buffered and directed as approved on the site plan so that any
glare, direct light or reflection will not interfere with the normal
use of nearby properties, dwelling units and streets.
(3) Air, water and environmental pollution. No use shall emit heat,
odor, vibrations, noise or any other pollutant into the ground, water
or air that exceeds the most stringent applicable state and federal
regulation. No building permit, zoning permit or certificate of
occupancy shall be issued for any use until a state permit has been
issued, where a state permit is required, to ascertain and approve
the level of emission, quality of emission, type and quality of
emission control and such other state regulations governing the
emission of pollutants into the ground, water or air.
(4) Dust, fumes, vapor, mists, gases, fly ash and odors. Dust, fumes,
vapors, mists, gases, fly ash or odors shall not be allowed to be
discharged into the atmosphere in such quantities or at such levels
as to cause injury, detriment of annoyance to persons on other
properties or endanger their comfort, repose, health or safety or in
such quantities or at such levels as to cause property damage or
damage to agriculture on other properties.
(5) Smoke. The emission of any smoke from any source whatever to a
density greater than that density described as No. 2 on the
§ 250-22 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-22
238:490
Ringelmann Smoke Chart, or equivalent, is prohibited. The
Ringelmann Smoke Chart, as published and used by the Bureau of
Mines, United States Department of the Interior, or an equivalent
based thereon, is hereby adopted and made a part of these
regulations.
(6) Ground vibrations. Every use shall be so operated that the ground
vibration inherently and recurrently generated is not perceptible,
without instruments, at any point along the property line of that
use.
(7) Storage and water disposal. No materials or wastes shall be
deposited upon a lot in such form or manner that they can be
transferred off the lot, directly or indirectly, by natural forces such
as precipitation, evaporation or wind. All materials or wastes which
might create a pollutant, be a safety hazard or be a health hazard
shall be stored indoors or be enclosed in appropriate containers to
eliminate such pollutant or hazard.
(8) Sound. The volume of sound inherently and recurrently generated
by any use shall not exceed the standards set forth below at any
point along the boundaries of the district in which such use is
located.
(a) Sound levels shall be measured with a sound-level meter and
associated octave-band filter manufactured according to the
most recent standards prescribed by the American Standards
Association.
(b) Objectionable sounds of an intermittent nature shall be
controlled so as not to become detrimental or a menace to the
health of the inhabitants outside of the district and so that the
intermittent sounds are or may become an annoyance or
interfere. with the comfort or general well-being of the
inhabitants outside of the district.
(c) Maximum sound-pressure levels shall conform to the following
table:
Octave Band
(cycles per second)
Maximum Sound Pressure
Level
[decibels (0.0002 dyne per
square centimeter)]
0 to 74 72
75 to 149 67
150 to 299 59
300 to 599 52
600 to 1,199 46
1,200 to 2,399 40
§ 250-22 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-22
238:491
Octave Band
(cycles per second)
Maximum Sound Pressure
Level
[decibels (0.0002 dyne per
square centimeter)]
2,400 to 4,800 34
Above 4,800 32
M. Principal use. No residential lot shall have situated upon it more than
one principal permitted use.
N. Prohibited uses in all zones:
(1) Any use not specifically permitted in a zone established by this
chapter is prohibited from that zone.
(2) The following uses and activities are specifically prohibited in any
zone, district, place or area of the Township of Westampton:
(a) Acetylene manufacture or storage.
(b) Asphalt or coal-tar manufacture.
(c) Celluloid, plastic or rubber manufacture.
(d) Creosote manufacture or treatment.
(e) Fat rendering, soap, tallow, grease or lard manufacture.
(f) Gas manufacture or storage in excess of 50,000 cubic feet.
(g) Match manufacture.
(h) Storage of gasoline in excess of 50,000 gallons.
(i) Tanning, curing or storage of rawhides.
(j) Tar distillation or manufacture.
(k) Fertilizer manufacture.
(l) Explosive manufacture or storage.
(m) Petroleum refining or processing.
(n) Manufacture of combustible, flammable or volatile materials in
any amount or storage of the same as a principal use.
(o) Junkyards, junk businesses or automobile junkyards or
wrecking yards.
(p) Amusement arcades.
[1] An amusement arcade, as defined in this chapter, is
prohibited in all zones.
§ 250-22 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-22
238:492
[2] Accessory use. Automatic amusement devices, as defined
in this chapter, are permitted as accessory uses in the
Commercial and HOC Zones.
(q) Parking of trailer portion of tractor-trailer containerized unit
for on-site permanent storage purposes for more than 15 days.
[Added 3-20-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]
O. Frontage on an improved street. Every principal building shall be built
upon a lot with frontage on a public or private street which has been
improved to Township standards or for which such improvements have
been insured by posting a performance guaranty pursuant to the
provisions of the Land Subdivision chapter of the Code of Ordinances of
the Township of Westampton.98
P. Swimming pools. No swimming pool shall be located any nearer than
that number of feet specified on the Schedule of Yard, Area and Bulk
Requirements99 to any rear or side property line or in any case nearer a
street than a principal building to which it is an accessory except that
swimming pools on lots 22 feet or 20 feet in width can have a four-foot
side line setback for the pool only. Footage shall be measured from the
water's edge. A permanent barrier, fence or obstruction not less than
four feet nor more than five feet in height, so constructed as to enclose
entirely the area on which the swimming pool is located and to bar all
reasonable and normal access to the swimming pool, except through a
substantial self-closing gate of the same height as the fence, equipped
with facilities for locking said gate when the pool is unattended or
unguarded, shall be provided for all swimming pools. [Amended
6-10-1997 by Ord. No. 13-1997; 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 20-1998]
Q. Off-street parking. [Amended 4-28-1998 by Ord. No. 8-1998]
(1) Off-street parking spaces, open-air or indoor, shall be provided with
all new construction or the creation of new uses as specified in this
chapter on the same lot as the use which they are intended to serve
and shall be furnished with necessary passageways and driveways.
All such space shall be deemed to be required space on the lots on
which the use it serves is situated and shall not be encroached
upon or reduced in any manner. All parking areas, passageways
and driveways shall be surfaced with a dustless, durable, allweather
surface such as macadam or concrete, clearly marked for
car spaces, and shall be adequately drained and subject to the
approval of the Township Engineer.
(2) The collective provision of off-street parking areas by two or more
buildings or uses located on adjacent lots is permitted, provided
that the total of such facilities shall not be less than the sum
required of the separate buildings or uses.
98.Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Subdivision of Land.
99.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Yard, Area and Bulk Requirements is located at the end of
this chapter.
§ 250-22 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-22
238:493
(3) All parking areas and appurtenant passageways and driveways
serving business or industrial uses shall be illuminated adequately
during the hours between sunset and sunrise when the use is in
operation. Adequate shielding shall be provided by business and
industrial users to protect adjacent residential zones from the glare
of such illumination and from that of automobile headlights.
(4) Access aisles and driveways to parking areas shall not be less than
25 feet in width. Aisles and driveways within parking areas shall
have a minimum width as follows:
(a) For parking at an angle of 90º to 60º: 25 feet.
(b) For parking at an angle of 60º to 45º: 19 feet.
(c) For parking at an angle less than 45º: 17 feet.
(d) For parallel parking: 12 feet.
(5) Where off-street parking is required under this chapter, a site plan
shall be filed showing surfacing, landscaping, location and design
of entrances, exits, marking and lighting, all of which shall be
subject to the approval of the Land Development Board. [Amended
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
(6) The size of required nonresidential parking spaces shall be as
follows:
(a) Nonemployee parking: 10 feet by 20 feet. [Amended
8-9-2011 by Ord. No. 11-2011]
(b) Employee parking: nine feet by 18 feet. Two-thirds of all
parking for office use may be considered employee parking.
Employee parking shall be physically separated from
nonemployee parking. [Amended 8-9-2011 by Ord. No.
11-2011]
(c) Parallel parking spaces shall be 10 feet by 24 feet for
nonemployee parking and nine feet by 22 feet for employee
parking.
(d) Nonparallel parking spaces may be reduced to a depth of 18
feet if the parking spaces abut a pedestrian walkway with a
width of at least six feet or abut aisle dividers, landscaped
islands or parking islands. The required width shall not be
reduced. [Added 8-9-2011 by Ord. No. 11-2011]
(7) "Building area" shall be defined, for purposes of this section and
the calculation of required off-street parking only, to include, in
addition to those areas as defined by the definitions section of this
chapter,100 any fenced or enclosed area for sales purposes.
100. Editor's Note: See § 250-4.
§ 250-22 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-22
238:494
(8) For a one-family detached dwelling, two off-street parking spaces
shall be provided for each dwelling unit, exclusive of garage.
R. Off-street loading.
(1) Each activity shall provide for off-street loading and unloading,
with adequate ingress and egress from streets, and shall provide
such area at the side or rear of the building. There shall be no
loading or unloading from the street.
Commercial Industrial
Space size (feet) 12 by 35 12 by 35
First space 1 per 5,000 square
feet of gross floor
area or fraction
thereof
1 per 8,000 square
feet of gross floor
area or fraction
thereof
Additional spaces 1 per 7,000 square
feet of gross floor
area or fraction
thereof
Same as above
(2) A minimum of one space per use, except that where more than one
use shall be located in one building or where multiple uses are
designed as part of a shopping center or similar self-contained
complex, the number of loading spaces shall be based on the
cumulative number of square feet within the building or complex,
shall be dispersed through the site to best serve the individual uses
and shall have site plan approval.
(3) There shall be at least one trash and garbage pickup location
provided by each building, which shall be separated from the
parking spaces by either a location within the building or in a
pickup location outside the building, which shall be a steel-like,
totally enclosed container located in a manner to be obscured from
view from parking areas, streets and adjacent residential uses or
zoning districts by a fence, wall, planting or combination of the
three. If located within the building, the doorway may serve both
the loading and trash/garbage functions; and, if located outside the
building, it may be located adjacent to or within the general loading
areas, provided that the container in no way interferes with or
restricts loading and unloading functions.
(4) All off-street loading areas shall be lighted.
(5) Loading area requirements may be met by combining the floor area
of several commercial activities taking place under one roof and
applying the above ratios.
(6) No off-street loading and maneuvering areas shall be located in any
front yard.
§ 250-22 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-22
238:495
(7) Loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the use being
served, may abut the building being served rather than requiring a
setback from the building and shall be located to directly service
the building for which the space is being provided.
S. General provisions applicable to both off-street parking and off-street
loading areas.
(1) No loading and parking spaces shall be located in any required
buffer area.
(2) No parking shall be permitted in fire lanes, driveways, aisles,
sidewalks or turning areas.
T. Curbing. All off-street parking and loading areas shall have concrete or
Belgian-block curbing around the perimeter of the parking and loading
areas and to separate major interior driveways from parking spaces.
Curbing may also be installed within the parking or loading areas to
define segments of the parking or loading areas. Concrete wheel blocks
may be located within designated parking or loading spaces. All
curbings shall be located in conjunction with the overall drainage plan.
Curbing installed at locations requiring pedestrian or bicycle access
over the curbing shall be designed with breaks in the curb height, with
ramps from the street grade to the sidewalk. The breaks shall be either
opposite each traffic lane or no less frequent than one every 65 feet
along the curb.
U. Drainage. All parking and loading shall have catch basins and drainage
facilities installed in accordance with good engineering practices as
approved by the Municipal Engineer. Where subbase conditions are of
such nature that surfacing would be inadvisable without first treating
the subbase, these areas shall be excavated to a depth of at least six
inches to 12 inches below the proposed finished grade and filled with a
suitable subbase material, as determined by the Municipal Engineer.
Where required by the Engineer, a system of subsurface drains shall be
constructed beneath the surface of the paving and connected to a
suitable drain. After the subbase material has been properly placed and
compacted, the parking area surfacing material shall be applied.
V. Surfacing off-tract parking areas, loading and unloading areas, interior
drives and aisles shall be paved with not less than four inches of
compacted base course of plant-mixed bituminous stabilized base
course, constructed in layers not more than two inches' compacted
thickness (stab base) and a top course of a minimum two-inch-thick
compacted wearing surface of bituminous concrete (FABC).
W. Recreational facilities.
(1) Active recreational facilities shall be provided for each residential
development, whether of multifamily housing or single-family
detached housing, when the development exceeds 14 dwelling
units. Recreation facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
§ 250-22 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-22
238:496
table and provisions set forth below. On multifamily housing
projects, the active recreation facilities shall be located in the
twenty-percent-open-space area. For cluster housing
developments, the active recreation facilities shall be located in
that open space area derived as a result of clustering the dwelling
units. In other single-family detached housing developments, an
open space area sufficient in size to accommodate the active
recreation facility plus the associated required off-street parking
shall be set aside by the developer, in accordance with the table set
forth below: [Amended 9-21-1987 by Ord. No. 15-1987]
Type of Recreation Facility Minimum Area
Tot lot 6,000 square feet
Tennis court 10,000 square feet, plus parking
area
Basketball court 8,000 square feet
Multipurpose field 2 acres, plus parking area
(2) No active recreational area shall be less than 6,000 square feet in
area nor less than 60 feet in width. All recreational areas shall be
located convenient to dwelling units. Recreational areas shall be
furnished with recreational equipment, as is set forth in the
Subdivision Ordinance,101 plus landscaping and benches and
appropriately sized trash disposal containers for the facility to be
constructed. Said trash containers shall be fenced, screened and
landscaped as necessary, based upon the type of trash disposal
facility. The number of recreational facilities shall be determined by
the number of units, in accordance with the following table:
[Amended 9-21-1987 by Ord. No. 15-1987]
Dwelling
Units Tot Lots
Tennis
Courts
Basketball
Courts
Multipurpose
Field
1 to 14 -- -- -- --
15 to 50 1 1 1 --
51 to 150 1 1 1 --
151 to 200 2 2 2 --
201 to 250 2 2 2 1
251 to 350 2 3 3 1
351 to 450 3 4 4 1
(3) Parking spaces for off-street parking will be required for each
tennis court and each multipurpose field in the same area and on
the same site as that active recreation facility which it serves. Four
parking spaces will be required for each tennis court, and 20
spaces will be required for each multipurpose field. Paving
101. Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Subdivision of Land.
§ 250-22 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-22
238:497
specifications for the off-street parking facility shall meet the
parking standard for paving in the commercial area.
(4) A buffer area 30 feet in width shall surround the nonstreet side of
each active recreational area and the parking area required to
support the same. Said buffer area shall be designed, developed
and maintained in accordance with the provisions for buffers set
forth in § 250-22B of this chapter, particularly Subsection B(5)(a)
thereof. Landscaping within the active recreation area itself may be
used as a basis for the request for a reduction of the screening
within the buffer area, and the type of active recreation facility
which is bounded by a portion of the perimeter property line may
also be used as a basis for a request for a reduction of the screening
requirements (i.e., outfield of multipurpose field, as opposed to
infield or foul lines, or tot lot, as opposed to basketball court or
tennis court). The adequacy of the buffering, landscaping and
screening must be approved by the Township Engineer and/or the
Township Planning Consultant as part of the landscape plan
presented to the reviewing authority.
(5) Recreational facilities for a type different than those mentioned
above may be proposed for substitution by the developer and
submitted for approval of the Board. Recreational facilities shall be
substituted on a dollar-for-dollar cost basis with cost figures
submitted by the developer and shall be of a type to serve the same
age group for whose use the original recreational facility was
intended.
(6) Recreational facilities proposed for any section of the development
receiving final plat approval shall be completed prior to issuance of
50% of the certificate of occupancy for said section and prior to
issuance of the building permits for any abutting and adjacent
dwelling unit.
(7) All active recreational facilities shall be so located where they are
easily accessible for police review and inspection so as to maintain
safety, peace and order in the community.
(8) Where two or more developments are proposed for construction or
are in the process of construction, which developments are either
adjacent to one another or are in close proximity to one another,
the number of dwelling units in the two developments shall be
added together to determine the type of recreation facilities
needed for the area, and the responsibility for providing and
constructing the recreation facilities so determined shall be
allocated proportionately between or among the developments.
[Added 9-21-1987 by Ord. No. 15-1987]
X. Flags and flagpoles. [Added 11-10-2009 by Ord. No. 14-2009]
(1) Flagpoles.
§ 250-22 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-22
238:498
(a) Number of flagpoles. One flagpole is permitted for each lot,
except that lots in excess of five acres shall be permitted up to
three flagpoles.
(b) Height of flagpoles. Flagpoles in residential zones or on lots
used for residential purposes shall not exceed 25 feet in height.
Flagpoles in nonresidential zones shall not exceed 35 feet in
height.
(c) Flagpole setbacks. In residential zones, the minimum setback
is 25 feet. In nonresidential zones, the minimum setback is 35
feet.
(d) Permits required. Building and zoning permits are required for
each flagpole.
(2) Flags, number and size. For each detached dwelling unit, two flags,
each not greater than 24 square feet in size, may be displayed. In
all multifamily developments and in all nonresidential zones, three
flags, each not greater than 40 square feet in size, may be
displayed.
Y. Temporary storage buildings. [Added 11-8-2011 by Ord. No.
12-2011]
(1) In all single-family detached housing districts, temporary storage
buildings shall be permitted, subject to the following:
(a) Number: One per lot containing a single-family detached
dwelling unit.
(b) Location: Shall be in the rear yard and shall satisfy the setback
requirements for accessory buildings contained in § 250-22A.
(c) Size: Shall not exceed 200 square feet or 12 feet in height.
(d) Material: Covering material is limited to canvas; supports may
be either wood or metal.
(e) Duration: Shall be permitted for a maximum of 180 days.
(f) Permits: An application for a zoning permit shall be made to
the Township Construction Official. Permits shall not be
extended or renewed beyond the permitted 180 days. The
property owner shall not receive more than one permit in any
one year.
(2) All temporary storage buildings that do not satisfy all of the
requirements of this subsection shall be considered permanent
accessory structures and shall satisfy all building and zoning
requirements for permanent accessory buildings.
Z. Existing communication towers. [Added 11-8-2011 by Ord. No.
12-2011]
§ 250-22 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-22
238:499
§ 250-22.1. Renewable energy systems. [Added 8-9-2011 by Ord. No.
11-2011]
(1) Additional antennas may be added to a non-conforming
communications tower and ground-mounted support equipment
may be added to a communications tower base complex in any
zoning district, subject to the following:
(a) The tower shall be preexisting.
(b) No increase in the overall height of the tower shall be
permitted.
(c) A structural analysis indicating the ability of the tower to
support the additional antennas shall be submitted to the
Township Construction Official for review and approval.
(d) No expansion of the lot area, leased area or fenced base
complex area shall be permitted.
(e) An applicant shall demonstrate the need for the additional
antennas and/or support equipment in order to satisfy federal
licensing requirements.
(f) An applicant for additional antennas and/or additional groundmounted
support equipment shall receive a zoning permit
approval from the Township Zoning Officer.
(2) An applicant shall satisfy all of the requirements set forth in this
subsection or the applicant shall apply for a use variance in
addition to a minor site plan.
A. Solar energy systems.
(1) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
PHOTOVOLTAIC PANEL — An elevated panel or plate, or a canopy
or array thereof, that captures and converts solar radiation to
produce power and includes flat plate, focusing solar connectors or
photovoltaic solar cells and excludes the base or foundation of the
panel, plate, canopy or array.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ACCESSORY USE — An energy system
which converts solar energy to usable thermal, mechanical,
chemical or electrical energy to meet all or a significant part of a
principal building's energy requirements.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, PRINCIPAL USE — An energy system
which converts solar energy to usable thermal, mechanical,
chemical or electrical energy and is primarily or solely designed
to generate energy for sale back into the energy grid rather than
being consumed on-site.
§ 250-22 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-22.1
238:500
(2) Solar energy systems, accessory use: where permitted.
(a) Single-family homes. Solar energy systems shall be a permitted
accessory use and structure to a single-family home in all
zoning districts permitting single-family homes. Solar energy
systems are permitted subject to the following:
[1] Solar energy systems shall be mounted parallel to the roof
of the principal structure. In no event shall a solar energy
system, or any accessory equipment, extend more than 12
inches beyond the edge of the roofline or 12 inches above
the highest point of the roof surface or structure. No solar
system shall cause any structure to exceed the permitted
height in the zone.
[2] Solar energy systems may be attached to any accessory
building that satisfies zoning locational, setback and
height requirements for the zone. However, in no event
shall solar energy systems be attached to more than two
accessory buildings on a single lot. No solar energy system
shall cause an accessory building to become
nonconforming in terms of height or setback
requirements.
[3] Ground-mounted accessory solar energy systems are
permitted, subject to the following:
[a] The system shall not contain more than 10
photovoltaic panels.
[b] The system shall be set back 50 feet from all property
lines.
[c] Systems are prohibited within front yard setbacks.
[4] Solar energy systems attached or mounted to accessory
structures, such as fences or walls, are prohibited.
[5] Solar energy systems as a permitted or principal use are
prohibited in all residential zoning districts.
[6] Zoning and construction permits shall be required.
(b) Office, retail, warehouse and industrial buildings; public
buildings and facilities; schools; religious facilities; and
daycare and preschool facilities.
[1] Solar energy systems are permitted as an accessory use
and/or structure. Solar energy systems are permitted
subject to the following:
[a] Preliminary and final site plan approval shall be
required.
§ 250-22.1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-22.1
238:501
[b] Solar energy systems shall be roof-mounted on the
principal building and shall not exceed the permitted
height in the zoning district.
[c] The principal use and building shall satisfy all zoning
bulk standards including lot size, setbacks and
percent of impervious area. A building may have an
accessory solar energy system if it is nonconforming
in terms of floor area ratio.
[d] Solar energy systems that are proposed to be groundmounted
or attached to accessory buildings or
structures are prohibited. Ground-mounted accessory
equipment may be ground-mounted but shall meet all
applicable setback requirements and shall be
screened from view from adjacent properties or public
streets.
[2] Solar energy systems that are proposed to be groundmounted
or attached or mounted to accessory buildings or
structures are prohibited.
(3) Solar energy systems as a principal permitted use: where
permitted.
(a) In any industrial zoning district, a solar energy system as a
principal permitted use on a lot or multiple lots that contain 20
or more contiguous acres under common ownership. The
following conditions shall apply:
[1] Solar energy systems as a principal permitted use shall
meet all setback and landscape buffer requirements of the
applicable zoning district.
[2] Only one permitted use per lot or lots is permitted under
this subsection.
(b) In any industrial zoning district, a solar energy system is
permitted as a secondary permitted use in relation to an
existing industrial or warehouse building, subject to the
following:
[1] Solar energy systems as a secondary permitted use are
permitted only on the roofs of industrial or warehouse
buildings and shall be screened from adjacent residential
uses and public streets. Ground-mounted systems are
prohibited.
[2] Accessory equipment is permitted to be ground-mounted
but shall meet all required district setbacks and shall be
screened from view from surrounding properties and
streets.
§ 250-22.1 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-23
238:502
§ 250-23. Restrictions on similarity of design.
With regard to multifamily housing units, the developer shall, to the
greatest extent feasible, alter the exterior construction materials of the
buildings or structures in order to minimize the uniformity of appearance
and shall design such buildings or structures so that the rooflines thereof
shall be broken up and shall not be contiguous for more than 40 feet,
so as to give the buildings or structures within the project an individual
appearance within reasonable limits. The front facade of any multifamily
housing dwelling unit shall not continue on the same plane for a distance
of more than the width of two connected dwelling units, and all offsets
between front facades shall be at least four feet in depth. If garages are
to be provided, they shall be an integral part of the structure and design
scheme. In order to provide variety in architectural appearance, all
construction of multifamily housing shall be in accordance with the
following table, entitled "Proposed Multifamily Variety Coefficient," which
establishes building point credits for various types of construction and
building point requirements based on the number of units involved.
Proposed Multifamily Variety Coefficient
Building Point Requirements
Units Points
2 16
3 20
4 24
5 28
6 32
Proposed Multifamily Variety Coefficient
Building Point Requirements
Factor Number of Points
Front and side offsets
4 to 6 feet 1 per unit
6 feet and over 3 per unit
Bay windows 1 per unit; maximum of 1/2 of units
in building
Overhang dormers 2 per unit; maximum of 1/2 of units
in building
Floor level changes 1 per unit
Story changes 4 per variation
Rooflines, major slope changes 3 per unit
Mansard or gambrel roofs 3 per unit, maximum of 1/2 of units
in building
§ 250-23 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-23
238:503
Proposed Multifamily Variety Coefficient
Building Point Requirements
Factor Number of Points
Material changes
Masonry frames 3 per unit
Texture only 1 per unit
Window and door varieties 2 per unit
Compatible architecture 4 per building
Compatible colors 2 per building
External fireplaces on front or side
facades
2 per dwelling unit
Covered entryways 1 per unit
Covered porches 2 per unit
Garages integrated with dwellings 3 per dwelling unit; maximum of 1/
2 of units in building
Integrated external access storage
areas
1 per unit; maximum of 1/2 of units
in building
§ 250-24. Sight triangles. [Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No.
24-1998; 4-22-2003 by Ord. No. 10-2003]
Sight triangles shall be required at each quadrant of an intersection of
streets and streets and driveways. The area within sight triangles shall be
either dedicated as part of the street right-of-way or maintained as part of
the lot adjoining the street and set aside on any subdivision or site plan
as a sight triangle easement. Within a sight triangle, no grading, planting
or structure shall be erected or maintained more than 30 inches above the
street center line or lower than 12 feet above the street center line. The
sight triangle is determined by the standards included in ASSHTO's Policy
on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, 2001. The classification of
existing and proposed streets shall be those shown on the adopted Master
Plan or as designated by the Land Development Board at the time of
the application for approval for a new street not included on the Master
Plan. A sight triangle easement dedication shall be expressed on the site
plan as follows: "Sight triangle easement subject to grading, planting and
construction restrictions, as provided for in the Zoning Ordinance of the
Township of Westampton." Portions of a lot set aside for the sight triangle
may be calculated in determining the lot area and may be included in
establishing the minimum setback provisions of this chapter.
§ 250-25. Signs. [Amended 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 20-2005]
A. Definitions. Definitions for signs shall be as defined in The New
Illustrated Book of Development Definitions by Moskowitz and
§ 250-23 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-25
238:504
Lindbloom, as amended, revised, updated or rewritten, unless modified
by this chapter.
B. Permit required.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect,
alter, locate or relocate, reconstruct or change in any manner any
sign or signs greater than six square feet in area without first
having obtained and having in force and effect a permit for the
location of such sign or signs from the Construction Official.
(2) Any person, firm or corporation desiring to procure a permit to
maintain a sign in the Township of Westampton shall file with the
Construction Official a written application which shall consist of an
accurate description of the location or the proposed location where
said sign is to be erected and a diagram of each sign that the
applicant desires to erect, alter, locate or relocate, use or maintain.
Such application shall be signed by the applicant who shall also
indicate his post office address and supply any and all information
that the Construction Official may reasonably require in order to
determine properly whether the proposed location of the sign
complies with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Exceptions, no permit required.
(1) The changing of the advertising copy or message on an approved
sign.
(2) Normal maintenance and repairs, unless a structural change is
made.
(3) Real estate signs temporarily advertising the sale, rental or lease of
the premises or portion thereof shall be, if not attached to the
building, set back at least 10 feet from all street and property lines.
Such signs shall not exceed eight square feet in area for residential
advertising nor 35 square feet for commercial and industrial uses.
Such signs shall be removed at the expense of the advertiser within
15 days after the termination or completion of the matter or
business being advertised. No more than one sign shall be
permitted along each street on which the building has frontage.
Real estate signs shall be permitted only on the lot that the sign is
advertising.
(4) Directional signs to real estate open houses may be permitted from
the nearest designated main street, at the entrance to a
development, and on street corners directing potential buyers to
the advertised property. Such signs shall be posted no earlier than
24 hours prior to an open house event and shall be removed no
later than one hour after such event. Attachments to open house
signs must be attached firmly and be constructed of material that is
reusable or otherwise environmentally sensitive. [Amended
10-9-2012 by Ord. No. 18-2012]
§ 250-25 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-25
238:505
(5) Temporary signs. No more than one sign advertising the name of
the building under construction, the general contractor, the
subcontractor, the financing institution, any public agencies or
officials and the professional personnel who worked on the project
is permitted on a construction site, beginning with the issuance of a
building permit and terminating with the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for the structure or the expiration of the building
permit, whichever comes first. Such sign shall not exceed an area
of 32 square feet.
(6) Temporary political signs not exceeding 32 square feet in area may
be erected on any privately owned lot or parcel. Political campaign
signs on cardboard not exceeding six square feet in area are
permitted in all districts. No such sign shall be erected more than
30 days prior to the election or referendum which it purports to
advertise, and all such sign shall be removed within five days after
the event.
D. Prohibited signs in all zoning districts.
(1) A sign advertising goods and/or services not sold or performed on
the lot on which the sign is located shall not be permitted, including
billboards.
(2) No flashing sign of any type may be erected.
(3) No signs shall be so placed as to impede or interfere in any way
with the operation of a traffic light, traffic directional signal or
general traffic vision.
(4) No advertising sign or device may be erected or used on top of any
building.
(5) Portable signs.
(6) Any sign or illumination that causes any direct glare into or upon
any road or any building other than the building to which the sign
may be related.
(7) Animated, flashing, illusionary and windblown signs. Signs using
mechanical and/or electrical devises to revolve, flash or display
movement or the illusion of movement as well as windblown signs
are prohibited. Windblown signs shall include, but not be limited to,
pennants, streamers, propellers and balloons. Searchlights used
for the attraction of attention to a commercial facility are also
prohibited.
(8) Changeable copy signs, either manually or electrically changed,
except as permitted for institutional uses.
E. Sign measurements.
§ 250-25 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-25
238:506
(1) The area of a sign shall mean and shall be computed as the area to
the outside edge of the frame surrounding the sign or by the edge
of the sign if no frame exists. When no frame or edge exists, the
area shall be defined by a projected, enclosed parallelogram drawn
to include all figures, letters, pictures and graphics on such sign.
Multifaceted signs shall not exceed the area allowed for standard
signs.
(2) Street number designations, postal boxes, family names on
residences, on-site traffic directional and parking signs, signs
posting property as "Private Property," "No Hunting" or similar
purposes, and "Danger" signs around utility and other danger areas
are permitted but are not to be considered in calculating the sign
area.
(3) The limitations of sign area prescribed in this chapter for permitted
commercial and industrial uses shall not apply to parking lot
markers, directional signs or entrance and exit signs erected on the
premises, provided that each such sign does not exceed four square
feet in area, that the number and the location of such signs are
approved by the reviewing authority and that no such sign contains
any advertising matter.
F. Promotional activities — permit required. A special permit shall be
available for a temporary sign promoting a special event or activity to
be no larger than four feet by four feet or 16 square feet. The permit
shall be valid for up to 30 days subject to extension of 30 days for no
more than three consecutive extensions. Only two special permits per
year per business may be issued. A sign permit shall be required, which
permit is available from the Construction Official. The temporary sign
promoting the special event or activity shall not be located where it
obstructs visibility or constitutes a traffic hazard in the opinion of the
issuing officer. Signs which are otherwise prohibited under these
provisions may be allowed under this special-temporary permit.
[Amended 12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 26-2016]
G. General requirements.
(1) Retail. [Amended 5-8-2007 by Ord. No. 10-2007; 11-10-2009
by Ord. No. 14-2009]
(a) Retail, office, manufacturing or warehouse freestanding signs
shall be monument- or ground-mounted with a maximum
height of eight feet, including the base. The base shall be no
higher than four feet, the length shall be 100% of the length of
the sign and the base shall not be considered part of the
permitted sign size.
(b) Subject to the approval of the Land Development Board, the
overall height of a freestanding sign may be increased up to 15
feet conditioned on the following:
§ 250-25 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-25
238:507
[1] For increased height between eight and 12 feet, the sign
size shall be reduced to 40 square feet and the length of
the base shall be reduced to 75% of the length of the sign.
[2] For increased height between 12 feet, one inch, and 15
feet, the sign size shall be reduced to 30 square feet and
the length of the base shall be reduced to 50% of the
length of the sign.
(c) Retail, office, manufacturing or warehouse buildings with a
front yard setback of 30 feet or less shall not be permitted a
freestanding sign. In lieu of a freestanding sign, such a
building shall be permitted an additional facade sign totaling
25 square feet to be mounted on a side wall of the building.
(2) All signs shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from all property
lines. [Amended 11-10-2009 by Ord. No. 14-2009]
(3) All signs shall be located outside all sight triangles.
(4) Attached signs shall be affixed parallel to the wall to which they are
attached and project no more than 15 inches from this surface of
the wall.
(5) Illuminated signs shall be arranged to reflect the light and glare
away from adjoining lots and streets. No sign shall be permitted if
said sign contains or uses a beam, beacon or flashing illumination.
All signs lighted externally shall be lit from the bottom and be
shielded from adjoining lots, streets and interior drives and with
the light source angled no closer to the horizontal than two vertical
to one horizontal. All lights shall be either shielded or shall have a
translucent fixture to reduce off-site effects.
(6) Signs permitted for conditional uses. Conditional uses are allowed
in accordance with the provisions of the sign regulations, no matter
in what district the conditional use is located, except as specifically
modified in the provisions for that conditional use.
(7) Maintenance. Signs shall be constructed of durable materials,
maintained in good condition and not allowed to become
dilapidated.
H. Residential development permanent identification sign. Signs for each
residential development shall not exceed 32 square feet on each side. If
the sign consists of additional architectural features or improvements
that are intended to establish a theme, logo or special identification for
the project, then the 32 square feet may be applicable only to the area
of the lettering. Architectural features that are harmonious with the
sign may include, but shall not be limited to, brick, stone or wood focal
features, fences, walls and pedestrian shelters. All signs shall be
located within the development and may be located adjacent to any
street bounding the development and shall not exceed two in number
§ 250-25 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-25
238:508
per project. All signs and architectural features shall not exceed six feet
in height from ground level.
I. Institutional uses including religious facilities; schools; child-care
facilities; governmental buildings and uses, including fire and
emergency management stations; libraries; public works facilities;
parks and recreation facilities; and lodges and fraternal organizations.
Such uses may be permitted one identification, building-mounted sign
not exceeding a total of 32 square feet in area. Freestanding signs,
limited to one per use, with or without a bulletin board or reader board,
shall be permitted, provided that the sign does not exceed 32 square
feet on each side. A bulletin board or reader board allows for
changeable copy of text. Letters shall not exceed three feet in height.
The height of the freestanding sign shall be a maximum of six feet.
J. Shopping centers; office, warehouse and/or industrial parks.
(1) In all projects, a master sign program shall be submitted for review
and approval. The master sign program shall show the proposed
color combinations as well as the locations and the sizes of all
signs.
(2) The overall project shall be permitted freestanding project
identification signs, one along each existing perimeter street or
highway. These signs shall identify only the name and the logo of
the entire project. The maximum size for each sign shall be 100
square feet.
(3) Individual tenants within a shopping center shall not be permitted
a freestanding sign.
(4) Each office, warehouse or industrial building shall be permitted
one freestanding sign indicating either the name and the logo of
the building, the address of the building, or both. The sign shall not
be greater than 50 square feet in size.
(5) Shopping centers and each office, warehouse or industrial building
shall be permitted one or more tenant directory signs for multioccupied
buildings. These signs shall be located within the parking
lot near the vehicular access points. These signs shall be
monument-based and ground-mounted horizontally and shall not
be raised in the air on poles. These signs may list the occupants of
the building, suite numbers and directional arrows. Such signs
shall be a maximum of 16 square feet with a maximum height of six
feet.
(6) Facade signs.
(a) Shopping centers. A facade sign board or area shall be
uniformly provided for the entire project. Individual facade
sign boxes shall be not more than three feet high and shall
contain not more than two lines of text. The length shall not
§ 250-25 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-25
238:509
exceed 15 feet, and there shall be six feet of open space
separating any two signs. [Amended 5-8-2007 by Ord. No.
10-2007]
(b) Banks shall be permitted one facade sign as specified above. In
addition, a separate facade sign not to exceed 24 square feet
shall be permitted as part of an exterior, wall-mounted, money
access machine.
(c) Each office, warehouse or industrial building may be permitted
one facade sign indicating the name and the logo of the
building. If the building name is the same as a tenant, then that
tenant must occupy at least 60% of the rentable area of the
building. These signs and logos shall not exceed three feet in
height. The length shall not exceed 20 feet. The overall length
shall include all letters, numbers, logos and open areas
between sign features. [Amended 5-8-2007 by Ord. No.
10-2007]
(d) Each tenant in a multi-occupied office, warehouse or industrial
building may be permitted a wall-mounted sign next to entry
doors listing the occupant's name, suite number and logo.
These signs shall not be greater than 12 inches by 12 inches.
These signs may also be painted on the entry doors. Individual
tenants in a shopping center are permitted such signs in
relation to side and rear doors only.
K. Commercial buildings not located in a shopping center; or office,
warehouse and/or industrial park.
(1) Retail, restaurant, hotels and motels:
(a) One facade sign not to exceed a maximum of 40 square feet.
(b) A restaurant within a hotel or motel and open to the general
public shall be permitted a forty-square-foot facade sign that is
in addition to the hotel or motel facade sign.
(c) One freestanding sign indicating the name and the logo of the
tenant and the street address shall be permitted. Such signs
shall not exceed fifty-square feet in size. A restaurant located
within a hotel or motel and open to the general public shall be
permitted a fifty-square-foot panel that shall be attached to the
freestanding sign associated with the hotel or motel.
(2) Office, warehouse and industrial buildings. Freestanding directory
and facade signs shall be as specified in § 250-25J(4), (5) and (6)(c)
and (d).
L. Rancocas Village Historic District. In addition to conforming to the
regulations contained in this chapter, approval for the construction,
alteration, erection or display of any sign within the Village shall be
§ 250-25 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-25
238:510
§ 250-26. Conditional uses. [Amended 8-15-1988 by Ord. No.
11-1988; 3-6-1989 by Ord. No. 4-1989; 4-28-1998 by Ord. No.
8-1998; 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 20-1998; 11-10-1998 by Ord. No.
22-1998; 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 24-1998]
subject to Historic Preservation Commission ("HPC") review and
recommendation. The Land Development Board shall refer the plans
to the HPC (Appearance Committee) and take its comments under
consideration while conducting the review of the proposed plans as
they relate to the appearance, lettering, color, size, position, method of
attachment, texture of materials and design in order to establish that
the proposed sign conforms to the historical and districtive character of
the Village and does not injuriously affect the same or impair the value
of the adjoining properties, the District in general or those buildings
having architectural and historical worth in the immediate area.
M. Nonconforming signs. See § 250-22J of the Zoning Ordinance.
A. Guiding principles. Recognizing that certain uses, activities and
structures are necessary to serve the needs and convenience of the
Township of Westampton and at the same time recognizing that such
uses may be or become inimical to the public health, safety and general
welfare, if located and operated without proper consideration being
given to existing conditions and character of the surrounding area, such
uses are hereby designated as conditional uses, formerly known as
"special exception uses" or "uses requiring a special use permit." The
appropriate reviewing authority for a conditional use shall be the Land
Development Board of the Township of Westampton, provided that the
applicant can meet all of the conditions for the use as are set forth in
this chapter. If any of the conditions require a variance, the entire
matter shall be submitted to the Zoning Board of Adjustment of the
Township as a D variance or use variance pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
B. Places of worship.
(1) The proposed use is a bona fide nonprofit religious use.
(2) The proposed use in the proposed location will not adversely affect
the safe and comfortable enjoyment of property rights and
otherwise adversely affect the value of adjacent properties; that the
design of any structures to be erected in connection with such use
is in keeping with the general character of the residential area; and
that sufficient landscaping, including trees, shrubs and lawn, is
provided to appropriately buffer said use from adjoining residential
properties and to ensure an attractive appearance for the use.
(3) The buildings will not occupy more than 25% of the lot area.102
102. Editor's Note: Subsection B(4), pertaining to signage, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 20-2005.
§ 250-25 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-26
238:511
C. Shopping centers.
(1) Minimum lot size: two acres.
(2) Width at building line: 250 feet minimum.
(3) Front yard setback: in accordance with the zoning district in which
the use is located.
(4) Rear yard setback: in accordance with the zoning district in which
the use is located.
(5) Side yard setback: in accordance with the zoning district in which
the use is located.
(6) Height limitations: maximum to highest roof ridge or parapet
coping, 35 feet, excluding architectural roof appurtenances such as
chimneys, balustrades and cupolas.
(7) Lot coverage.
(a) Building: 30%.
(b) Building and paving: 80%.
(c) Open space: The twenty-percent requirement shall not be met
with streams or retention basins, but detention basins with
slopes not exceeding a ratio of 3 to 1 shall be included.
(8) Off-street parking spaces required.
(a) Amount.
[1] Five for every 1,000 square feet of building space.
[2] One for every three seats in restaurants, plus one for every
two restaurant employees per shift.
(b) Size.
[1] Nonemployee parking: 10 feet by 20 feet, except that
parking spaces abutting a pedestrian walkway with a
width of at least five feet or parking spaces abutting aisle
dividers, landscaping islands or parking islands may be 10
feet by 18 feet.
[2] Employee parking: nine feet by 20 feet. Employee parking
shall be physically separated from nonemployee parking. A
length of 18 feet for employee parking shall only be
permitted for spaces abutting a pedestrian walkway with a
width of at least five feet or for parking spaces abutting
aisle dividers, landscaping islands or parking islands.
(9) Parking lot design. Refer to § 250-22Q.103
§ 250-26 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-26
238:512
D. Motor vehicle service stations. [Amended 9-13-2005 by Ord. No.
20-2005; 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 1-2017]
(1) In addition to the information required in the site plan, said plan
shall also show the number and location of fuel tanks to be
installed, the dimensions and capacity of each storage tank, the
depth the tanks will be placed below the ground, the number and
location of pumps to be installed, the type of structure and
accessory buildings to be constructed, the number of automobiles
which are to be garaged, parking and vehicular circulation and the
relationship of the proposed use to the highways, streets and
adjacent properties.
(2) No conditional use will be granted unless it is determined that the
proposal satisfies the following aesthetic considerations:
(a) The design of any building in connection with such facilities, as
far as the general character of the area, will not be a
substantial detriment to the property rights of others in the
zone.
(b) Adequate and attractive fences and other safety devices will be
provided.
(c) Sufficient landscaping, including shrubs, trees and lawn, is to
be provided and will be periodically maintained.
(d) Adequate off-street parking will be provided.
(e) All of the area, yard and building coverage requirements of the
respective zone will be met.
(3) The following standards shall apply to any such conditional use:
(a) The entire area of the site traveled by motor vehicles shall be
hard-surfaced.
(b) Any repair of motor vehicles shall be performed in a fully
enclosed building, and no motor vehicles will be offered for
sale on the site. No motor vehicle parts or partially dismantled
motor vehicles will be stored outside of an enclosed building.
(c) No vehicles shall be permitted to be standing or parked on the
premises of a motor vehicle service station other than those
used by the employees in the direct or indirect operation of the
establishment and those being serviced therein. A maximum of
10 motor vehicles shall be parked on the premises at any one
time, and none shall remain standing for more than seven days,
with the exception that the Zoning Officer shall have the power
to extend the seven-day provision, for good cause shown, for a
103. Editor's Note: Subsection C(10) pertaining to sign regulations, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 20-2005.
§ 250-26 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-26
238:513
period of time not to exceed 30 consecutive days, provided
that the service station owner or operator makes a written
application to the Zoning Officer and pays an application fee of
$10. Noncompliance with the provisions of this section shall be
just cause for revocation of the permit required by this section.
(4) No more than two service stations may be located at any one
intersection.
(5) Outdoor displays of the accessory goods for sale may be erected on
the pump island and on the building island only, provided that they
are in a suitable rack or stand.
(6) Parking facilities shall be provided in the ratio of one parking space
for every 100 square feet of floor area in the principal building
which is specifically devoted to use as a motor vehicle service
station. Additional parking will be required if any portion of the site
is used as a convenience store.
(7) Where the motor vehicle service station abuts a residential area
(either a residential zone or an existing residential use), the motor
vehicle service station shall provide buffering in accordance with
the terms of this chapter, or as otherwise specifically approved by
the Planning Board based on specific site conditions.
(8) All fuel pumps shall be located at least 25 feet from any street or
property line. A minimum space of 20 feet shall exist between any
two islands and between any island and the service station
building.
(9) No motor vehicle service station shall display for sale, rental or
storage any motor vehicle or utility trailer or van or truck.
(10) Motor vehicle service stations shall comply with lot area and width
requirements of the zone in which they are located.
(11) Signage is permitted as follows:
(a) One facade sign for each building entrance, not to exceed
three feet high and 40 square feet in size.
(b) If fuel island canopies are proposed, one additional sign
attached to each canopy is permitted. Each sign shall not
exceed three feet high and 40 square feet in size.
(c) One freestanding sign for each street frontage not to exceed 60
square feet.
(d) A panel may be included within the permitted area of the
freestanding sign advertising gasoline grades and prices. The
panel shall not increase the height of the freestanding sign.
E. Repair garages and body shops.
§ 250-26 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-26
238:514
(1) The design of any building in connection with such facilities, as far
as the general character of the area, will not be a substantial
detriment to the property rights of others in the zone.
(2) Adequate and attractive fences and other safety devices will be
provided.
(3) Sufficient landscaping, including shrubs, trees and lawn, is
provided and will be periodically maintained.
(4) Adequate off-street parking will be provided.
(5) All of the area, yard and building coverage requirements of the
restrictive zone will be met.
(6) The entire area of the site traveled by motor vehicles shall be hardsurfaced.
(7) Any repair of motor vehicles shall be performed in a fully enclosed
building, and no motor vehicles will be offered for sale on the site.
(8) No motor vehicles shall be parked on the premises and remain
standing thereon for more than 14 consecutive days. For purposes
of this section, the term "motor vehicle" shall include partially
dismantled motor vehicles or any group of motor vehicle parts, as
well as motor vehicles in apparently operable condition.
Noncompliance with the provisions of this section shall be just
cause for the revocation of the permit required by this section and
of the certificate of occupancy.104
F. Hospitals or nursing homes; congregate care facilities; residential care
facilities.
(1) A "residential care facility" is an integrated complex consisting of
individual dwelling units with or without cooking facilities in each
unit and which provides a common dining area which may be
available to the residents of the complex. Medical facilities are
usually not provided, which distinguishes this type of facility from a
nursing home.
(2) Area and lot coverage shall be as follows:
(a) Area: minimum of five contiguous acres of land.
(b) Lot coverage (maximum):
[1] Building: 30%.
[2] Building with paving: 80%.
104. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E(9), pertaining to signs, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 20-2005.
§ 250-26 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-26
238:515
(3) Parking spaces shall be nine feet by 18 feet in size for
perpendicular spaces used for employee parking and 10 feet by 20
feet in size for patient, guest or visitor parking. The number of
spaces shall be computed at 0.333 parking space per bed for
patient, guest or visitor parking, plus two spaces for each employee
determined based on the highest shift. Only 1/2 of the aforesaid
employee parking need be improved as part of the initial
construction of the facility.
(4) A landscape plan showing adequate and appropriate buffering and
screening must be approved.
(5) All signs shall be reviewed by the approving authority that
approves the developmental plan, whether said signs are
illuminated or not, and meet the number and size requirements for
commercial uses set forth elsewhere in this chapter, unless express
provisions changing the general requirements are set forth
elsewhere in this section.
(6) All utility and service areas shall be adequately screened and
buffered.
(7) No standing sign shall exceed 15 feet in height. All signs shall be
reviewed by the approving authority that approves the
developmental plan, whether said signs are illuminated or not, and
meet the number and size requirements for commercial uses set
forth elsewhere in this chapter, unless express provisions changing
the general requirements are set forth elsewhere in this section.
(8) Buffers. Forty-foot-wide grass border strips or a twenty-foot-wide
landscaped or bermed border strip shall be established between
any improved surface and any property line. With respect to the
landscaped and bermed border strip, the combination of
topography and planting shall not exceed 30 inches in height. The
requirement of this section may be waived by the Land
Development Board if such a border strip would serve no useful
purpose or may be reduced to 10 feet if the Board determines that
the landscaping and berming provided is ample enough to serve as
a basis for the reduction.
(9) Building setbacks shall be as follows:
(a) Front yard and rear yard: 75 feet.
(b) Each side yard: 50 feet, total of 100 feet.
(10) Units. Rooms or units within those facilities such as congregate
care facilities and residential care facilities which are intended for
human occupancy on a long-term basis shall contain an interior
dimension of not less than 200 square feet and shall contain toilet,
bathing and sleeping facilities as well as living space. If cooking
§ 250-26 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-26
238:516
facilities are included, the interior dimension shall not be less than
250 square feet.
(11) Density. There shall be a density of not greater than 15 units per
gross tract acre for each facility two stories or less in height. A
facility of greater height consisting of more stories than two shall
be accorded a proportionate density increase depending upon the
number of stories allowed.
(12) Drives, parking areas, loading zones and trash enclosures,
impervious cover and signs all shall meet the standards set forth in
this chapter for commercial and industrial uses unless specifically
modified herein.
(13) All facilities shall be protected by an approved manual fire alarm
system. All facilities shall be protected by an approved automatic
sprinkler system. Any facility exceeding two stories shall have
elevator service provided.
G. Funeral homes.
(1) Buildings will not occupy more than 25% of the lot area, and total
improvement coverage shall not exceed 75%.
(2) The appropriate area and number of off-street parking spaces have
been established and met. The burden shall be on the applicant to
show that the property will be so situated that no traffic problems
are likely to result and to produce plans showing off-street parking
and proposed traffic flow and proposed location of cars or vehicles
lining up for funeral processions. The proofs must show that the
property is adequate in size and so located as to prevent
congestion.
(3) All signs shall be reviewed by the approving authority that
approves the developmental plan, whether said signs are
illuminated or not.
(4) All adjacent single-family detached residential uses, zones or
districts, whether constructed or to be constructed, shall be
buffered.
(5) All utility and service areas shall be adequately screened and
buffered.105
H. Lodges and fraternal organizations.
(1) The facilities involved shall consist of halls, meeting places or
clubhouses belonging to an association of persons formed for
mutual aid and benefit, but not for profit, providing social,
recreational or cultural opportunities for members.
105. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G(6), pertaining to signage, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 20-2005.
§ 250-26 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-26
238:517
(2) The applicant shall set forth a statement of full particulars on the
operation of the proposed use and a complete list of current
officers, including names and resident addresses.
(3) The applicant shall provide sufficient information to enable the
Board to determine that the proposed use is a bona fide nonprofit
organization operated solely for the recreation and enjoyment and
use of the members of said organization.
(4) All adjacent single-family detached residential uses, zones or
districts, whether constructed or to be constructed, shall be
buffered.
(5) The design of any building in connection with such facilities, as far
as the general character of the area, will not be a substantial
detriment to the property rights of others in the zone.
(6) Buildings will not occupy more than 25% of the lot area, and total
improvement coverage shall not exceed 75%.
(7) (Reserved)106
(8) All utility and service areas shall be adequately screened and
buffered.
I. Satellite antennas.
(1) Definitions. A "satellite antenna" is any apparatus, commonly
known as a "dish antenna," which is designed for the purpose of
receiving satellite television transmissions.
(2) Permit; required fee. No satellite earth station antenna, including
its mount, shall be built, erected or modified unless a building
permit is issued by the Construction Official. Any person, which
shall include corporations, partnerships, associations or any other
legal entity, applying for such a permit shall furnish to the
Construction Official such plans, drawings and specifications as he
may reasonably require as to the satellite earth station antenna to
be constructed, erected or modified and shall pay a fee equal and
equivalent to the sum of $6 per $1,000 of the value of the costs of
said construction and installation of said satellite antenna
commonly known as a "satellite dish."
(3) Conditional use. The satellite earth station, commonly known as a
"satellite dish," is permitted in all zones as a conditional use after
the following requirements are met:
(a) A dish antenna is only permitted as an accessory use on a lot
which contains a principal structure.
106. Editor's Note: Former Subsection H(7), pertaining to signs, was repealed 9-13-2005 by
Ord. No. 20-2005.
§ 250-26 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-26
238:518
(b) A dish antenna is not permitted in the front yard of any
structure.
(c) A dish antenna is permitted on the roof of a structure, provided
that the top of the dish antenna does not exceed three feet
from the highest part of the roof. Only perforated dishes are
allowed on roofs.
(d) No lot may contain more than one dish antenna as heretofore
regulated.
(e) No dish antenna placed anywhere on any lot shall exceed a
height of 14 feet from ground level to its uppermost extremity,
with a dish diameter not to exceed 12 feet. Dish antennas on
lots may be solid dishes.
(f) If the satellite antenna is to be placed in a side yard, it is to
conform to the same bulk requirements as are required for
principal buildings in the development regulations of the
Township of Westampton. If the satellite antenna is to be
placed in a rear yard, it is to conform to the same setback
requirements as govern the location of accessory buildings.
Any inconsistencies between this section and any other section
of the Zoning Code will be resolved in favor of this section.
(g) Dish antennas are not permitted on lots containing multifamily
dwellings, except that the same are allowed on lots containing
twins or duplexes.
J. Hotels and motels.
(1) Area and lot coverage shall be as follows:
(a) Area: minimum of five contiguous acres of land.
(b) Lot coverage.
[1] Building: 30%.
[2] Building with paving: 80%.
(2) Units. Rooms or units within the facility intended for human
occupancy shall contain an interior dimension of not less than 200
square feet and shall contain toilet, bathing and sleeping facilities
as well as living space. If cooking facilities are included, the
interior dimension shall not be less than 250 square feet.
(3) Density. The density shall be not greater than 15 units per gross
tract acre for each facility two stories or less in height. A facility of
greater height consisting of more stories than two shall be
accorded a proportionate density increase depending upon the
number of stories allowed.
§ 250-26 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-26
238:519
(4) All drives, parking areas, loading zones and trash enclosures,
impervious cover and signs shall meet the standards set forth in
this chapter for commercial and industrial uses unless specifically
modified herein.
(5) Buffers and setbacks shall be the same as those for hospitals and
nursing homes, etc.
(6) Parking. One parking space per unit intended for human occupancy
shall be provided, plus two spaces for each employee determined
based on the highest shift. Only 1/2 of the aforesaid employee
parking need be improved as part of the initial construction of the
facility. All spaces for employee parking shall be at least nine feet
by 18 feet for perpendicular parking. All spaces for visitor or guest
parking shall be 10 feet by 20 feet.
(7) Ballrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms and similar assembly
facilities are permitted in these facilities. Parking requirements for
such facilities shall be based on 25% of the maximum occupancy
permitted under the Building and Fire Codes107 for the aforesaid
assembly facilities. Restaurants shall meet the requirements for
parking as set forth elsewhere in this chapter or 25% of the
maximum occupancy permitted under the Building and Fire Codes,
whichever number is greater. Parking space shall be 10 feet by 20
feet.
(8) As part of the hotel or motel, commercial uses may be located
therein, limited to the following types of uses and restrictions:
(a) Dispensing of drugs, flower shops, laundry and dry-cleaning
pickup station, restaurants, food and beverage service
facilities, snack bars and sundry shops.
(b) Public entry to the commercial facility shall be from the
interior of the building, with no direct public entrance from
street or outside of building permitted.
(c) No merchandise or merchandise display windows shall be
visible from outside the building.
(9) All facilities shall be protected by an approved manual fire alarm
system. All facilities shall be protected by an approved automatic
sprinkler system. All facilities exceeding two stories shall have
elevator service provided.
(10) (Reserved)108
(11) A landscape plan showing adequate and appropriate buffering and
screening must be approved.
107. Editor's Note: See Ch. 99, Building Construction, and Ch. 128, Fire Prevention.
108. Editor's Note: Former Subsection J(10), pertaining to signs, was repealed 9-13-2005 by
Ord. No. 20-2005.
§ 250-26 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-26
238:520
(12) All utility and service areas shall be adequately screened and
buffered.
K. Office or research park development in the B-1 Zone.
(1) Minimum tract size shall be 15 acres.
(2) Tracts shall be developed with interior streets to reduce the
number of access points on arterial and collector streets.
(3) The average lot size in the park shall not be less than four acres.
(4) The minimum lot size shall be 2.5 acres.
(5) No lots of less than four acres may be created by subdivision until a
sufficient number of lots in excess of four acres have been
subdivided to maintain the minimum average lot size of four acres,
except that in any event, no more than half the total number of
resulting lots may be less than four acres. (For purposes of this
chapter in determining building setbacks and other site
requirements, a leased area that is not a subdivided lot shall
nevertheless use the boundaries of the leased area in the same
manner as if the boundaries were the subdivided lot lines.)
(6) The minimum lot frontage, width and depth, required yards,
maximum building height, maximum building coverage, maximum
floor area ratio (FAR) and maximum impervious coverage shall be
as required in the Schedule of Area, Yard and Bulk Requirements,
Table II, for four acre lots.109
L. Office or research park development in the OR-I Zone.
(1) Minimum tract size shall be 25 acres.
(2) Tracts shall be developed with interior streets to reduce the
number of access points on arterial and collector streets.
(3) The average lot size in the park shall not be less than 10 acres.
(4) The minimum lot size shall be five acres.
(5) No lots of less than 10 acres may be created by subdivision until a
sufficient number of lots in excess of 10 acres have been subdivided
to maintain the minimum average lot size of 10 acres, except that in
any event, no more than half the total number of resulting lots may
be less than 10 acres. (For purposes of this chapter in determining
building setbacks and other site requirements, a leased area that is
not a subdivided lot shall nevertheless use the boundaries of the
leased area in the same manner as if the boundaries were the
subdivided lot lines.)
109. Editor's Note: Said table is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 250-26 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-26
238:521
(6) The minimum lot frontage, width and depth for parcels less than 10
acres shall be 300 feet, with minimum building setbacks of 65 feet
from front and rear lot lines and 50 feet from side lot lines, except a
minimum setback of 100 feet from any residential zone line.
(7) Maximum building height, maximum building coverage, maximum
floor area ratio (FAR) and maximum impervious coverage shall be
as required in the Schedule of Area, Yard and Bulk Requirements,
Table II.110
M. Office or research park development in the OR-2 and OR-3 Zones.
(1) Minimum tract size shall be 15 acres.
(2) Tracts shall be developed with interior streets to reduce the
number of access points on arterial and collector streets.
(3) The average lot size in the park shall not be less than four acres.
(4) The minimum lot size shall be 2.5 acres.
(5) No lots of less than four acres may be created by subdivision until a
sufficient number of lots in excess of four acres have been
subdivided to maintain the minimum average lot size of four acres,
except that in any event, no more than half the total number of
resulting lots may be less than four acres. (For purposes of this
chapter in determining building setbacks and other site
requirements, a leased area that is not a subdivided lot shall
nevertheless use the boundaries of the leased area in the same
manner as if the boundaries were the subdivided lot lines.)
(6) The minimum lot frontage, width and depth, required yards,
maximum building height, maximum building coverage, maximum
floor area ratio (FAR) and maximum impervious coverage shall be
as required in the Schedule of Area, Yard and Bulk Requirements,
Table II.111
N. Bed-and-breakfast facilities.
(1) The habitable area of any dwelling used for a bed-and-breakfast
facility shall exceed 3,000 square feet. Basements and unfinished
attics shall not be counted as part of this computation.
(2) A residential dwelling containing overnight or short-term sleeping
accommodations for paying guests, limited to two such rooms,
suites or units. Occupancy of each unit or suite is limited to a
maximum of two adults and two children.
(3) The owner of the establishment must reside on the premises.
110. Editor's Note: Said table is located at the end of this chapter.
111. Editor's Note: Said table is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 250-26 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-26
238:522
(4) The character of the structure must be maintained and continued
as a single-family residence.
(5) A central dining area may be utilized to furnish meals to guests
only. Individual kitchen facilities and restaurant service to the
general public are prohibited.
(6) Guest stays are limited to 14 consecutive days of any period of 90
successive days.
(7) If the cartway which the property fronts is not wide enough to
permit on-street parking on both sides of the street, off-street
parking must be provided as follows:
(a) Two parking spaces for the owners and/or employees of the
residence and one parking space for each bed-and-breakfast
unit or suite. The owner operator of the bed-and-breakfast
shall require all employees and guests to use the off-street
parking.
(b) All parking spaces shall be 10 feet by 20 feet in size.
(c) Driveways may be used to satisfy this requirement.
(d) Off-street parking at a different premise may be used to satisfy
this requirement where the entitlement to such parking is
established under a recorded lease which shall be required for
the conditional use permit to become and remain valid.
(8) Signs. One or more signs indicating only the name, occupancy or
purpose of such building for any bed-and-breakfast facility or
identifying the off-street parking area, provided that the aggregate
area of such signs shall not exceed six square feet and no individual
sign shall exceed four square feet. The signs shall not be internally
illuminated. Either top or bottom lighting may be used with the
lighting and sign to be arranged to reflect the light and glare away
from adjoining lots and streets. Criteria pertaining to signs as set
forth in § 250-23 shall be followed unless they conflict with other
provisions set forth in this subsection.
(9) As part of a conditional use application, a site showing the signage,
including location and type and parking, shall be required.
O. Planned retirement communities in the R-1 District. [Added
11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 18-2000]
(1) The minimum tract size shall be at least 30 acres.
(2) The property shall front upon a municipal street.
(3) The property shall have a common lot line with property in the B-1
and OR-1 Districts.
§ 250-26 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-26.1
238:523
§ 250-26.1. Planned retirement community (PRC) development in
R-1 District. [Added 11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 18-2000]
The following zoning standards shall apply to the permitted conditional use
of a planned retirement community in the R-1 District:
A. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings (See Schedule 1.112)
(2) Model homes and/or sales office.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Retirement community center, as part of a planned retirement
community (PRC) development.
(2) Recreational facilities and uses, including buildings for
recreational activities, biking paths, walking paths, tennis courts,
shuffleboard courts, swimming pools and similar recreational
improvements related to the PRC.
(3) Administration buildings related to the PRC.
(4) Building emergency services, such as garages and offices for first
aid equipment and personnel, as part of the PRC development.
(5) On-site medical and personal services for the use of the on-site
population only, as part of the PRC development.
(6) Bus stops to service the retirement community center as part of the
PRC development.
C. PRC requirements.
(1) The tract shall be under one ownership or control by the applicant
for purposes of obtaining all required development approvals and
committing the tract to the regulations of the planned retirement
community.
(2) Area and yard requirements for tract.
(a) Minimum tract size: 30 acres.
(b) Maximum density: 3.0 dwelling units per net acre. [Amended
6-14-2005 by Ord. No. 16-2005]
(c) Minimum buffer from residential lot to existing streets: 50 feet.
(d) Minimum building setback to adjoining zone: 50 feet.
(e) Minimum landscaped buffer to adjoining zone: 30 feet.
112. Editor's Note: Schedule 1 is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 250-26.1 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-26.1
238:524
(f) Minimum building setback to existing residential
development*: 100 feet.
(g) Minimum landscaped buffer to existing residential
development*: 50 feet.
(h) Maximum building coverage: 20%.
(i) Maximum impervious coverage: 35%.
(j) Maximum building height: 1 1/2 stories or 25 feet.
*NOTE: For the purposes of this section, "existing residential
development" means residential development with a minimum
gross density of one unit per three acres at the time of
adoption of this section.
(3) Covenants and deed restrictions. Approval of a planned retirement
community development consisting of age-restricted housing in the
R-1 District shall be conditioned upon the placement of restrictive
covenants on the deeds to any and all portions of a tract so
developed, to ensure that occupancy will be limited to persons 55
years of age or older with no children under 19 in permanent
residence.
(4) Architectural controls. The following architectural standards shall
apply to any planned retirement community:
(a) Sheds shall be permitted in the rear yard only, provided that
the maximum height shall be 10 feet and the maximum area
shall be 100 square feet.
(b) Decks and patios shall be limited in width to 12 feet, and shall
be set back at least six feet from the property lines.
Additionally, the minimum distance between the closest points
of any two decks shall be 18 feet.
(c) Cantilevered bay windows shall be permitted to extend two
feet into a required front yard or rear yard. The maximum
width of a bay window shall be eight feet.
(5) Management of recreation facilities, security, internal
transportation and open space. Open undeveloped portions of any
age-restricted development and all proposed recreation facilities,
security facilities and internal transportation facilities shall be
owned and maintained by a homeowners' association consisting of
all residents. Notification of this provision is to be included in the
contract of sale deed for each unit.
(6) Open space and recreation areas.
(a) At least 20% of the tract shall be reserved for open space and
recreation uses.
§ 250-26.1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-26.1
238:525
(b) Open space and recreation areas shall be located in
appropriate locations and arranged in such a manner so as to
further and foster the purposes of the planned retirement
community.
(c) All open space and recreation areas shall be dedicated for
active or passive recreation or open space. Such areas shall be
owned in common by residents of the planned retirement
community and managed by a homeowners' association.
(d) A comprehensive recreation plan shall be prepared to include
all proposed passive and active recreation elements such as
walking trails, picnic areas, outdoor and indoor tennis courts,
shuffleboard courts, swimming pools and seating areas.
(7) Retirement community center. Each planned retirement
community development may have a retirement community center.
The following standards shall apply:
(a) The retirement community center shall be centrally located
and easily accessible to all units. A comprehensive circulation
plan shall be prepared to coordinate the road network,
sidewalk layout and bikeways for the entire development with
emphasis on access to the center.
(b) The retirement community center may include but not be
limited to cafeteria facilities, homeowners' association
management offices, recreation and social activity rooms and
offices and a multi-purpose room designed for social activities.
(c) The retirement community center shall be no more than 1 1/2
stories and no more than 25 feet in height.
(8) Homeowner's association.
(a) Within the planned retirement community, the applicant shall
establish a homeowner's association.
(b) The homeowner's association shall own and be responsible for
the maintenance, repair, and reconstruction of all buildings
and lands owned by the residents of the community in common
with one another. Such lands shall include at a minimum all
recreational areas, open space and drainage facilities required
by the reviewing board for the community.
(c) All open space and recreation areas shall be protected by legal
arrangements, satisfactory to the Planning Board attorney,
sufficient to assure their maintenance and preservation for
their intended purpose. Covenants or other legal
arrangements, including homeowner's associations, shall
specify ownership of the area; method of maintenance;
responsibility for maintenance; maintenance taxes and
§ 250-26.1 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-26.1
238:526
insurance; compulsory membership and compulsory
assessment provisions; guarantees that any association formed
to own and maintain the area will not be dissolved without the
consent of the Planning Board; and any other specifications
deemed necessary by the Planning Board.
(9) Additional facilities.
(a) Each PRC may provide appropriate security measures, which
may include gatehouses, security patrols and/or secured
entries to the PRC.
(10) General requirements. No more than one residential lot per 140
feet of the existing rear lot line may abut the rear yards of existing
residences adjoining the rear of the tract.
(11) Buffer landscaping requirements. The minimum buffers
established in § 250-26.1C(2) above shall be planted in accordance
with the standards established in § 196-8B(2) and (3).
(12) Parking requirements. One and one-half parking spaces per unit, or
as required by the Residential Site Improvement Standards.
§ 250-26.1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-26.1
238:527

ARTICLE VIII
Low- and Moderate-Income Housing
[Amended in its entirety 7-11-2006 by Ord. No. 9-2006 ]
§ 250-27. General requirements.
A. Definitions. All definitions contained in the Council on Affordable
Housing (COAH) Third Round Substantive Rules, N.J.A.C 5:94-1.4, as
amended, are hereby incorporated by reference.
B. Phasing of units. Inclusionary developers shall complete construction
on and obtain certificates of occupancy for units intended for low- and
moderate-income occupancy in tandem with the market-rate
(unrestricted) units according to the following schedule:
Percentage of Market-Rate
Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
Up to 25% 0% (none required)
25%, plus 1 unit 10%
50% 50%
75% 75%
90% 100%
C. Distribution of low- and moderate-income units. At least half of all
affordable units within each inclusionary development shall be
affordable to low-income households.
D. Bedroom mix.
(1) Inclusionary developments that are not age-restricted shall provide
the following bedroom mix:
(a) The combination of efficiency and one-bedroom units is at least
10% and no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units;
(b) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units are twobedroom
units; and
(c) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units are threebedroom
units.
(2) Age-restricted, low- and moderate-income units shall provide, at a
minimum, that the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of
age-restricted, low- and moderate-income units within the
inclusionary development. The standard can be met by creating all
one-bedroom units or by creating a two-bedroom unit for each
efficiency unit.
§ 250-27 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-27
238:529
E. Controls on affordability. In placing households in low- and moderateincome
units, the Housing Officer shall utilize the following verification
and certification procedures:
(1) Every household member 18 years of age or over who will live in
the affordable unit and receives income shall be required to provide
income documentation as applicable and determined by the
Housing Officer. This includes income received by adults on behalf
of minor children for their benefit. Household members 18 years of
age or over not receiving income must produce documentation of
current status.
(2) Verification may include, but is not limited to, the following:
(a) Four (4) consecutive pay stubs, including overtime, bonuses or
tips, dated within 120 days of the interview date, or a letter
from an employer stating current annual income figures as
projected annually;
(b) A copy of regular IRS Form 1040 (Tax Computation Form),
1040A or 1040EZ, as applicable, and state income tax returns
filed for each of the three years prior to the date of the
interview;
(c) A letter or appropriate reporting form verifying benefits, such
as social security, unemployment, welfare, disability or pension
income (monthly or annually);
(d) A letter or appropriate reporting form verifying any other
sources of income claimed by the applicant, such as alimony
and child support;
(e) Reports that verify income from assets to be submitted by
banks or other financial institutions managing trust funds,
money market accounts, certificates of deposit, stocks or
bonds;
(f) Evidence or reports of income from assets, such as real estate
or businesses that are directly held by any household member;
(g) Evidence or reports that verify assets that do not earn regular
income, such as non-income-producing real estate or savings
that do not earn interest; and
(h) A notarized statement of explanation in such form as to be
satisfactory to the reviewer.
(3) Generally, sources of annual income shall be based on regular
income reported to the IRS and which can be utilized for mortgage
approval. Household annual gross income shall be calculated by
projecting current gross income over a twelve-month period.
§ 250-27 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-27
238:530
(4) Income includes, but is not limited to, wages, salaries, tips,
commissions, alimony, regularly scheduled overtime, pensions,
social security, unemployment compensation, AFDC, verified
regular child support, disability, net income from business or real
estate and income from assets such as savings, CDs, money market,
mutual funds, stocks and bonds, and imputed income from nonincome-
producing assets, such as equity in real estate.
(5) Assets not earning a verifiable income shall have an imputed
interest income using a current average annual savings interest
rate. Assets not earning income include current real estate equity.
Applicants owning real estate must produce documentation of a
market value appraisal and outstanding mortgage debt. The
difference will be treated as the monetary value of the asset and the
imputed interest added to income.
(6) Income from assets that have delayed earnings, such as IRAs or
annuity programs, shall not be included in current income until
such payments are being received. However, these assets must be
reported and verified.
(7) Net rent from real estate is considered income after the monthly
mortgage payment, including real estate taxes and insurance, is
deducted. Other expenses are not deductible. In addition, the
equity in the rented real estate is considered an asset and will have
the imputed interest income on the calculated value of equity
added to income.
(8) Income does not include payments, rebates or credits received
under federal or state low-income home energy assistance
programs, food stamps, payments received for care of foster
children, relocation and assistance benefits, income of live-in
attendants, scholarships, student loans, personal property such as
inheritances, one-time lottery winnings and insurance settlements
except for additional income earned from these additions and
casual, sporadic or irregular gifts and bonuses.
(9) Standard credit information services that provide conventional
credit and tenant reports may be utilized when certifying a
household with required written permission from the household.
An unsatisfactory credit history or credit information that
demonstrates a disproportionate debt to income ratio may result in
a denial of certification. Court-ordered payments for alimony or
child support to another household shall be considered a regular
monthly debt whether or not it is being paid regularly.
(10) Households whose total gross annual income is measured at 50%
or below 50% of the authorized median-income guidelines shall be
certified as low-income households and referred to units
designated for low-income households.
§ 250-27 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-27
238:531
(11) Households whose total gross annual income is measured above
50% but below 80% of the authorized median income shall be
certified as moderate-income households and referred to units
designated for moderate-income households.
(12) Generally, households will be referred to units where
predetermined total monthly housing costs correspond to the
household's calculated ability to pay, using 28% of gross monthly
income as a standard for home ownership and 30% of gross
monthly income as a standard for rental units.
(13) At the discretion of the administrative entity, households may also
be required to produce documentation of household composition
for determining the correct unit size and the applicable medianincome
guide.
(14) Generally, households will be referred to available units using the
following standards for occupancy:
(a) A maximum of two persons per bedroom;
(b) Children of the same sex in the same bedroom;
(c) Unrelated adults or persons of the opposite sex other than
husband and wife in separate bedrooms; and
(d) Children not in the same bedroom with parents.
(15) Households may be considered for units other than as above, but in
no case shall a household be referred to a unit that provides for
more than one additional bedroom per household occupancy
standards as stated in Subsection E(14)(a) above.
(16) A form for certification shall be prepared and signed by the
Housing Officer. Only households receiving certification shall be
referred to affordable housing units.
(17) Certified households who reject an opportunity for affordable
housing may be replaced on the referral list at their request and
may be reinterviewed for certification when their name appears on
a listing for a subsequent unit.
(18) Certification shall be valid for no more than 120 days unless a valid
sales contract or lease has been executed within that time period.
In this event, certifications shall be valid until such time as the
sales contract or lease is ruled invalid and no occupancy has
occurred. Certifications may be renewed in writing at the request
of a certified household for no more than an additional period of
120 days at the discretion of the administrative entity.
(19) Households who are denied certification may make a written
request for a redetermination. Households shall be required to
produce additional documentation to support their claim.
§ 250-27 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-27
238:532
Households who are denied certification a second time may request
a hearing by forwarding a written request to the Housing Officer
within 30 days following the household's receipt of a denial
notification. If a written request has not been received within the
thirty-day time period, the ineligible determination will be final.
The hearing decision shall be final.
F. Length of controls.
(1) Newly constructed low- and moderate-income sales units remain
affordable to low- and moderate-income households for an
appropriate period of not less than 30 years. The Housing Officer
shall require all conveyances of newly constructed low- and
moderate-income sales units subject to the Act to contain the deed
restriction and mortgage lien adopted by COAH.
(2) Rehabilitated, owner-occupied or renter-occupied housing units
that are improved to code standard shall be subject to affordability
controls for at least six years.
(3) Newly constructed and/or gut-rehabilitated low- and moderateincome
rental units remain affordable to low- and moderate-income
households for a period of 30 years. Affordability controls on rental
units may exceed the prescribed periods if the developer agrees to
a longer period.
(4) Housing units created through conversion of a nonresidential
structure shall be considered a new housing unit and shall be
subject to controls on affordability as delineated in Subsections
F(1) and F(3) above.
G. General provisions concerning uniform deed restriction liens and
enforcement through certificates of occupancy or reccupancy on sales
units.
(1) A certificate of occupancy for initial occupancy of a low- or
moderate-income sales unit shall not be issued unless there is a
written determination by the Housing Officer that the unit is to be
controlled by a deed restriction and mortgage lien as adopted by
COAH. The Housing Officer shall make such determination within
10 days of receipt of a proposed deed restriction and mortgage lien.
Amendments to the deed restriction and lien shall be permitted
only if they have been approved by COAH. A request for an
amendment to the deed restriction and lien may be made by the
Housing Officer, the Township or a developer.
(2) The initial occupancy of a low- or moderate-income sales unit shall
not be permitted prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy in
accordance with Subsection G(1) above.
(3) A certificate of reoccupancy shall be required for any occupancy of
a low- or moderate-income sales unit resulting from a resale, and
§ 250-27 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-27
238:533
such certificate shall not be issued unless there is a written
determination by the Housing Officer that the unit is to be
controlled by the deed restriction and mortgage lien prior to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy regardless of whether the
sellers had executed the deed restriction and mortgage lien
adopted by COAH upon acquisition of the property. The Housing
Officer shall make such determination within 10 days of receipt of
a proposed deed restriction and mortgage lien.
(4) The certificate of reoccupancy shall not be required in sales for
which controls are allowed to expire or in which the repayment
option is being exercised.
(5) The mortgage lien and the deed restriction shall be filed with the
Records Office of the County of Burlington. The lien and deed
restriction shall be in the form adopted by COAH unless
amendments have been approved by COAH.
(6) The deed restriction, including the repayment clause, and the
mortgage lien shall have priority over all mortgages on the
property except for a first mortgage placed on the property by the
mortgagee prior to the expiration of resale controls.
H. Option to buy sales unit.
(1) The deed restriction governing the deeds of low- and moderateincome
units shall include an option permitting purchase of the
affordable housing unit at the maximum allowable restricted sales
price at the time of the first nonexempt sale after controls on
affordability have been in effect on the unit for the period specified
in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2. The option to buy shall be available to the
Township, the DCA, the Agency or a qualified nonprofit.
(2) All deed restrictions governing low- and moderate-income units
shall require the owner to notify the Housing Officer and COAH by
certified mail of any intent to sell the unit 90 days prior to entering
into an agreement for the first nonexempt sale after controls have
been in effect on the housing unit for the period specified in N.J.A.C.
5:93-9.2.
(3) Upon receipt of such notice, the option to buy the unit at the
maximum allowable restricted sales price or any mutually
agreeable sales price that does not exceed the maximum allowable
restricted sales price shall be available for 90 days. The Housing
Officer shall notify the Township, the DCA, the Agency and COAH
that the unit is for sale. If the Township exercises this option, it may
enter into a contract of sale. If the Township fails to exercise this
option within 90 days, the first of the other entities giving notice to
the seller of its intent to purchase during the ninety-day period
shall be entitled to purchase the unit. If the option to purchase the
unit at the maximum allowable restricted sales price is not
exercised by a written offer to purchase the housing unit within 90
§ 250-27 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-27
238:534
days of receipt of the intent to sell, the owner may proceed to sell
the housing unit pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.8. If the owner does
not sell the unit within one year of the date of the delivery of notice
of intent to sell, the option to buy the unit shall be restored and the
owner shall be required to submit a new notice of intent to sell 90
days prior to any future proposed date of sale.
(4) Any option to buy a housing unit at the maximum allowable
restricted sales price shall be exercised by certified mail and shall
be deemed exercised upon mailing.
I. Municipal option; sales units.
(1) If the Township elects to purchase a low- or moderate-income unit
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93:9.4, it may:
(a) Convey or rent the housing unit to a low- or moderate-income
purchaser or tenant at a price or rent not to exceed the
maximum allowable restricted sales price or rent, provided
that the unit is controlled by a deed restriction or an
alternative approved by COAH; or
(b) Convey the unit at fair market value subject to the provisions of
Subsection I(3)(c) below.
(2) If the Township purchases low-income housing units, it shall
maintain them as low-income housing units.
(3) If the Township elects to purchase low- or moderate-income
housing units and conveys them at a fair market value, it shall:
(a) Notify COAH of any proposed sale and sales price 90 days
before closing;
(b) Notify COAH of the price differential as defined in N.J.A.C.
5:93-1.3; and
(c) Deposit the price differential in an interest-bearing housing
trust fund devoted solely to the creation, rehabilitation or
maintenance of low- and moderate-income housing.
J. State option; sales units.
(1) When the DCA or the Agency elects to purchase a low- or moderateincome
unit pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4, it may:
(a) Convey or rent the housing unit to a low- or moderate-income
purchaser or tenant at a price or rent not to exceed the
allowable restricted sales price or rental; or
(b) Convey the unit at fair market value and utilize the price
differential to subsidize the construction, rehabilitation or
maintenance of low- and moderate-income housing within the
appropriate housing region.
§ 250-27 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-27
238:535
K. Nonprofit option; sales units.
(1) Nonprofit agencies may apply to COAH at any time for the right to
purchase low- or moderate-income units subsequent to the period
of controls on affordability, provided that the unit remains
controlled by a deed restriction approved by COAH.
(2) Nonprofit agencies that have been designated by COAH shall be
eligible to purchase low- or moderate-income units pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.4 for the sole purpose of conveying or renting the
housing unit to a low- or moderate-income purchaser or tenant at a
price or rent not to exceed the allowable restricted sales price or
rental. Low-income units shall be made available to low-income
purchasers or tenants, and the housing unit shall be regulated by
the deed restriction and lien adopted by COAH. The term of the
controls on affordability shall be the same as those required by
N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2.
L. Seller option; sales units.
(1) An eligible seller of a low- or moderate-income unit which has been
controlled for the period established in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2 who has
provided notice of an intent to sell may proceed with the sale if no
eligible entity as outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.19(c) and 5:80-26.22
exercises its option to purchase within 90 days.
(2) Subject to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.9, the seller may elect to:
(a) Sell to a qualified low- and moderate-income household at a
price not to exceed the maximum permitted sales price in
accordance with existing COAH rules, provided that the unit is
regulated by the deed restriction and lien adopted by COAH for
a period of at least 30 years; or
(b) Exercise the repayment option and sell to any purchaser at
market price, provided that 95% of the price differential is paid
to the Housing Officer as an instrument of the Township at
closing.
(3) If the sale will be to a qualified low- or moderate-income household,
the Housing Officer shall certify the income qualifications of the
purchase and shall ensure that the housing unit is regulated by the
deed restriction and lien required by COAH.
(4) The Housing Officer shall examine any contract of sale containing a
repayment option to determine if the proposed sales price bears a
reasonable relationship to the housing unit's fair market value. In
making this determination, the Housing Officer may rely on
comparable sales data or an appraisal. The Housing Officer shall
not approve any contract of sale where there is a determination
that the sales price does not bear a reasonable relationship to fair
market value. The Housing Officer shall make a determination
§ 250-27 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-27
238:536
within 20 days of receipt of the contract of sale and shall calculate
the repayment option payment.
(5) The Housing Officer shall adopt an appeal procedure by which a
seller may submit written documentation requesting the
administrative entity to recompute the repayment obligation if the
seller believes an error has been made or to reconsider a
determination that a sales price does not bear a reasonable
relationship to fair market value. A repayment obligation
determination made as a result of an owner's appeal shall be a final
administrative determination of the Housing Officer.
M. Township rejection of repayment option; sales units.
(1) The Township has the right to determine that the most desirable
means of promoting an adequate supply of low- and moderateincome
housing is to prohibit the exercise of the repayment option
and maintain controls on lower-income housing units sold within
the Township beyond the period required by N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2. Such
determination shall be made by resolution of the Township
Committee and shall be effective upon filing with COAH and the
Authority. The resolution shall specify the time period for which the
repayment option shall not be applicable. During such period, no
seller in the Township may utilize the repayment option permitted
by N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.8.
(2) If the Township exercises the option outlined in Subsection M(1)
above, it shall:
(a) Provide public notice in a newspaper of general circulation;
and
(b) Notify the administrative entity and COAH of the Township
Committee's action.
(3) The Housing Officer shall ensure that the deed restriction on all
affected housing units reflects the extended period of controls.
N. Continued application of options to create, rehabilitate or maintain lowand
moderate-income units; sales units. When a housing unit has been
maintained as a low- or moderate-income unit after controls have been
in effect for the period specified in the deed, the deed restriction
governing the housing units shall allow the Township, the state,
nonprofit agencies and sellers of low- and moderate-income units to
again exercise all of the same options as provided in this chapter.
O. Eligible capital improvements prior to the expiration of controls; sales
units.
(1) Property owners of single-family, owner-occupied housing may
apply to the Housing Officer for permission to increase the
maximum price for eligible capital improvements. "Eligible capital
§ 250-27 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-27
238:537
improvements" shall be those that render the unit suitable for
a larger household. In no event shall the maximum price of an
improved housing unit exceed the limits of affordability for the
larger household. Property owners shall apply to the Housing
Officer if an increase in the maximum sales prices is sought.
(2) At resale, all items of property which are permanently affixed to the
units and/or were included when the unit was initially restricted
(for example, refrigerator, range, washer, dryer, dishwasher, wallto-
wall carpeting, etc.) shall be included in the maximum allowable
resale price. Other items of property may be sold to the purchaser
at a reasonable price that has been approved by the Housing
Officer at the time of signing the agreement to purchase. The
purchase of central air conditioning installed subsequent to the
initial sale of the unit and not included in the base price may be
made a condition of the unit resale, provided that the price has
been approved by the Housing Officer. Unless otherwise permitted
by COAH, the purchase of any property other than central air
conditioning shall not be made a condition of the unit resale. The
owner and the purchaser must personally certify at the time of
closing that no unapproved transfer of funds for the purpose of
selling and receiving property has taken place at resale.
P. Subsidy to ensure affordability prior to the expiration of controls; sales
units. If the use of median-income data adopted by COAH to index the
cost of housing renders a unit unaffordable to a low- or moderateincome
household at the time of resale, the Township shall not lose
credit for the housing unit, provided that adequate controls on
affordability remain in place, but the Township may subsidize the
housing unit to maintain affordability.
Q. Impact of foreclosure on resale while controls are in place; sales units.
A judgment of foreclosure or a deed in lieu of foreclosure to a financial
institution regulated by State and/or Federal law or to a lender on the
secondary mortgage market (including, but not limited to, the Federal
National Mortgage Association, the Home Loan Mortgage Corporation,
the Government National Mortgage Association or any entity acting on
their behalf) shall not extinguish controls on affordable housing units.
[Amended 8-8-2006 by Ord. No. 12-2006]
R. Excess proceeds upon foreclosure; sales units. In the event of a
foreclosure sale, the owner of the affordable housing unit shall be
personally obligated to pay the Housing Officer any surplus funds, but
only to the extent that such surplus funds exceed the difference
between the sales price at the time of foreclosure and the amount
necessary to redeem the debt to the financial institution, including
costs of foreclosure.
S. Annual indexed increases while controls are in place; sales and rentals.
§ 250-27 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-27
238:538
(1) The price of an owner-occupied housing unit may increase annually
based on the percentage increase in the regional median income
limit for each housing region. In no event shall the maximum resale
price established by the Housing Officer be lower than the last
recorded purchase price.
(2) With the exception of rentals constructed pursuant to low-income
tax credit regulations, the rent of a low- or moderate-income
housing unit may be increased annually based on the percentage
increase in the housing consumer price index for the United States.
This increase shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for units
constructed pursuant to low-income tax credit regulations shall be
indexed pursuant to the regulations governing low-income tax
credits.
T. Procedures for initial sales, resale prior to the expiration of controls
and rentals.
(1) Low- and moderate-income sales units shall not be offered to nonincome-
eligible households at initial sale without COAH approval.
Parties that petition COAH for such approval shall document efforts
to sell housing units to income-eligible households.
(2) Persons wishing to sell affordable units shall notify the Housing
Officer of the intent to sell. If no eligible buyer enters a contract of
sale for the unit within 90 days of notification, the Housing Officer
shall have the option to purchase the unit for a negotiated price
that shall not exceed the maximum price permitted based on the
regional increase in median income as defined by HUD or other
recognized standard adopted by COAH. If the Housing Officer does
not purchase the unit, the seller may apply for permission to offer
the unit to a non-income-eligible household at the maximum price
permitted. The seller shall document efforts to sell the unit to an
income-eligible household as part of this application. In reviewing
the request, the Housing Officer shall consider the specific reasons
for any delay in selling the housing unit and the hardship to the
seller in continuing to offer the affordable unit to an income-eligible
applicant. The inability to sell a unit for the maximum permitted
resale price shall not, in itself, be considered an appropriate reason
for allowing a housing unit to be sold to a non-income-eligible
household. If the request is granted, the seller may offer a lowincome
housing unit to a moderate-income household and a
moderate-income housing unit to a household earning in excess of
80% of median. In no case shall the seller be permitted to receive
more than the maximum price permitted. In no case shall a sale
pursuant to this section eliminate the resale controls on the unit or
permit any subsequent seller to convey the unit except in full
compliance with the terms of this chapter. The over-income
purchaser may pay the same condominium or homeowner
association fees as the market purchaser if the master deed so
provides. If an income-eligible purchaser subsequently purchases a
§ 250-27 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-27
238:539
unit previously owned by an over-income purchaser, the
condominium or homeowner association fee shall revert to the fee
currently charged to all income-eligible owners.
(3) Owners of low- and moderate-income rental units shall not offer
rental units to non-income-eligible households without prior
approval of COAH. Parties that petition for such approval shall
document all efforts to rent to income-eligible households and
demonstrate to the satisfaction of COAH that alternatives, such as
a reduction in rent, are not feasible.
U. Affirmative marketing.
(1) Legislative authority:
(a) This article will apply to all developments that contain
proposed low- and moderate-income units.
(b) The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing
strategy designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all
majority and minority groups, regardless of sex, age or number
of children, to housing units which are being marketed by a
developer/sponsor, municipality and/or designated
administrative agency of affordable housing. The plan will
address the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15. In addition,
the plan prohibits discrimination in the sale, rental, financing
or other services related to housing on the basis of race, color,
sex, religion, handicap, age, familial status/size or national
origin. The Township of Westampton is in the housing region
consisting of Burlington, Camden and Gloucester Counties.
The affirmative marketing program is a continuing program
and will meet the requirements set forth in this article.
(2) General responsibilities:
(a) A Housing Officer shall be appointed by the Township
Committee to act as a liaison to the contracting agency for
housing services and the developers of low- and moderateincome
housing.
(b) Developers of low- and moderate-income housing shall be
responsible for the affirmative marketing, determination of
eligibility and the initial sale or rental of low- or moderateincome
units. After the initial sale and occupancy by qualified
residents, the responsibility for the continuing affirmative
marketing program, determination of eligibility and resale of
units shall be the responsibility of the agency appointed by the
Township Committee to administer the affordable housing
program.
(c) The owner of a low- or moderate-income rental development
may either continue the affirmative marketing program,
§ 250-27 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-27
238:540
determination of eligibility or rerental of units or choose to
have the Township's appointed Affordable Housing
Administrator perform these functions.
(d) The Township Committee may appoint an outside agency as
the Affordable Housing Administrator. The Administrator has
the responsibility to income-qualify low- and moderate-income
households; place income-eligible households in low- and
moderate-income units as they become vacant during the
period of affordability controls; assist with advertising and
outreach to low- and moderate-income households; enforce the
terms of the deed restriction and mortgage loan; and provide
counseling services to low- and moderate-income applicants on
subjects such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage
qualification, rental lease requirements and landlord/tenant
law.
(e) The owner of affordable rental units may contract with the
Administrator for the affirmative marketing and determination
of eligibility for the rerental of affordable units.
(f) An affirmative marketing plan shall be prepared for each
development containing low- and moderate-income units. The
plan shall contain the following information:
[1] The name and address of the project.
[2] The number of units, including the number of sales and/or
rental units.
[3] The price of sales and/or rental units.
[4] The name of the sales agent and/or rental manager.
[5] A description of the random selection method that will be
used to select occupants of affordable housing.
[6] Disclosure of required application fees.
[7] A description of the media to be used in advertising.
(g) The cost of advertising shall be the developer's responsibility.
(h) The affirmative marketing process shall begin at least four
months prior to expected occupancy of the units.
(3) Required information:
(a) Street address of units.
(b) Directions to housing units.
(c) Number of bedrooms per unit.
(d) Range of prices/rents.
§ 250-27 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-27
238:541
(e) Maximum income permitted to qualify for housing units.
(f) Location of applications, including business hours and where/
how applications may be obtained.
(g) Application fees.
(4) Newspaper advertisement.
(a) All newspaper articles, announcements and requests for
applications for low- and moderate-income units will appear in
the following daily regional newspapers/publications:
[1] Burlington County Times.
[2] Courier-Post.
[3] Trenton Times.
(b) The primary marketing will take the form of at least one press
release sent to the above publications and a paid display
advertisement in each of the above newspapers. Additional
advertising and publicity will be on an as-needed basis.
(5) Radio and cable television advertisements: Regional radio and/or
cable television station(s) will be used on an as-needed basis.
(6) Locations of applications: The following are the locations of
applications, brochure(s), sign(s) and/or poster(s) used as part of
the affirmative marketing program:
(a) Westampton Township Municipal Building.
(b) Developers' sales or rental offices.
(c) Burlington County Library.
(d) Applications shall be mailed to prospective applicants upon
request.
(7) Community outreach:
(a) The following is a list of community contact person(s) and/or
organization(s) in Burlington, Camden and Gloucester
Counties that will aid in the affirmative marketing program
with particular emphasis on contacts that will reach out to
groups that are least likely to apply for housing within the
region:
[1] The area chapter of NAACP (Willingboro).
[2] South Burlington branch of NAACP (Cinnaminson).
[3] Puerto Rican Action Committee (Camden).
[4] Interfaith Caregivers, Inc.
§ 250-27 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-27
238:542
[5] Houses of worship within Westampton Township.
[6] Family Services of Burlington County.
[7] Spanish-Speaking Ministry.
[8] Camden Metropolitan Ministry.
[9] Concerned Citizens of North Camden.
[10] Powhatan Renape Nation.
(b) Quarterly flyers and applications will be sent to each of the
following agencies for publication in their journals and for
circulation among their members: Board of Realtors in
Burlington, Camden and Gloucester Counties.
(c) Additionally, quarterly informational circulars and applications
will be sent to chief administrative employees of each of the
following agencies in the Counties of Burlington, Camden and
Gloucester:
[1] Welfare or Social Services Board.
[2] Rental Assistance Office (local office of DCA).
[3] Office of Department of Aging.
[4] Housing Authority.
[5] Library.
(8) Selection of occupants:
(a) The developer's sales or rental office shall be open to take
applications at specified times during the week as advertised.
The developer shall interview all prospective applicants to
explain the regulations and policies associated with the
development and the Township's low- and moderate-income
housing program in general.
(b) After receiving a completed application, the developer shall
make a preliminary determination for eligibility based on
annual income, the number of family members and age. Age
shall be an eligibility standard for age-restricted units only. If
eligibility is tentatively established, the applicant's income
shall be verified. In addition, the developer will have
performed a credit record search. If information received
shows a record of bad credit or exposes erroneous information
on the application, the applicant shall be given an opportunity
to explain. If the developer believes the explanation refutes the
derogatory information, then the application shall be
continued to be processed.
§ 250-27 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-27
238:543
(c) Applicants shall receive written notice of a determination of
ineligibility within 10 days of such determination. The written
notice shall contain the reason for ineligibility and an
explanation of the appeal process.
(d) The applicant who has been declared ineligible shall have the
right to appeal to the Township Committee. Such appeal shall
be filed in writing with the Township Housing Officer within 15
days of receipt of the notice of ineligibility. The Township
Committee shall make a determination of eligibility within 10
days of receipt of the appeal. Such determination shall be in
the form of a written notice to the applicant. The determination
of the Township Committee shall be deemed to be final.
V. Procedures for recertification of tenants.
(1) Responsibilities of the developer:
(a) The developer of low- and/or moderate-income rental units
shall certify annually, in the month of January, that their rental
prices comply with the low- and moderate-income affordable
rental charges currently established under the terms of this
article and shall submit a certified rent roll showing apartment
numbers, name(s) of all tenants and rent charges.
(b) Existing renters' income eligibility will be recertified annually.
The developer will be responsible for gathering updated
information, as was required upon initial occupancy, and
submitting that documentation and re-certification form to the
Housing Officer for recertification. These forms and
documentation shall be filed with the Housing Officer at least
60 days before the anniversary of the lease inception.
(2) Responsibilities of the Housing Officer:
(a) The Housing Officer shall notify all developers of low- and
moderate-income rental units of any adjustments in income
ceilings and/or affordable rental charges.
(b) The Housing Officer shall send to the developer a current copy
of this article and any rules and regulations developed
pursuant to it, application forms and list of required
documentation to be submitted by any renter.
(c) The Housing Officer shall, within 30 days of receipt of a
complete application from the developer, review the
documentation and determine if the renter remains qualified.
The Housing Officer shall notify the renter and the developer of
the determination in writing.
(3) Responsibilities of renter applying for recertification:
§ 250-27 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-27
238:544
(a) The renter shall complete and sign the application for
recertification as a qualified renter of low- and/or moderateincome
affordable housing and submit the same to the
developer.
(b) The rental shall submit with the above application all pertinent
documentation required by the Housing Officer.
(4) Procedure in the event a renter is no longer qualified: If it is
determined that an existing renter's income exceeds the relevant
income ceiling, the following will apply:
(a) If the renter's income exceeds 100% of the moderate-income
ceiling, the renter may continue in occupancy and shall pay a
rent that is greater than the applicable final affordable rental
charge, such that the total cost for rent and utilities equals
30% of the renter's gross aggregate family income. That
portion of the rent that is greater than the applicable final
affordable rental charge (excess rental income) shall be paid to
the Township. The funds paid to the Township shall be utilized
to assist the Township in maintaining its housing program for
low- and moderate-income persons. [Amended 8-8-2006 by
Ord. No. 12-2006]
(b) (Reserved)113
(c) If the gross aggregate family income of a previously qualified
moderate-income renter falls below the low-income ceiling, as
soon as a low-income family vacates, that renter may be
requalified as a low-income renter and only be responsible for
paying the affordable rental charge for a low-income unit. The
developer then may fill the vacant rental unit with a new
qualified moderate-income renter who will pay the affordable
rental charge for a moderate-income unit.
(5) Procedure if apartment is vacant due to failure to requalify: If any
apartment is vacated as a result of failing to requalify a renter, the
same procedure will be followed by the developer, the Housing
Officer and the applicant as on initial occupancy of the rental unit.
W. Qualifying units. Dwelling units which are not built pursuant to one of
the above affirmative programs, but whose sale or rental price qualifies
them for low- and moderate-income occupancy, and which can be
counted in the fair-share allocation, shall not be subject to the above
restrictions pertaining to affordability or to the administrative
procedures dealing with sale and resale, letting and reletting.
X. Inability to sell or rent.
113. Editor's Note: Former Subsection V(4)(b), pertaining to notice to quit, was repealed
8-8-2006 by Ord. No. 12-2006.
§ 250-27 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-27
238:545
(1) In the event that low- and moderate-income units cannot be sold or
rented, as applicable, within six months of being substantially
completed and offered for sale or rent, any inclusionary developer
may apply to the Township Committee for relief. Such application
must provide evidence of the developer's having undertaken an
affirmative marketing effort to sell or rent the units. Relief to the
developers shall not include exempting the units from the low- and
moderate-income sales prices or rent level, nor shall relief include
exempting the units from restrictions on appreciation allowable
upon resale or restrictions on escalation allowable upon rerental.
(2) The Township Committee may allow a special-exemption qualified
buyer/renter to purchase or rent any inclusionary unit based upon a
statement of exemptions and surcharge if the Township Committee
finds it appropriate. The Township Committee is not limited to this
Section or those methods of relief.
Y. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(1) The Township's Housing Office and Housing Officer are responsible
for the enforcement of this article. Any person(s) violating any
provision of this article shall be subject to prosecution in the
Westampton Township Municipal Court.
(2) In addition to prosecution, the Township may apply to the Superior
Court of New Jersey for such legal or equitable relief as it deems
the circumstances to require in order to further the intent and
purposes of this article or to prevent continuing violation of the
article.
(3) Any person violating any provision of this article shall be
responsible for all costs and expenses, including attorney's fees
incurred by the Township in the enforcement process.
(4) The Township shall encourage the resolution of disputes and other
issues regarding alleged violations of this article by mediation and
conciliation. To that end, the Housing Office, through the Housing
Officer, shall provide the person suspected of any violation with
prior notice and an opportunity to respond in writing to the issues
raised in the notice. After developing all the facts possible from
available sources, the Housing Officer shall prepare a written
report to the Township Committee which will then determine what
particular steps shall be taken to provide for prompt and efficient
enforcement.
(5) Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a
fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a
period not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each violation of any of the provisions of this article
and each day the same is violated shall be deemed and taken to be
separate and distinct offense.
§ 250-27 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-27
238:546
§ 250-28. Mandatory set-asides for low- and moderate-income
housing construction.
Z. Waivers. Any person adversely affected by the strict adherence to this
article may apply to the Township Committee or its designee for a
waiver of interpretation of that section which adversely impacts his/her
situation. Such application shall be in writing and contain a full
statement of the facts and circumstances. The Township Committee or
its designees shall consider such a request and shall advise such person
as to whether relief is to be granted. In considering such requests, the
Township Committee or its designee shall give primary consideration to
the purpose underlying this article and the specific regulation involved
and shall weigh this purpose against the specific reasons sought to
justify a departure or modification.
AA. Forms. The Housing Officer shall create and from time to time
supplement and/or modify application forms so that the information
needed to make a fair evaluation of income eligibility may be obtained.
At a minimum, this form shall include current information regarding the
applicant's family size, income, expenses, assets and liabilities.
A. Where required. Whenever construction of multifamily housing or onefamily
detached dwellings on lots of less than 20,000 square feet is
proposed in the R-3 and R-4 Districts, the developer shall be required to
provide a set-aside and to construct low- and moderate-income housing
as required pursuant to this article. Mandatory set-aside construction
shall be provided according to the requirements of §§ 250-27 through
250-28.
B. Exemptions: maximum density; minimum set-aside; credits.
(1) Exceptions: Low- and moderate-income housing shall be
constructed as part of all developments in the R-3 and R-4 Zoning
Districts with the exception of minor subdivisions involving lots to
be constructed according to the standards contained in
§ 250-12A(1) and (2).
(2) Multifamily housing: A maximum density of six residential dwelling
units of multifamily housing per net acre shall be permitted,
provided that the developer constructs a mandatory set-aside of
20% of the units for low- and moderate-income housing. When
multifamily development is proposed at a lower density than six
units per net acre, the following set-aside requirements shall apply:
Development Density
(units/acre)
Required Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Up to 3 12.5%
4 15.0%
5 17.5%
§ 250-27 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-28
238:547
Development Density
(units/acre)
Required Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
6 20.0%
(3) Single-family detached housing: Single-family detached housing on
lots smaller than 20,000 square feet or which are part of a major
subdivision in the R-3 and R-4 Zoning Districts may be developed
pursuant to the sections of this article. An overall tract density of
up to four units per net acre shall apply. A mandatory set-aside of
15% of the single-family units for low- and moderate-income
housing is required.
(4) Mixed-housing types: Where the development is composed of
multifamily housing and single-family housing, calculation of the
required set-aside shall be based on the number of multifamily
units and single-family units. The set-aside requirement may be
satisfied by construction of the low- and moderate-income units in
either the multifamily housing or the single-family housing or
partially in each. The fifteen-percent set-aside shall only apply to
the extent that the low- and moderate-income units are located in
the single-family detached structures. If the obligation is proposed
to be satisfied by locating the low- and moderate-income housing in
the multifamily structures, the twenty-percent set-aside shall apply
based on the total number of dwelling units to be built throughout
the development.
(5) Rental housing: The Township shall be eligible for all rental
housing bonus credits as determined by the current rules of the
New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing (COAH).
(6) Multifamily housing containing low- and moderate-income rental
units are permitted at a density of 10 dwelling units per net acre
with a minimum set-aside of 15% low- and moderate-income rental
units.
C. Development types permitted. The following development types are
permitted: multifamily housing, including, but not limited to,
townhouses, garden apartments, congregate-care facilities and singlefamily
detached housing.
(1) Garden apartments: a group of multifamily dwellings,
architecturally designed with one unit placed on top of another
unit, up to three units in height, designed for rental or sale of the
individual units, having common open spaces and designed in
accordance with the requirements for such dwellings as set forth in
this chapter.
(2) Townhouses: a building that has not fewer than two nor more than
10 one-family adjacent dwelling units erected in a row as a single
building, each being separated from the adjoining unit or units by
§ 250-28 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-28
238:548
an approved masonry party or partition wall or walls, thus creating
distinct units intended for separate ownership or rental. This
definition shall also include such terms as "row house," "patio
house," "court dwelling," "masonette," etc.
(3) Congregate-care facilities: a multifamily age-restricted housing
development with a common eating facility and a professional staff
providing social care and limited medical facilities.
(4) Single-family housing (with public water and sewer) according to
the following minimum standards:
(a) Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.
(b) Average lot area: 6,500 square feet.
(c) Minimum lot frontage: 50 feet.
(d) Minimum lot width at the front yard setback line: 50 feet.
(e) Distance between principal structures: at least 10 feet.
(f) Side yard setbacks: total of at least 15 feet with no less than
five feet on any one side.
(g) Principal or accessory structure: no closer to any lot line than
five feet.
(h) Minimum front yard: 20 feet.
(i) Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
(j) Architectural diversity shall be provided by requiring that
contiguous dwelling units are not the same size or color nor do
they have the same facade treatment.
D. Design standards and densities for garden apartments, townhouses and
congregate-care housing.
(1) Each project shall contain not less than 20% open space.
(2) No more than two townhouses may be attached in a straight line.
Consideration must be given to facade treatment with an eye
toward variety and/or breaks in the line of the facade. The
maximum building length in any one plane for any multifamily
housing structure, excluding congregate-care facilities, shall be
250 feet. "Plane" shall be defined as the general building line,
including facades or rooflines, with breaks and/or projections. It is
not intended to be interpreted as only those perfectly straight lines.
(3) The lot on which each townhouse is located shall be a minimum of
20 feet in width at its narrowest point.
(4) No unit shall exceed three stories in height from ground level.
Where topography permits, three-story buildings shall be
§ 250-28 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-28
238:549
constructed with the first-story dwelling unit at ground level on
one side of the structure and the second tier of units fronting on
the other side of the structure at ground level. There shall be no
dwelling units below ground or below the first story unless those
units front on one side of the structure at ground level with the
second tier of units fronting on the other side at ground level.
(5) The maximum number of garden apartment units per structure
shall be 24, and the maximum number of townhouses per structure
shall be 10 units. There shall not be any limit to the number of units
per structure for congregate-care facilities.
(6) The maximum height of any building shall be 40 feet, as measured
from the high point of the ridgeline to the average elevation of the
building at the grade line.
(7) Setbacks from perimeter property lines, from streets and one
building from the other:
(a) Setbacks. No multifamily building shall be closer than 25 feet
to any perimeter property line of the tract or 35 feet where a
buffer is required. No paved or otherwise improved impervious
surface shall be closer than 10 feet to any perimeter property
line or 20 feet where a buffer is required.
(b) The distance between multifamily buildings and any other
residential building, whether single-family or multifamily, shall
be as follows:
Position
Minimum Distances
(feet)
Front to front 60
Rear to rear 50
End to end or side to side 20
Where buffers are required 35
(c) No multifamily structure shall be located closer than 25 feet to
the roadway right-of-way line or, if a private drive is involved,
25 feet to the cartway from which access is obtained.
(d) Setbacks; additions to multifamily structures.
[1] Setbacks shall be measured in accordance with the
definition of setbacks. Minimum rear yards shall be
measured and shall run from the original rear building line
to the rear lot line of the property. Structures may be
added to existing multifamily dwellings in the rear yard,
within minimum distance of said rear yard, without a
variance, provided that said structure meets the following
criteria:
§ 250-28 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-28
238:550
[a] Multifamily dwellings consisting of two connecting
units. Types of structures permitted: awnings,
canopies, decks, patio covering, dwelling unit
additions for additional living space or storage space
as part of the dwelling unit. No addition or
construction allowed under this provision shall exceed
one story in height nor be deeper than 15 feet from
the original rear building line of the dwelling unit nor
be wider than the original dwelling unit nor extend
beyond the side building lines of any dwelling unit,
and shall be constructed no closer than two feet from
any common property line. Anyone wishing a
structure different from those described by the above
criteria will be required to apply for a variance.
[b] Multifamily dwellings consisting of three or more
connecting units. Types of structures permitted:
awnings, canopies, decks, patio coverings. None of the
above structures shall be deeper than 15 feet from the
original rear building line of the dwelling unit nor be
wider than the original dwelling unit nor extend
beyond the side building lines of any dwelling unit.
Anyone wishing a structure different from those
described by the above criteria will be required to
apply for a variance.
[2] These provisions are designed to protect the availability of
light and air to adjacent structures and properties and are
not intended to prohibit or apply to the construction of
fences or patios. It is intended to allow limited expansion
of multifamily dwelling units without the necessity of a
variance.
(8) Building coverage and impervious surface coverage. Not less than
20% of the gross area of the multifamily development shall be
devoted to green area. Twenty percent of open space may include
detention basins and wetlands to the extent of 1/2 of said open
space but shall not include retention basins, lakes, streams, other
areas of water, floodways, floodplains or flood hazard areas. The
eighty-percent impervious surface coverage can be apportioned in
any manner among building coverage; accessory building
coverage; paving coverage, including parking lot coverage;
cartways and sidewalks; retention basins; lakes; streams, etc.
(9) The density of the site or tract shall be calculated on the net
acreage of the site or tract.
(10) All proposed residential development shall be located on the
buildable acreage of the tract. The buildable acreage of the tract
shall be calculated excluding existing lakes, streams, floodways,
floodplains, flood hazard areas, wetlands and wetlands transition
§ 250-28 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-28
238:551
areas, environmentally sensitive land, slopes exceeding 15%, soils
which do not have the necessary stability coefficient to support
the building and structure proposed, any land encumbered by an
easement where the right to build has been precluded and areas
of the tract which contain a historic resource. All areas or pockets
proposed for buildable acreage shall be contiguous, with a
maximum pocket area of at least three acres in a geometric
configuration that makes all of the building acreage in the pocket
usable. The pocket must be accessible to streets and roadways
without traversing wetlands or wetland transition areas. In
addition, the buildings to be located on the buildable acreage shall
meet all setback criteria and other restrictions and criteria of this
chapter such as buffers, which may affect the ultimate dwelling
unit number count.
E. Buffers. Buffer areas are required between residential and
nonresidential development and also between multifamily development,
including townhouse development, garden apartments, congregatecare
facilities and areas zoned, developed or proposed for single-family
dwellings, whether part of the same project or on an adjacent tract. A
buffer area will also be required between multifamily development of
the nature set forth above from one another or single-family dwelling
areas, zoned, developed or proposed, whether on the multifamily
housing tract or adjacent thereto. For uses within the same project, the
Land Development Board shall waive this buffer requirement if
appropriate transitional uses are employed or if topography eliminates
the need for said buffer. Buffers are required where the perimeter
property line abuts a public roadway. All requirements of § 250-22B
shall be met.
F. Pedestrian access. With respect to any multifamily dwelling structure
which structure has interior units, as opposed to end units, the
developer shall provide pedestrian access easements along the front,
side and rear lot lines or building lines nearest to and surrounding the
structure so as to provide unobstructed access to the occupant of the
interior unit to his/her rear yard. It shall be unlawful for said pedestrian
accessway or easement to be obstructed in any manner such as by
fences, landscaping, etc.
G. Recreational facilities. Recreational facilities are required for all
townhouse and garden apartment developments. Congregate-care
facilities are exempt from the active recreation facility requirement but
shall appropriately improve the twenty-percent open space as a passive
recreation facility, said improvements consisting of benches, paths,
landscaping and other amenities. Recreational facilities shall comply
with the ordinance requirements for subdivisions as set forth in the
Township development standards.
H. Architectural and design requirements.
§ 250-28 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-28
238:552
(1) Any addition, exterior alteration, modification or change to an
existing building shall be compatible with the design, character
and color of the original building. Any new detached structure shall
also be compatible with the design, character and color of the
parent structure.
(2) All exterior painting and roofing, woodwork, trim work and siding
shall be kept the same color as that established and/or agreed to by
the owners of the entire building for the entire building. (Singlefamily
attached units, where rooflines and siding are not the same
elevation or continuous from one unit to the next, are excluded
from this section.) [Amended 3-12-2013 by Ord. No. 3-2013;
6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 6-2013]
(3) Storm and screen windows and doors shall conform to the
architectural character and color scheme of the home.
(4) Retaining walls, other structures, mounds, changes of grade and
drainage are prohibited.
(5) Extensions, widening or rerouting of existing driveways is
prohibited. Walkways are permitted, provided that they do not
exceed 30 inches in width and are constructed of concrete, laid
brick or patio stone in sand. Larger patios are permitted if the
drainage is not affected and they are constructed to conform to the
architectural character and scheme of the home.
(6) No outdoor animal enclosures, runs, houses or pens shall be
permitted unless the property is enclosed with a fence a minimum
of four feet high.
(7) Exterior antennas of any type are prohibited. (Twin homes and
duplex homes are excluded.)
(8) Except where a fence or wall has specifically been approved by the
Board of Directors, or a committee established by the Board of
Directors, of a homeowner’s association operating within and for a
residential community in the Township of Westampton, in which
case the decision of the homeowner’s association shall control, all
fences and walls constructed within the Township shall be subject
to the following: [Amended 7-10-2007 by Ord. No. 12-2007]
(a) Fences are to be no higher than six feet and are to be of a wood
board-on-board type with a natural finish. (Clear
weatherproofing or varnish is permitted.)
(b) Property owners shall obtain a permit to erect the fence, said
permit to be obtained from the Construction Official.
(9) Every effort shall be made so that both the facade and the type of
unit of the low- and moderate-income units shall in no way be
distinguishable from the facades or types of the other units in the
§ 250-28 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-28
238:553
§ 250-29. Mandatory development fees. [Amended 3-24-2009 by
Ord. No. 3-2009]
development. Comparable design shall be employed so that the
low- and moderate-income units look as much as possible like the
market units.
(10) Residential dwelling units shall be dispersed throughout an
inclusionary development as much as is reasonably possible. Where
there exists more than one type of unit, such as townhouses and
apartments, low- and moderate-income units may be allocated
disproportionately to one or more of the types of dwelling units if
the same is necessary in order to meet the sales or rental price
criteria set forth in this chapter. This provision shall not be
construed to allow geographic concentration of the low- and
moderate-income units in one area of the development. As part of
the developer's preliminary plat submission, a plan of dispersal of
the low- and moderate-income units among a suitable number of
market units shall be submitted and approved.
(11) Modular, prefabricated, manufactured, panelized or units by
similar names may be used for the implementation of low- and
moderate-income units.
I. Site development standards.
(1) Developments proposed under this chapter shall comply with the
Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.S.A. 5:21), as
amended.
(2) All other Township regulations as set forth in the Code of the
Township of Westampton which relate to the development of
property shall apply to any project which contains low- and
moderate-income housing, except as otherwise specifically varied
and changed herein.
A. Purpose.
(1) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, the power to adopt public ordinances
for public health, safety and welfare of the Township of
Westampton is conterminous with the power of the legislature; and
in Holmdel Builder's Association V. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985
(the Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq., and the State Constitution,
subject to the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption
of rules.
(2) Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, § 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2), and the
Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-8.1 through 40:55D-8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and
promulgate regulations necessary for the establishment,
§ 250-28 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-29
238:554
implementation, review, monitoring and enforcement of municipal
affordable housing trust funds and corresponding spending plans.
Municipalities that are under the jurisdiction of the Council or
court of competent jurisdiction and have a COAH-approved
spending plan may retain fees collected from nonresidential
development.
(3) This section establishes standards for the collection, maintenance,
and expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's
regulations and in accordance P.L. 2008, c. 46, §§ 8 and 32 through
38. Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be used for the sole
purpose of providing low- and moderate-income housing. This
section shall be interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules
on development fees, codified at N.J.A.C. 5:97-8, as such rules and
to the extent such rules are deemed applicable to the Township by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
(4) Notwithstanding the adoption of the provisions contained herein,
the within Code provisions shall not be construed as a waiver by
Westampton Township of any right it possesses to pursue claims set
forth in a certain Superior Court, Law Division complaint that
challenges the validity of New Jersey P.L. 2008, c. 46, which
contains the changes to the New Jersey Fair Housing Act that this
section is intended to implement.
B. Basic requirements.
(1) This section shall not be effective until approved by COAH pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.1.
(2) Westampton Township shall not spend development fees until
COAH has approved a plan for spending such fees in conformance
with N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.10 and 5:96-5.3.
C. Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the
following meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included
in the Westampton Township Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and
includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal
construction project or a one-hundred-percent-affordable development.
COAH or the COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing established under the Act which has primary jurisdiction for
the administration of housing obligations in accordance with sound
regional planning consideration in the state.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
§ 250-29 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-29
238:555
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property
divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for
the municipality in which the property is situated, as determined in
accordance with §§ 1, 5 and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A..54:1-35a
through 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment, and enhance the health,
safety and well-being of residents by producing durable, lowmaintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of
existing infrastructure and community services.
D. Residential development fees.
(1) Imposed fees.
(a) Within all residential zoning district(s) of the Township of
Westampton, residential developers, except for developers of
the types of development specifically exempted below, shall
pay a fee of 1.5% of the equalized assessed value for
residential development, provided no increased density is
permitted.
(b) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers shall pay a development fee of 6% percent of the
equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be
realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during
the two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance
application, the base density for the purposes of calculating
the bonus development fee shall be the highest density
permitted by right during the two-year period preceding the
filing of the variance application.
(c) Example: If an approval allows four units to be constructed on
a site that was zoned for two units, the fees could equal 1 1/2%
of the equalized assessed value on the first two units; and the
specified higher percentage up to 6% of the equalized assessed
value for the two additional units, provided zoning on the site
has not changed during the two-year period preceding the
filing of such a variance application.
(2) Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
residential development.
(a) Affordable housing developments, developments where the
developer is providing for the construction of affordable units
elsewhere in the municipality, and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
§ 250-29 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-29
238:556
(b) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a
site plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building
permit shall be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan
approval for this purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested
on the date that the building permit is issued.
(c) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure undergoes a change to a more intense use, is
demolished and replaced, or is expanded, if the expansion is
not otherwise exempt from the development fee requirement.
The development fee shall be calculated on the increase in the
equalized assessed value of the improved structure.
E. Nonresidential development fees.
(1) Imposed fees.
(a) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except
for developers of the types of development specifically
exempted, shall pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized
assessed value of the land and improvements, for all new
nonresidential construction on an unimproved lot or lots.
(b) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types
of development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee
equal to 2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value
resulting from any additions to existing structures to be used
for nonresidential purposes.
(c) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure is demolished and replaced. The
development fee of 2.5% shall be calculated on the difference
between the equalized assessed value of the preexisting land
and improvement and the equalized assessed value of the
newly improved structure, i.e., land and improvement, at the
time final certificate of occupancy is issued. If the calculation
required under this section results in a negative number, the
nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
(2) Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
(a) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or
market-rate development shall be subject to the two-and-ahalf-
percent development fee, unless otherwise exempted
below.
(b) The two-and-a-half-percent fee shall not apply to an increase in
equalized assessed value resulting from alterations, change in
§ 250-29 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-29
238:557
use within existing footprint, reconstruction, renovations and
repairs.
(c) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the
payment of nonresidential development fees in accordance
with the exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as
specified in the Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption Form."
Any exemption claimed by a developer shall be substantiated
by that developer.
(d) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from
the nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.
46, shall be subject to it at such time the basis for the
exemption no longer applies, and shall make the payment of
the nonresidential development fee, in that event, within three
years after that event or after the issuance of the final
certificate of occupancy of the nonresidential development,
whichever is later.
(e) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit
the fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid
nonresidential development fees under these circumstances
are enforceable by Westampton Township as a lien against the
real property of the owner.
F. Collection procedures.
(1) Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable
approval for a development, the applicable approving authority
shall direct its staff to notify the construction official responsible
for the issuance of a building permit.
(2) For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/Exemption" to be completed
as per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The construction official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify
exemptions and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the
instructions provided in Form N-RDF.
(3) The construction official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local tax assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a
development fee.
§ 250-29 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-29
238:558
(4) Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the Municipal Tax Assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
(5) The construction official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which
is subject to a development fee.
(6) Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Municipal Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements
of the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter
notify the developer of the amount of the fee.
(7) Should Westampton Township fail to determine or notify the
developer of the amount of the development fee within 10 business
days of the request for final inspection, the developer may estimate
the amount due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the
dispute process set forth in Subsection b of § 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
(8) Fifty percent of the development fee shall be collected at the time
of issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion shall be
collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The
developer shall be responsible for paying the difference between
the fee calculated at building permit and that determined at
issuance of certificate of occupancy.
(9) Appeal of development fees.
(a) A developer may challenge residential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Burlington County Board
of Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Board,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow
account by Westampton Township. Appeals from a
determination of the Board may be made to the tax court in
accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after
the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
(b) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division
of Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the
Director, which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the
challenge, collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing
escrow account by Westampton Township. Appeals from a
determination of the Director may be made to the tax court in
accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after
§ 250-29 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-29
238:559
the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
G. Affordable Housing Trust Fund
(1) There has existed within Westampton Township an Affordable
Housing Trust Fund for many years. This fund shall be continued
and maintained by the Chief Financial Officer and Township Clerk
for the purpose of depositing development fees collected from
residential and nonresidential developers and proceeds from the
sale of units with extinguished controls. The Township
Administrator shall be provided with regular reports of the status
of the fund.
(2) The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source
and amount:
(a) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
(b) Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
(c) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(d) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(e) Recapture funds;
(f) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(g) Any other funds collected in connection with Westampton
Township's affordable housing program.
(3) Within seven days of the adoption of this section, Westampton
Township shall provide COAH with written authorization, in the
form of a three-party escrow agreement between the municipality,
the bank with which the affordable housing fees are deposited by
the Township and maintained by said bank, and COAH to permit
COAH, to direct the disbursement of the funds as provided for in
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.13(b).
(4) All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
H. Use of funds.
(1) The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan
approved by COAH. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may
be used for any activity approved by COAH to address Westampton
Township's fair share obligation and may be set up as a grant or
revolving loan program. Such activities include, but are not limited
to: preservation or purchase of housing for the purpose of
§ 250-29 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-29
238:560
maintaining or implementing affordability controls, rehabilitation,
new construction of affordable housing units and related costs,
accessory apartment, market to affordable, or regional housing
partnership programs, conversion of existing nonresidential
buildings to create new affordable units, green building strategies
designed to be cost saving and in accordance with accepted
national or state standards, purchase of land for affordable
housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable housing,
extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to
affordable housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase
affordability, administration necessary for implementation of the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as
permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7 through 5:97-8.9 and
specified in the approved spending plan.
(2) Except as specifically provided by court order, funds shall not be
expended to reimburse Westampton Township for past housing
activities.
(3) At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned
shall be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and
moderate-income households in affordable units included in the
municipal Fair Share Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance
portion of development fees collected shall be used to provide
affordability assistance to those households earning 30% or less of
median income by region.
(a) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans,
rental assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance
with emergency repairs.
(b) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to
make them affordable to households earning 30% or less of
median income.
(c) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and
funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be
exempt from the affordability assistance requirement.
(4) Westampton Township may contract with a private or public entity
to administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
including the requirement for affordability assistance, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.
(5) No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees
may be expended on administration, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, a
§ 250-29 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-29
238:561
§ 250-30. Growth share requirement. [Added 12-12-2006 by Ord.
No. 16-2006]
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative
marketing program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no
more than 20% of the revenues collected from development fees
shall be expended for such administrative expenses. Administrative
funds may be used for income qualification of households,
monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units, and compliance
with COAH's monitoring requirements. Legal or other fees related
to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or objecting to the
Council's regulations and/or action are not eligible uses of the
Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
I. Monitoring. Westampton Township shall complete and return to COAH
all monitoring forms included in monitoring requirements related to the
collection of development fees from residential and nonresidential
developers, payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site,
funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls, barrier-free
escrow funds, rental income, repayments from affordable housing
program loans, and any other funds collected in connection with
Westampton Township's housing program, as well as to the expenditure
of revenues and implementation of the plan approved by the court. All
monitoring reports shall be completed on forms designed by COAH.
J. Ongoing collection of fees. The ability for Westampton Township to
impose, collect and expend development fees shall expire with its
judgment of compliance or any extensions thereto granted by the Court
unless Westampton Township has filed an adopted Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan with COAH and has received COAH's approval of
its development fee ordinance. If Westampton Township fails to renew
its ability to impose and collect development fees prior to the expiration
of its judgment of compliance, it may be subject to forfeiture of any or
all funds remaining within its municipal trust fund. Any funds so
forfeited shall be deposited into the New Jersey Affordable Housing
Trust Fund established pursuant to § 20 of P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-320). Westampton Township shall not impose a residential
development fee on a development that receives preliminary or final
site plan approval after the expiration of its substantive certification or
judgment of compliance, nor shall Westampton Township retroactively
impose a development fee on such a development. Westampton
Township shall not expend development fees after the expiration of its
substantive certification or judgment of compliance.
A. Applicability.
(1) This subsection of the land use regulations of Westampton
Township sets forth mechanisms by which developers shall provide
for a fair share of affordable housing based on growth that is
associated with development taking place within Westampton
Township.
§ 250-29 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-30
238:562
(2) Residential development. Except as exempted in the subsection
"Exemption" below, all residential development that results in the
construction of new market-rate dwelling units in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:94-1 et seq., shall be subject to the "growth share"
provisions of this section.
(3) Nonresidential development. All nonresidential development that
results in an increase in gross floor area of an existing
nonresidential structure; the construction of a new nonresidential
structure; or the conversion of one nonresidential use to a different
nonresidential use that increases jobs, based on job conversion
factors, by use, contained as Appendix E in N.J.A.C. 5:04-1 et seq.,
shall comply with § 250-29, the Development Fee Ordinance.
B. Exemptions. Residential developments that received preliminary or
final approval from the Land Development Board prior to the effective
date of this section.
C. Residential growth share provisions
(1) All residential development which results in construction of new
market-rate dwelling units in Westampton Township shall provide
one affordable unit on site for every eight market-rate units
constructed.
(2) For developments that result in a number of market-rate residential
units not evenly divisible by eight, the developer may construct the
additional affordable unit on site or, alternatively, the developer
may make a payment in lieu of constructing the additional
affordable unit. If the developer selects the latter option, the
amount of said payment shall be one percent (1%) of equalized
assessed value as determined by the Township Tax Assessor for the
market-rate units, 1/2% payable at building permit issuance and 1/
2% payable at the time of issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
(3) All residential development consisting of fewer than eight
residential units may provide one affordable unit on site or may
make a payment in lieu of constructing the proportionate fraction
of the affordable-housing unit requirement. If the developer selects
the latter option, the amount of said payment shall be the same as
Subsection C(2) above.
(4) As an alternative to fulfilling the affordable-housing requirement
set forth in Subsections C(1) through C(3) above, developers of
residential units may elect to construct an affordable-housing unit
elsewhere in Westampton Township subject to review and approval
of the Land Development Board and Township Committee.
(5) All residential development not subject to the provisions of
Subsections C(1) through C(4) above shall be subject to the
provision of development fees as set forth in § 250-29.
§ 250-30 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-30
238:563
§ 250-31. (Reserved)
§ 250-32. (Reserved)
§ 250-33. (Reserved)
§ 250-34. (Reserved)
§ 250-35. (Reserved)
§ 250-36. (Reserved)
§ 250-37. (Reserved)
§ 250-38. (Reserved)
§ 250-39. (Reserved)
D. Mixed-use development growth share provisions.
(1) When a mixed-used development is proposed, the residential
component shall satisfy the standards of Subsection C above.
(2) The nonresidential component shall satisfy the standards of
Subsection A(3) above.
E. General provisions for constructing affordable units.
(1) Affordable housing units being constructed on site or off site shall
be in conformance with COAH's Third Round Rules at N.J.A.C.
5:94-1 et seq., and the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls at
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., including but not limited to requirements
regarding phasing schedule, controls on affordability, lowmoderate-
income split, heating source, maximum rent and/or sales
prices, affordability average, bedroom distribution and affirmative
marketing.
(2) To the greatest extent possible, affordable-housing units being
provided within inclusionary developments shall be dispersed
throughout inclusionary developments and shall be located within
buildings designed to be architecturally indistinguishable from the
market-rate units otherwise being constructed within the
development. To that end, the scale, massing, roof pitch and
architectural detailing (such as the selection of exterior materials,
doors, windows, etc.) of the buildings contained in the affordablehousing
units shall be similar to and compatible with that of the
market-rate units.
(3) Affordable-housing units shall be subject to the bulk standards set
forth by the underlying zoning district.
§ 250-30 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-40
238:564
§ 250-40. (Reserved)
§ 250-41. (Reserved)
§ 250-42. (Reserved)
§ 250-43. (Reserved)
§ 250-44. (Reserved)
§ 250-45. (Reserved)
§ 250-46. (Reserved)
§ 250-47. (Reserved)
§ 250-48. (Reserved)
§ 250-49. (Reserved)
§ 250-50. (Reserved)
§ 250-51. (Reserved)
§ 250-52. (Reserved)
§ 250-53. (Reserved)
§ 250-54. (Reserved)
§ 250-55. (Reserved)
§ 250-56. (Reserved)
§ 250-57. (Reserved)
§ 250-58. (Reserved)
§ 250-40 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-58
238:565

ARTICLE IX
Change of Use; New Uses; Enforcement
§ 250-59. Certificate of occupancy required for change of use.
A change of use within the Township of Westampton will void the previously
issued certificate of occupancy and require the issuance of a new certificate
of occupancy. The Building Inspector or Zoning Officer may require
submission of new site plan review, even though no construction is planned
with the conversion of the use, if he finds that increased traffic will result,
that off-street parking facilities should be expanded or that buffering and/or
screening may be necessary.
§ 250-60. New uses.
No building shall be occupied or used until such time as a certificate of
occupancy is issued by the Building Inspector after determination that the
building, structure or use is in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 250-61. Expiration of variance. [Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No.
24-1998]
Any variance hereinafter granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment or
Land Development Board pertaining to the erection or alteration of any
structure or structures or permitting a specified use of any premises shall
expire unless such construction or alteration shall have been actually
commenced on each and every structure permitted by said variance or
unless such permitted use has actually been commenced within one year
from the date of publication of the notice of the judgment or determination
of the Board.
§ 250-62. Enforcement.
The Zoning Officer is charged with the primary duty of enforcement of
this chapter. Any citizen of the municipality may bring a proceeding in
Municipal Court alleging a violation of this chapter, including nonpayment
of fees, escrows, inspection fees or other costs. This chapter may also be
enforced by the administrative officer of the municipality by instituting a
proceeding in the Municipal Court of the municipality alleging a violation of
this chapter.
§ 250-63. Violations and penalties.
A. Any owner or agent and any person or corporation who shall violate any
of the provisions of this chapter or fail to comply therewith or with any
of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, structurally alter,
enlarge, rebuild or move any building or buildings or any structure or
who shall put into use any lot or land in violation of any detailed
statement or plan submitted hereunder or who shall refuse reasonable
opportunity to inspect any premises shall be, upon conviction, liable to
§ 250-59 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-63
238:567
§ 250-64. Compliance required.
All development in the Township shall comply with all applicable standards
and procedures of this chapter, as well as all applicable standards and
procedures of the Township Land Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinances
and the administrative procedures and fees of the Land Use Procedures
Ordinance.114
§ 250-65. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication as provided by law and the filing of a copy of said chapter with
the Burlington County Planning Board.
a fine of not more than $500 or to imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or to both such fine and imprisonment. Each and every day such
violation continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation.
B. The owner of any building or structure, lot or land or part thereof where
anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed or shall exist and
any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation
employed in connection therewith who assists in the commission of any
such violation shall each be guilty of a separate violation and, upon
conviction thereof, shall each be liable to the fine or imprisonment, or
both, specified above.
C. Should construction, building, excavation, clearing or use of a structure
or property take place that is not in accordance with the approvals
granted by the reviewing authority and required by any developmental
ordinance or without fulfillment or compliance with the conditions
imposed by such approvals, such deviation shall be considered a
violation of said ordinance. If, within 30 days of notification and demand
by the municipality, the applicant has failed to pay the fees and escrows
required by this chapter or the applicant has failed to pay the inspection
fees assessed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53h, a violation of said
chapter shall be deemed to have occurred.
114. Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Subdivision of Land; Ch. 196, Site Plan Review; and Ch. 149,
Land Use Procedures, respectively.
§ 250-63 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-65
238:568
ARTICLE X
Right to Farm
[Added 10-24-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
§ 250-66. Right to farm.
The right to farm, as defined in N.J.S.A. 4:1C-3, is hereby recognized to exist
in the Township of Westampton, in the County of Burlington, and is hereby
declared a permitted use in all zones of this Township where an agricultural
use is preexisting.
A. This right to farm includes, but not by way of limitation:
(1) Production of agricultural and horticultural crops, trees and forest
products, livestock and poultry and other commodities described in
the Standard Industrial Classification for agriculture, forestry,
fishing and trapping.
(2) Housing and employment of necessary farm laborers.
(3) Erection of necessary agricultural buildings ancillary to
agricultural and horticultural production.
(4) The grazing of animals and use of range for fowl.
(5) Construction of fences for livestock and fowl, as well as to control
depredation by wildlife.
(6) The operation and transportation of large slow-moving equipment
over roads within the Township of Westampton.
(7) Control of pests, predators and diseases of plants and animals.
(8) Conduction of agricultural-related education and farm-based
recreational activities, provided that the activities are related to
marketing the agricultural or horticultural output of the
commercial farm and permission of the farm owner to lessee is
obtained.
(9) Use of irrigation pumps and equipment, aerial and ground seeding
and spraying, tractors, harvest aids and other equipment.
(10) Processing and packaging of the agricultural output of commercial
farm.
(11) The operation of a farm market, including the construction of
business and parking areas in conformance with Westampton
Township standards.
(12) The operation of a pick-your-own operation, meaning a direct
marketing alternative wherein retail or wholesale customers are
invited onto a commercial farm in order to harvest agricultural,
floricultural, or horticultural products.
§ 250-66 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-66
238:569
(13) Replenishment of soil nutrients and improvement of soil tilth.
(14) Clearing of woodlands using open burning and other techniques,
installation and maintenance of vegetative and terrain alterations
and other physical facilities for water and soil conservation and
surface control in wetland areas.
(15) On-site disposal of organic agricultural wastes.
(16) The application of manure and chemical fertilizers, insecticides,
and herbicides in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
(17) Agricultural-related educational and farm-based recreational
activities, provided that the activities are related to marketing the
agricultural or horticultural output of the farm, including but not
limited to equestrian activities, including the boarding of horses
and riding instructions.
(18) Harvesting of timber.
B. The foregoing activities must be in conformance with applicable federal
and state law.
C. The foregoing practices and activities may occur on holidays, weekdays
and weekends by day or night and shall include the attendant or
incidental noise, odors, dust and fumes associated with these practices.
D. It is hereby determined that whatever nuisance may be caused to
others by these uses and activities is more than offset by the benefits of
farming to the neighborhood community and society in general.
E. Any person aggrieved by the operation of a commercial farm shall file a
complaint with the Burlington County Agriculture Development Board
prior to filing an action in court.
F. An additional purpose of this section is to promote a good neighbor
policy by advising purchasers and users of property within 500 feet
from the lot line of any agricultural operation of the potential
discomforts associated with such purchase or residence. It is intended
that, through mandatory disclosures, purchasers and users will better
understand the impacts of living near agricultural operations and be
prepared to accept attendant conditions as the natural result of living in
or near land actively devoted to commercial agriculture (or in an
agricultural development area, meaning an area identified by a County
Agriculture Development Board pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
4:1C-18 and certified by the State Agricultural Development
Committee). The disclosure required by this subsection is set forth in
the disclosure form attached hereto and made a part hereof at
Appendix A.115
115. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 250-66 WESTAMPTON CODE § 250-66
238:570
G. It is the intent of this section to require all developers in Westampton
Township to include language in their deeds advising buyers of this
Right to Farm Ordinance and to permit the Land Development Board to
require this language as part of any subdivision or site plan approval.
H. The Township Land Development Board shall, as part of any subdivision
or site plan approval, direct any developer to include in the deed to
buyers advisement of this Right to Farm Ordinance.
§ 250-66 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 250-66
238:571
Part III, Board of Health
Chapter 254
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch. 95.
Building construction — See Ch. 99.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 106.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 128.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 149.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 152.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Sewers — See Ch. 192.
Solid waste — See Ch. 206.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 215.
Zoning — See Ch. 250.
Nuisances — See Ch. 256.
§ 254-1. Designation of enforcement officer.
The Burlington County Health Department be and is hereby designated as
the enforcement officer to exercise the powers prescribed by the within
chapter, and they shall serve in such capacity without any additional salary.
§ 254-2. Adoption of standards.
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 21, P.L. 1946 (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1 et
seq.), the New Jersey State Housing Code (1980 Revision), as approved by
the Department of Community Affairs and filed in the Secretary of State's
Office, is hereby accepted, adopted and established as a standard to be used
as a guide in determining whether dwellings in this municipality are safe,
sanitary and fit for human habitation and rental. A copy of the New Jersey
State Housing Code (1980 Revision) is annexed to this chapter and three
copies of the same have been placed on file in the office of the Westampton
Township Clerk and are available to all persons desiring to use and examine
the same.
§ 254-3. Inspections and access to dwellings.
The enforcement officer is hereby authorized and directed to make
inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming
units, and premises located within the Township of Westampton in order
that they may perform their duty of safeguarding the health and safety of
the occupants of dwellings and of the general public. For the purpose of
making such inspections, the enforcement officer is hereby authorized to
enter, examine and survey, at all reasonable times, all dwellings, dwelling
units, rooming units and premises. The owner or occupant of every
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall
give the enforcement officer free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit,
§ 250-66 WESTAMPTON CODE § 254-3
254:572
or rooming unit and its premises at all reasonable times for the purpose
of such inspection, examination and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling
or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee,
access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit, or its premises, at
all reasonable times, for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations
as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted, or any lawful order issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 254-4. Notice of violation; hearing.
A. Whenever the enforcement officer determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this chapter, or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, they shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or
persons responsible therefor as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall
be put in writing; include a statement of reasons why it is being issued;
allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires; and
be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the case may
require; provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly
served upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant, if a copy
thereof is served upon him personally; or if a copy thereof is posted
certified mail to his last known address; or if a copy thereof is posted in
a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by this notice; or
if he is served with such notice by any other method authorized or
required under the laws of this state. Such notice may contain an
outline of remedial action which, if taken, will affect compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and with rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto.
B. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter, or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted
a hearing on the matter before the Burlington County Health
Department, provided such person shall file, in the office of the
Burlington County Health Department, a written petition requesting
such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor
within 10 days after the day the notice was served. Upon receipt of such
petition, the Burlington County Health Department shall set a time and
place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice
thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to
be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn.
The hearing shall be commenced not later than 10 days after the day on
which the petition was filed; provided that, upon application of the
petitioner, the Burlington County Health Department may postpone the
date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period, if
in its judgment, the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient
reason for such postponement. After such hearing, the Burlington
County Health Department shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the
notice, depending upon its findings as to whether the provisions of this
§ 254-3 HOUSING STANDARDS § 254-4
254:573
§ 254-5. Rules and regulations.
The Township Committee is hereby authorized and empowered to make and
adopt such written rules and regulations as they may deem necessary for
the proper enforcement of the provisions of this chapter; provided, however,
that such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of
this chapter, nor in any way alter, amend, or supersede any of the provisions
thereof. The Township Committee shall file a certified copy of all rules and
regulations, which they may adopt, in their office and in the office of the
Clerk of the Township of Westampton.
§ 254-6. Occupancy prohibited when not in compliance with
standards.
No person shall occupy as owner, occupant, or rent to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein
which does not conform to the provisions of the New Jersey State Housing
Code (1980 Revision), established hereby as the standard to be used in
determining whether a dwelling is safe, sanitary and fit for human
habitation.
chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto
have been complied with. If the Burlington County Health Department
sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any
notice served pursuant to this chapter shall automatically become an
order if a written petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the
Burlington County Health Department within 10 days after such notice
is served. The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings
and decision of the Burlington County Health Department, shall be
summarized, reduced to writing, and entered as a matter of public
record in the office of the Burlington County Health Department. Such
record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in
connection with the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Burlington County Health Department may seek relief therefrom in any
court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this state.
Whenever the enforcement officer finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, he may,
without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such
an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems
necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions
of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to
whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately but,
upon petition to the Burlington County Health Department, shall be
afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After such hearing, depending
upon its findings as to whether the provisions of this chapter and of
the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied
with, the Burlington County Health Department shall continue such
order in effect or modify it or revoke it. [Amended 9-12-2006 by Ord.
No. 13-2006]
§ 254-4 WESTAMPTON CODE § 254-7
254:574
§ 254-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500
or by imprisonment in the county jail for such period of time not to exceed
90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment, and each violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter and each day the same is violated shall be
deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
Chapter 256
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 88.
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch. 95.
Buildings unfit for human habitation — See
Ch. 106.
Littering — See Ch. 155.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Sewers — See Ch. 192.
Solid waste — See Ch. 206.
§ 256-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENFORCING OFFICIAL — Includes the Health Officer or other official
authorized by the Board of Health to enforce this code and chapter.
PERSON — Includes an individual, firm, corporation, association, society
and partnership and their agents or employees.
§ 256-2. Prohibited nuisances; exceptions.
A. The following matters, things, conditions or acts and each of them are
hereby declared to be a nuisance and injurious to the health of the
inhabitants of this municipality:
(1) Any matter, thing, condition or act which is or may become
detrimental or a menace to the health of the inhabitants of this
municipality.
(2) Any matter, thing, condition or act which is or may become an
annoyance or interfere with the comfort or general well-being of
the inhabitants of this municipality.
(3) Pollution or the existence of a condition or conditions which cause
or threaten pollution of any waters in this municipality in such
manner as to cause or threaten injury to any of the inhabitants of
this municipality either in their health, comfort or property.
§ 254-7 NUISANCES § 256-2
256:575
§ 256-3. Inspection of premises.
§ 256-4. Abatement.
(4) The escape into the open air from any stack, vent, chimney or any
entrance to the open air or from any fire into the open air of such
quantities of smoke, flyash, dust, fumes, vapors, mists or gases as
to cause injury, detriment or annoyance to the inhabitants of this
municipality or to endanger their comfort, repose, health or safety.
(5) The growth, existence or presence of ragweed or noxious weeds on
any plot of land, lot, highway, right-of-way or any other public or
private place.
(6) The growth, existence or presence of poison ivy within 20 feet of
any property line.
(7) The existence or presence of any water or other liquid in which
mosquito larvae breed or exist.
(8) The existence or presence of any accumulation of garbage, refuse,
manure or animal or vegetable matter which may attract flies and
to which flies may have access or in which fly larvae or pupae breed
or exist.
(9) The depositing, accumulating or maintaining of any matter or thing
which serves as food for insects or rodents and to which they may
have access or which serves or constitutes a breeding place or
harborage for insects or rodents in or on any land, premises,
building or other place.
B. Notwithstanding anything above to the contrary, the matters, things,
conditions or acts set forth in § 256-2A(5) through (8) shall not
constitute a nuisance if such are located upon a farm in which
agricultural products or commodities are cultivated for sale
commercially.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to commit, maintain or
allow any nuisance as declared and described in this section.
A. All places and premises in this municipality shall be subject to
inspection by the Board of Health or the Enforcing Official if the Board
or that Official has reason to believe that any section of this code is
being violated.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct, delay, resist or
prevent the Board of Health or the Enforcing Official from having full
access to any place or premises upon which a violation of this code is
believed to exist.
A. Whenever a nuisance as declared by § 256-2 of this code is found on any
plot of land, lot, right-of-way or any other private premises or place,
§ 256-2 WESTAMPTON CODE § 256-4
256:576
§ 256-5. Recovery of costs by Board of Health.
The Board of Health may institute an action at law to recover costs incurred
by it in the removal or abatement of any nuisance as declared by § 256-2 of
this code from any person who shall have caused or allowed such nuisance
to exist or from any owner, tenant or occupant of premises who, after notice
and notification as herein provided, shall fail to remove and abate the same
within the time specified in such notice.
§ 256-6. Enforcement.
The provisions of this code shall be enforced by the Board of Health or its
Enforcing Official.
§ 256-7. Violations and penalties.
notice, in writing, shall be given to the owner thereof to remove or
abate the same within such time as shall be specified therein but not
less than five days from the date of service thereof. A duplicate of the
notice shall be left with one or more of the tenants or occupants of the
premises or place. If the owner resides out of the state or cannot be
so notified speedily, such notice shall be left at that place or premises
with the tenant or occupant thereof or posted on the premises, and such
action shall be considered proper notification to the owner, tenant or
occupant thereof.
B. Whenever a nuisance as declared by § 256-2 of this code is found on any
public property or on any highway or any other public premises or
place, notice, in writing, shall be given to the person in charge thereof
to remove or abate the same within such time as shall be specified
therein. If such person fails to comply with such notice within the time
specified therein, the Board of Health may remove or abate such
nuisance in the manner as hereinafter provided in the case of a like
condition existing on a private premises or place.
C. If the owner, tenant or occupant, upon being notified as provided by this
section, shall not comply with such notice within the time specified
therein and fails to remove or abate such nuisance, the Board of Health
shall proceed to abate the nuisance or may cause it to be removed or
abated in a summary manner by such means as said Board shall deem
proper.
A. Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or code established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto
shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than $2
nor more than $100 for each violation.
B. In case a defendant shall have been twice convicted, within the space of
six months, of the violation of the same health ordinance or code and
due proof of such fact is made, the court may sentence such defendant
in accordance with N.J.S.A 26:3-78.
§ 256-4 NUISANCES § 256-7
256:577
Chapter 258
VECTOR CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 43.
§ 256-7 WESTAMPTON CODE § 256-7
258:578
ARTICLE I
Tire Storage
[Adopted 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. 16-2001]
§ 258-1. Maintenance of tires.
No person shall provide, maintain, keep or store tires in any manner on any
property unless they are maintained in such a way as to preclude mosquito
breeding in rainwater which collects and stagnates in tires exposed to the
elements.
§ 258-2. Intent and purpose.
The provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in
pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public
health and general welfare of persons in Westampton Township and to
prevent the spread of diseases from mosquito transmission by preventing
the presence of mosquito larvae in water that accumulates in tires.
§ 258-3. Proper storage of tires.
Tires shall be stored in a totally enclosed structure or covered to prevent
the existence or presence of any water in which mosquito larvae may
mature and grow or exist. if stored outside, they must be stored up off the
ground and covered not to allow standing water.
§ 258-4. Unusable (scrap) tires.
Any tires that cannot be used shall be considered waste material and must
be disposed of in a proper and lawful manner which prevents the collection
of stagnant rainwater therein.
§ 258-5. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Minimum penalty. There shall be a minimum penalty of a fine fixed at an
amount not less than $50, first offense; $100, second offense, $150
third and subsequent offenses.
B. Separate violations. Each and every day in which a violation of any
provisions of this article exists shall constitute a separate violation.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the Municipal Code Enforcement Officer
and/or Burlington County Health Department to enforce this article.
§ 258-1 VECTOR CONTROL § 258-5
258:579

ARTICLE II
Pool Maintenance
[Adopted 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. 17-2001116]
§ 258-6. Maintenance of pools.
No person shall provide, maintain, or keep a pool in any manner on any
property unless it is maintained pursuant to this article.
§ 258-7. Intent and purpose.
The provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in
pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public
health and general welfare of persons in Westampton Township and to
prevent the spread of diseases from mosquito transmission by preventing
the presence of mosquito larvae in pool water that is not maintained
properly.
§ 258-8. Pool maintenance standards.
Pool maintenance standards shall be as follows:
§ 258-9. Pool covers.
Any pool cover must be maintained in a way to prevent the collection of
stagnant rainwater.
§ 258-10. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Maintain the pool with an adequate disinfecting agent that imparts
sufficient residual which provides for easily measured continual
disinfections; provide daily circulation of the pool water with a properly
functioning circulation system; and daily removal of any debris.
B. When in use, the pool water shall be sufficiently clear to permit clear
visibility of the bottom of the pool.
C. When the owner is away and cannot maintain the pool, a biological
pesticide shall be used in the pool (e.g., Bti Briquettes, mosquito
Dunks).
D. Empty tot pools when not in use and refill daily.
A. Minimum penalty. There shall be a minimum penalty of a fine fixed at an
amount not less than $50, first offense, $100, second offense, $150
third and subsequent offenses.
116. Editor’s Note: The preamble to this ordinance provided for a definition of “private
swimming pool” as a pool generally used for recreational purposes and is either in-ground
or on the surface, located on private property, whose operation is the responsibility of the
owner.
§ 258-6 VECTOR CONTROL § 258-10
258:581
B. Separate violations. Each and every day in which a violation of any
provisions of this article exists shall constitute a separate violation.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the Municipal Code Enforcement Officer
and/or Burlington County Health Department to enforce this article.
§ 258-10 WESTAMPTON CODE § 258-10
258:582
Appendix
Chapter A261
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ 258-10 VECTOR CONTROL § 258-10
258:583

ARTICLE I
(Reserved)117
§ A261-1. through § A261-25. (Reserved)
117. Editor's Note: Art. I, Future Cable Enterprises, Inc. expired 10-25-1994.
§ A261-1 VECTOR CONTROL § A261-1
258:585

ARTICLE II
Comcast of Garden State, L.P.
[Added 10-13-2009 by Ord. No. 12-2009118]
§ A261-26. Grant of franchise.
The Township of Westampton hereby grants to Comcast of Garden State,
L.P. renewal of its nonexclusive municipal consent to place in, upon, across,
above, over and under highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements,
public ways and public places in the Township of Westampton, poles, wires,
cables, underground conduits, manholes and other television conductors,
fixtures, apparatus and equipment as may be necessary for the
construction, operation and maintenance in the Township of Westampton of
a cable television and communications system.
§ A261-27. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission ("FCC") rules and regulations, 47 CFR 76.1 et
seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as
amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq., and shall in
no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with the federal and state
definitions:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION — The company's application for renewal of municipal
consent.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Any service tier which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by the FCC.
BOARD or BPU — The Board of Public Utilities, State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this ordinance and known as
Comcast of Garden State, L.P.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
OFFICE or OCTV — The Office of Cable Television of the Board.
PRIMARY SERVICE AREA or PSA — Consists of the area of the Township
of Westampton currently served with existing plant as set forth in the map
annexed to the company's application for municipal consent.
TOWNSHIP or MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Westampton, County of
Burlington, State of New Jersey.
118. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. II, Garden State Cablevision,
added 9-13-1994 by Ord. No. 9-1994.
§ A261-26 VECTOR CONTROL § A261-28
258:587
§ A261-28. Statement of findings.
Public hearings conducted by the Township of Westampton concerning the
renewal of municipal consent herein granted to the company were held
after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act
and the regulations of the Board adopted pursuant thereto. The Township
of Westampton, having received at said public hearings all comments
regarding the qualifications of the company to receive this renewal of
municipal consent and said hearings having been fully open to the public,
hereby finds that the company possesses the necessary legal, technical,
character, financial and other qualifications and that the company's
operating and construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A261-29. Duration of franchise; automatic renewal.
§ A261-30. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
Township of Westampton 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring
charges in the nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for cable
television reception service in the Township of Westampton or any higher
amount permitted by the Act or otherwise allowable by law, whichever is
greater.
§ A261-31. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance to the renewal of the franchise
shall apply to the entirety of the Township of Westampton and any property
subsequently annexed hereto.
§ A261-32. Extension of service.
The company shall be required to proffer service to any residence or
business along any public right-of-way in the primary service area, as
A. The nonexclusive municipal consent granted herein shall expire 15
years from the date of expiration of the previous certificate of approval
issued by the Board with a ten-year automatic renewal in accordance
with the procedures set forth in N.J.S.A. 48:5A-19 and 25, and N.J.A.C.
14:18-13.6 et seq.
B. In the event that the Township of Westampton shall find that the
company has not substantially complied with the material terms and
conditions of this ordinance, the Township of Westampton shall have
the right to petition the OCTV, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47, for
appropriate action, including modification and/or termination of the
certificate of approval ; provided however, that the Township of
Westampton shall first have given the company written notice of all
alleged instances of noncompliance and an opportunity to cure same
within 90 days of that notification.
§ A261-28 WESTAMPTON CODE § A261-32
258:588
set forth in the company's application. Any extension of plant beyond the
primary service area shall be governed by the company's line extension
policy of 35 homes per mile.
§ A261-33. Construction and maintenance requirements.
§ A261-34. Customer service.
In providing services to its customers, the company shall comply with
N.J.A.C. 14:18-1, et seq. and all applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations. The company shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary
company and industry standards in the delivery of customer service and
shall be prepared to report on it to the Township of Westampton upon
written request of the Township of Westampton Administrator/Clerk.
A. Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface
in the natural topography, the company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good a
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent, the
Township of Westampton shall alter or change the grade of any street,
alley or other way or place the company, upon reasonable notice by the
Township of Westampton, shall remove, relay or relocate its equipment,
at the expense of the company.
C. Temporary removal of cables. The company shall temporarily, upon
request, raise, lower or remove its cables and wires in order to facilitate
the moving of buildings, vehicles, equipment and machinery, or in other
similar circumstances. Where such property is Township-owned, the
cost of such activity shall be that of the company. Where such property
is privately owned, the cost shall be at the responsibility of the
requesting party.
D. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public places of the Township of Westampton so as to prevent the
branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cable
of the company. Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to
maintain proper clearance of the company's wire and cables.
A. The company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding credit for outages, the
reporting of same to regulatory agencies and notification of same to
customers.
B. The company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding the availability of devices for
the hearing impaired and the notification of same to customers.
§ A261-32 VECTOR CONTROL § A261-34
258:589
§ A261-35. Municipal complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designed as the complaint officer
for the Township of Westampton pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b). All
complaints shall be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.5. The Township of Westampton shall have the right to request
copies of records and reports pertaining to complaints by Township of
Westampton customers from the OCTV.
§ A261-36. Local office.
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the company
shall maintain a business office or agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:18-5.1 for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving all local
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and
similar matters. Such a business office shall have a publicly listed toll-free
telephone number and be open during standard business hours, and in no
event (excepting emergent circumstances) less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.
§ A261-37. Performance bonds.
During the life of the franchise, the company shall give to the Township of
Westampton a bond in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure
the faithful performance of all undertakings of the company as represented
in its application for municipal consent incorporated herein.
§ A261-38. Subscriber rates.
The rates of the company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
federal and state law. The municipality reserves the right to participate in
any permissible rate regulation as provided by law.
§ A261-39. Commitments by the company.
C. The company shall use every reasonable effort to meet or exceed
voluntary standards for telephone accessibility developed by the
National Cable Television Association (NCTA).
D. Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the Township
of Westampton to express any comment with respect to telephone
accessibility to the complaint officer or impair the right of the complaint
officer to take any action that is permitted under law.
A. The company shall provide total preferred cable television service on
one outlet at no cost to each school in the Township of Westampton,
public and private, elementary, intermediate and secondary, provided
the school is within 175 feet of active cable distribution plant. Each
additional outlet installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials plus
labor basis by the school requesting service. Monthly service charges
shall be waived on all additional outlets.
§ A261-34 WESTAMPTON CODE § A261-39
258:590
§ A261-40. Educational and governmental access.
B. The company shall provide total preferred cable television service at no
cost on one outlet to the Township of Westampton municipal building,
each police, fire, emergency management facility and public library in
the Township of Westampton, provided that the facility is located within
175 feet of active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet
installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials plus labor basis by the
Township of Westampton. Monthly service charges shall be waived on
all additional outlets.
C. The company shall provide free basic Internet service, via high-speed
cable and modem, to one nonnetworked personal computer in each
existing and future school in the municipality, public and private,
elementary, intermediate and secondary, at no charge, provided that
the facility is located within 175 feet of active cable distribution plant.
The Internet service shall be installed on a personal computer that is
accessible to the students and not for administrative use only.
D. The company shall provide free basic Internet access via high-speed
cable and modem on one nonnetworked personal computer in each
qualified existing and future public library at no charge, provided the
facility is located within 175 feet of active cable distribution plant. The
Internet shall be installed on a personal computer that is accessible to
library patrons and not for administrative use only.
E. Within 12 months of receipt of a renewal certificate of approval, the
company shall provide the Township with a one-time technology grant
in the amount of $11,300 for the Township of Westampton's cable- and
technology-related needs.
A. The company will continue to provide one channel for educational and
governmental ("EG") access for shared use by the residents of the
Township of Westampton, Lumberton Township, Mount Holly Township,
Eastampton Township and Hainesport Township (collectively,
"municipalities"). The governing bodies of the Township of Westampton,
Lumberton Township, Mount Holly Township, Eastampton Township
and Hainesport Township or a designated educational institution shall
provide educational access video programming. The governing bodies
of the Township of Westampton, Lumberton Township, Mount Holly
Township, Eastampton Township and Hainesport Township shall
provide government video programming. Unused capacity may be
utilized by the company subject to the provisions for fallow time below.
B. The company does not relinquish its ownership of or ultimate right of
control over a channel by designating it for EG use. An EG access user,
whether an educational or government user, acquires no property or
other interest by virtue of the use of a channel so designated, and may
not rely on the continued use of a particular channel number, no matter
how long the same channel may have been designated for such use.
§ A261-39 VECTOR CONTROL § A261-40
258:591
§ A261-41. Emergency uses.
§ A261-42. Liability insurance.
The company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability
insurance policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000 covering liability
C. The company shall not exercise editorial control over any educational
or governmental use of channel capacity, except that the company may
refuse to transmit any educational or governmental access program or
portion of an educational or governmental access program that
contains obscenity, indecency, or nudity.
D. The governing bodies of the Township of Westampton, Lumberton
Township, Mount Holly Township, Eastampton Township and
Hainesport Township shall be responsible for developing,
implementing, and enforcing rules for EG access channel use which
shall ensure that the EG access channel and the EG access equipment,
which shall be provided by the municipalities or designated educational
institution, will be available on a first-come-first-served,
nondiscriminatory basis.
E. Educational access. Educational access shall mean noncommercial use
by educational institutions such as public or private schools, but not
home schools, community colleges, and universities.
F. Government access. Government access shall mean noncommercial use
by the governing bodies of the Township of Westampton, Lumberton
Township, Mount Holly Township, Eastampton Township and
Hainesport Township, for showing the public local government at work.
G. Company use of fallow time. Because blank or underutilized EG
channels are not in the public interest, in the event that the
municipalities or other EG access users elect not to fully program their
EG access channel, the company may program unused time on those
channels (at its discretion and for any purpose), subject to reclamation
by the municipality upon no less than 60 days' written notice.
H. Indemnification. The Municipalities shall indemnify the company for
any liability, loss, or damage it may suffer due to violation of the
intellectual property rights of third parties on the EG channel and from
claims arising out of the municipalities' rules for or administration of
access.
A. The company will comply with the Emergency Alert System ("EAS")
rules in accordance with applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations.
B. The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the
Township of Westampton or any other person during an emergency if
for any reason the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable
television system as contemplated herein.
§ A261-40 WESTAMPTON CODE § A261-42
258:592
for any death, personal injury, property damages or other liability arising
out of its construction and operation of the cable television system, and an
excess liability (or umbrella) policy in the amount of $5,000,000.
§ A261-43. Incorporation of application.
All of the statements and commitments contained in the application or
annexed thereto and incorporated therein, and all the representations made
at the public hearings conducted are considered to be binding, and any
amendment thereto, except as modified herein, are binding upon the
company as terms and conditions of this consent. The Application and
other relevant writings submitted by the company shall be annexed hereto
and made a part hereof by reference, provided same do not conflict with
applicable state or federal law.
§ A261-44. Competitive equity.
Should the Township of Westampton grant a franchise to construct, operate
and maintain a cable television system to any other person, corporation
or entity on terms materially less burdensome or more favorable than the
terms contained herein, the company may substitute such language that
is more favorable or less burdensome for the comparable provision of this
ordinance subject to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
§ A261-45. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
or federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and its validity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
the ordinance.
§ A261-45.1. Incorporation of changes by state or federal agencies.
Should any state or federal agency or body modify, change or alter any of its
provisions with respect to cable television, the company shall comply with
federal and state law.
§ A261-45.2. Third-party beneficiaries.
Nothing in this franchise or in any prior agreement is or was intended to
confer third-party beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce
the terms of such agreements or franchise.
§ A261-45.3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon issuance of a renewal
certificate of approval from the BPU.
§ A261-42 VECTOR CONTROL § A261-45.3
258:593

ARTICLE III
Comcast of Burlington County, LLC
[Added 1-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1-1997; amended 7-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 14-2012]
§ A261-46. Purpose.
The municipality hereby grants to Comcast renewal of its nonexclusive
municipal consent to place in, upon, across, above, over and under
highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, public ways and public
places in the municipality, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors, fixtures, apparatus and
equipment as may be necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance in the municipality of a cable television and communications
system.
§ A261-47. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission ("FCC") rules and regulations, 47 C.F.R. 76.1
et seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as
amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq., and shall in
no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with the federal and state
definitions:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION — The company's application for renewal of municipal
consent.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Any service tier, which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by the FCC.
BOARD or BPU — The Board of Public Utilities, State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this ordinance and is known as
Comcast of Burlington County, LLC.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
OFFICE or OCTV — The Office of Cable Television of the Board.
PRIMARY SERVICE AREA or PSA — Consists of the area of the municipality
currently served with existing plant as set forth in the map annexed to the
company's application for municipal consent.
TOWNSHIP or MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Westampton, County of
Burlington, State of New Jersey.
§ A261-46 VECTOR CONTROL § A261-48
258:595
§ A261-48. Statement of findings.
Public hearings conducted by the municipality, concerning the renewal of
municipal consent herein granted to the company were held after proper
public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act and the
regulations of the Board adopted pursuant thereto. Said hearings, having
been fully open to the public, and the municipality, having received at said
public hearings all comments regarding the qualifications of the company
to receive this renewal of municipal consent, the municipality hereby finds
that the company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character,
financial and other qualifications and that the company's operating and
construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A261-49. Duration of franchise.
§ A261-50. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
municipality 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the
nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for cable television
reception service in the municipality or any higher amount permitted by the
Act or otherwise allowable by law, whichever is greater.
§ A261-51. Franchise territory.
The consent granted herein to the company shall apply to the portions of
Westampton Township that lie west of the center line of the New Jersey
Turnpike. The areas that lie east of the New Jersey Turnpike are serviced
by Comcast of Garden State L.P. under a separate franchise.
§ A261-52. Extension of service.
The company shall be required to proffer service to any residence or
business along any public right-of-way in the primary service area, as
set forth in the company's application. Any extension of plant beyond the
A. The nonexclusive municipal consent granted herein shall expire 15
years from the date of expiration of the previous certificate of approval
issued by the Board with a ten-year automatic renewal as provided by
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-19 and -25, and N.J.A.C. 14:18-13.6.
B. In the event that the municipality shall find that the company has not
substantially complied with the material terms and conditions of this
ordinance, the municipality shall have the right to petition the OCTV,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47, for appropriate action, including
modification and/or termination of the certificate of approval; provided,
however, that the municipality shall first have given the company
written notice of all alleged instances of noncompliance and an
opportunity to cure same within 90 days of that notification.
§ A261-48 WESTAMPTON CODE § A261-52
258:596
primary service area shall be governed by the company's line extension
policy, as set forth in the company's application.
§ A261-53. Construction requirements.
§ A261-54. Customer service.
In providing services to its customers, the company shall comply with
N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq. and all applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations. The company shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary
company and industry standards in the delivery of customer service and
shall be prepared to report on it to the municipality upon written request of
the municipality Administrator or Clerk.
A. Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface
in the natural topography, the company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good a
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent, the
municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place the company, upon reasonable notice by the municipality,
shall remove, re-lay or relocate its equipment, at the expense of the
company.
C. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public places of the municipality so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cable of the company.
Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance of the company's wire and cables.
A. The company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding credit for outages, the
reporting of same to regulatory agencies and notification of same to
customers.
B. The company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable state and
federal statues and regulations regarding the availability of devices for
the hearing impaired and the notification of same to customers.
C. The company shall use every reasonable effort to meet or exceed
voluntary standards for telephone accessibility developed by the
National Cable Television Association (NCTA).
D. Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the
municipality to express any comment with respect to telephone
accessibility to the Complaint Officer, or impair the right of the
Complaint Officer to take any action that is permitted under law.
§ A261-52 VECTOR CONTROL § A261-55
258:597
§ A261-55. Municipal Complaint Officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the Complaint Officer
for the municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26b. All complaints shall
be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The
municipality shall have the right to request copies of records and reports
pertaining to complaints by municipality customers from the OCTV.
§ A261-56. Local office.
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the company
shall maintain a business office or agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:18-5.1 for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving all local
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and
similar matters. Such a business office shall have a publicly listed toll-free
telephone number and be open during standard business hours, and in no
event (excepting emergent circumstances) less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.
§ A261-57. Performance bonds.
During the life of the franchise, the company shall give to the municipality
a bond in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful
performance of all undertakings of the company as represented in its
application for municipal consent incorporated herein.
§ A261-58. Subscriber rates.
The rates of the company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
federal and state law.
§ A261-59. Commitments by company.
A. The company shall provide Expanded Basic or a similar tier of cable
television service on one outlet at no cost to each qualified existing and
future school in the municipality, public and private, elementary,
intermediate and secondary, provided the school is within 175 feet of
active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet installed, if any,
shall be paid for on a materials plus labor basis by the school requesting
service.
B. The company shall provide Expanded Basic or a similar tier of cable
television service at no cost on one outlet to each qualified existing and
future police, fire, emergency management facility and public library in
the municipality, provided the facility is located within 175 feet of active
cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet installed, if any, shall be
paid for on a materials plus labor basis by the municipality.
C. The company shall provide free basic Internet service, via high-speed
cable modem, to one non-networked personal computer in each
qualified existing and future public school in the Township, elementary,
§ A261-55 WESTAMPTON CODE § A261-59
258:598
§ A261-60. Educational and governmental access.
intermediate and secondary, at no charge, provided the facility is
located within 175 feet of active cable distribution plant. The Internet
service shall be installed on a personal computer that is accessible to
the students and not for administrative use only.
D. The company shall provide free basic Internet access via high-speed
cable modem on one non-networked personal computer in each
qualified existing and future public library at no charge, provided the
facility is located within 175 feet of active cable distribution plant. The
Internet service shall be installed on a personal computer that is
accessible to library patrons and not for administrative use only.
E. Within 12 months of passage of the certificate of approval, the company
shall make available to Township residents served by Comcast of
Burlington County, LLC, the educational and government access
channel broadcast to Westampton Township residents served by
Comcast of Garden State, LLC, pursuant to the conditions outlined in
§ A261-60 of this ordinance. The company will make every effort to
deliver said educational and governmental access programming to all
residents served by Comcast of Burlington County, LLC; however, it
shall not be required to do so in areas where the company deems it to
be cost prohibitive.
A. The company will continue to provide one channel for educational and
governmental ("EG") access for the shared use by the municipalities of
Westampton Township, Lumberton Township, Mount Holly Township,
Eastampton Township and Hainesport Township (collectively,
"municipalities").
B. The company will provide and maintain the cable, modulators and
equipment necessary for the Township education-government access
channel to send a signal to the company, and to receive the return feed
signal. The company will not be responsible for the acquisition or
maintenance of any studio facility or equipment used for the access
channel, including, but not limited to, cameras, editing decks, monitors,
character generators, etc.
C. The company does not relinquish its ownership of or ultimate right of
control over a channel by designating it for EG use. An EG access user,
whether an educational or government user, acquires no property or
other interest by virtue of the use of a channel so designated, and may
not rely on the continued use of a particular channel number, no matter
how long the same channel may have been designated for such use.
D. The company shall not exercise editorial control over any educational
or governmental use of channel capacity, except the company may
refuse to transmit any educational or governmental access program or
portion of an educational or governmental access program that
contains obscenity, indecency, or nudity.
§ A261-59 VECTOR CONTROL § A261-60
258:599
§ A261-61. Emergency uses.
§ A261-62. Liability insurance.
The company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability
insurance policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000 covering liability
for any death, personal injury, property damages or other liability arising
out of its construction and operation of the cable television system, and an
excess liability (or "umbrella") policy in the amount of $5,000,000.
E. The governing body of the municipalities shall be responsible for
developing, implementing, and enforcing rules for EG access
programming.
F. Educational access. "Educational access" shall mean noncommercial
use for educational purposes that is managed, scheduled, and
programmed by local educational institutions such as public or private
schools, but not "home schools," community colleges, and/or
universities.
G. Government access. "Government access" shall mean noncommercial
use by the governing bodies, for the purpose of showing the public local
government at work.
H. Company use of fallow time. Because blank or underutilized EG
channels are not in the public interest, in the event the municipality or
other EG access users elect not to fully program their EG access
channel, the company may program unused time on those channels (at
its discretion and for any purpose), subject to reclamation by the
municipality upon no less than 60 days' written notice.
I. Indemnification. The municipality shall indemnify the company for any
liability, loss, or damage it may suffer due to violation of the intellectual
property rights of third parties on the EG channel and from claims
arising out of the municipalities' rules for or administration of access.
J. Company use of fallow time. Because blank or under-utilized EG
channels are not in the public interest, in the event the municipality or
other EG access users elect not to fully program their EG access
channel, the company may program unused time on those channels
subject to reclamation by the municipality upon no less than 60 days'
written notice.
A. The company will comply with the Emergency Alert System ("EAS")
rules in accordance with applicable state and federal statues and
regulations.
B. The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the
municipality or any other person, during an emergency, if for any
reason the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television
system as contemplated herein.
§ A261-60 WESTAMPTON CODE § A261-63
258:600
§ A261-63. Incorporation of application.
All of the statements and commitments contained in the application or
annexed thereto and incorporated therein, and any amendment thereto,
except as modified herein, are binding upon the company as terms and
conditions of this consent. The application and other relevant writings
submitted by the company shall be annexed hereto and made a part hereof
by reference, provided same do not conflict with applicable state or federal
law.
§ A261-64. Competitive equity.
Should the municipality grant a franchise to construct, operate and
maintain a cable television system to any other person, corporation or entity
on terms materially less burdensome or more favorable than the terms
contained herein, the company may substitute such language that is more
favorable or less burdensome for the comparable provision of this ordinance
subject to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
§ A261-65. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
or federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and its validity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
the ordinance.
§ A261-66. Third-party beneficiaries.
Nothing in this franchise or in any prior agreement is or was intended to
confer third-party beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce
the terms of such agreements or franchise.
§ A261-67. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon issuance of a renewal
certificate of approval from the BPU.
§ A261-63 VECTOR CONTROL § A261-67
258:601
Chapter A263
STREET VACATIONS, ACCEPTANCES AND NAME CHANGES
§ A263-1. Street vacations.
Following is a listing of streets vacated by ordinance of the Township
Committee of the Township of Westampton:
Street Vacated Date
Certain streets and parts of streets shown on plan of
Will's Rancocas Lots, Burlington County, New Jersey,
1875 (expressly excepting portions of Wills Avenue and
Second Street)
10-16-1951
Portion of Oxmead Road and portion of Hancock Lane 9-16-1952
Portion of unnamed connecting street situate
eastwardly from easterly right-of-way line of Pennington
Drive
11-15-1966
Lundy's Lane 8-15-1972 [Ord.
No. 3-1972]
Portion of School House Lane 2-11-1997 [Ord.
No. 2-1997]
Parts of Access Road D, aka Haines Lane, adjacent to
portions of Lots 1, 1.01, 2, 4 and 2.1 in Block 202
6-12-2001 [Ord.
No. 14-2001]
Portion of Hancock Lane (Old Oxmead Road) 2-25-2003 [Ord.
No. 2-2003]
Portions of Access Road D (aka Haines Lane), adjacent
to Lot 3 in Block 202; Lot 1 in Block 202.01; and Lot 1
in Block 202.02
4-22-2003 [Ord.
No. 17-2003]
Portion of Haines Lane (realigned), adjacent to Lot 1 in
Block 202.02 and Lot 1 in Block 202.01
4-22-2003 [Ord.
No. 17-2003]
Portion of Hilliards Lane, adjacent to Lots 1, 3, 4, 4.02
and 4.03 in Block 202
4-22-2003 [Ord.
No. 17-2003]
Willard Road 9-14-2004 [Ord.
No. 19-2004]
§ A263-2. Street acceptances.
Following is a listing of streets accepted by resolution of the Township
Committee of the Township of Westampton:
§ A261-67 WESTAMPTON CODE § A263-2
A263:602
Street Area Accepted Date
The streets, curbs and side-walks on
plan entitled Hampton Estates in
Township of Westampton
1-15-1957
Stratton Drive From Pennington Drive northwardly to
and including cul-de-sac
11-19-1963
Seeley Drive From Pennington Drive northeasterly
and northwest-erly to the property line
now of formerly Antonio Russo
11-19-1963
Fort Drive From Holly Lane west-wardly to Olden
Drive, now called Russo Drive
11-19-1963
Price Drive From Holly Lane west-wardly to
Lambert Drive
11-19-1963
David Street From Lambert Drive east-wardly to one
lot beyond Pennington Drive (Block 10
M-Lot 1, extended)
11-19-1963
Lambert Drive From the division line between Sections
2 and 3 southwesterly to one lot beyond
David Street (Block 10 F - Lot 10,
extended)
11-19-1963
Holly Lane From the division line between Sections
2 and 3 southwesterly to one lot beyond
David Street (Block 10 F - Lot 18,
extended)
11-19-1963
Pennington Drive From the division line between Sections
2 and 3 southwesterly to one lot beyond
David Street (Block 10 C - Lot 8,
extended)
11-19-1963
Bloomfield Drive From the division line between Sections
2 and 3 northwesterly to the westerly
side line of Block 10 DD - Lot 13,
extended
11-19-1963
Olden Drive (now
Russo Drive)
From Bloomfield Lane southwesterly to
lands now or formerly William E. Kelly
11-19-1969
Fort Place From Fort Drive southwesterly to and
including cul-de-sac
11-19-1963
Lambert Drive Beginning at a point one lot beyond
David Street (Block 10 F - Lot 10) and
continuing in a southwesterly direction
to Rancocas Road
6-20-1967
Holly Lane Beginning at a point one lot beyond
David Street (Block 10F - Lot 18) and
continuing in a southwesterly direction
to Rancocas Road
6-20-1967
§ A263-2 STREET VACATIONS, ACCEPTANCES AND § A263-2
A263:603
Street Area Accepted Date
Pennington Drive Beginning at point one lot beyond David
Street (Block 10C - Lot 8) and
continuing in a southwesterly direction
to Howell Drive
6-20-1967
Ogden Drive Beginning at Holly Lane and extending
westerly to lands n/f William E. Kelly
6-20-1967
Howell Drive Beginning at Lambert Drive and
extending eastwardly to lands n/f Irwin
A. Seward
6-20-1967
§ A263-3. Street name changes.
Following is a listing of street name changes effected by ordinance of the
Township Committee of the Township of Westampton:
Original Name New Name Date
Centerton Road Bridge Street 7-13-2004
Olden Drive Russo Drive 7-16-1963
Springside Road (a
portion)
Valley Farm Road 7-23-2002
Stokes Road East Stokes Road 12-19-1967
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-1999 Contract NCM
2-1999 Contract NCM
3-1999 1-16-1999 Adoption of 1998
renumbering of Code
Ch. 1, Art. III
4-1999 1-26-1999 Vehicles and traffic:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 232, Art. I
5-1999 Salary NCM
6-1999 Bond NCM
7-1999 3-9-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
§ A263-2 WESTAMPTON CODE § DL-1
A263:604
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
8-1999 3-9-1999 Historic preservation Ch. 140
9-1999 5-11-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
10-1999 5-11-1999 Defense and
indemnification
Ch. 26
14-1999 10-26-1999 Zoning Map amendment NCM
1-2000 Contract NCM
2-2000 Contract NCM
3-2000 3-14-2000 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 99
4-2000 5-9-2000 Vehicles and traffic:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 232, Art. I
5-2000 NCM
6-2000 NCM
7-2000 NCM
8-2000 NCM
9-2000 NCM
10-2000 NCM
11-2000 NCM
12-2000 6-13-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
13-2000 6-27-2000 Vehicles and traffic:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 232, Art. I
14-2000 NCM
15-2000 11-14-2000 Fire prevention:
enforcement of Uniform
Fire Safety Act
amendment
Ch. 128, Art. I
16-2000 11-14-2000 False alarms amendment Ch. 79
17-2000 11-14-2000 Gasoline tanks Ch. 135 (repealer
only)
18-2000 11-14-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
19-2000 11-14-2000 Site plan review
amendment; subdivision
of land amendment
Chs. 196 and 215
20-2000 Weight limits for trucks
on Irick Road
NCM
21-2000 Stemmers Lane NCM
§ DL-1 STREET VACATIONS, ACCEPTANCES AND § DL-1
A263:605
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
22-2000 12-12-2000 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 99
1-2001 Irick Road NCM
2-2001 Voided
3-2001 2-13-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
4-2001 2-27-2001 Vehicles and traffic:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 232, Art. I
5-2001 2-27-2001 Vehicles and traffic:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 232, Art. I
6-2001 NCM
7-2001 NCM
8-2001 NCM
9-2001 NCM
10-2001 NCM
11-2001 Bond NCM
12-2001 4-10-2001 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 215
13-2001 5-8-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
14-2001 6-12-2001 Street vacation Ch. A263
15-2001 11-27-2001 Temporary weight limit
on street
NCM
16-2001 8-14-2001 Vector control: tire
storage (Board of Health)
Ch. 258, Art. I
17-2001 8-14-2001 Vector control: pool
maintenance (Board of
Health)
Ch. 258, Art. II
18-2001 11-13-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
1-2002 Bond NCM
2-2002 4-9-2002 Vehicles and traffic:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 232, Art. I
3-2002 Bond NCM
4-2002 Lease agreement NCM
5-2002 4-23-2002 Court amendment Ch. 21
6-2002 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 WESTAMPTON CODE § DL-1
A263:606
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-2002 Salaries NCM
8-2002 6-11-2002 Soil removal amendment Ch. 199
9-2002 East Park Drive NCM
10-2002 Open space agreement NCM
11-2002 7-23-2002 Street vacations,
acceptances and name
changes amendment
Ch. A263
12-2002 10-22-2002 Vehicles and traffic:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 232, Art. I
1-2003 1-28-2003 Basketball hoops Ch. 90
2-2003 2-25-2003 Street vacation Ch. A263
3-2003 Salary NCM
4-2003 Salary NCM
5-2003 Salary NCM
6-2003 Cap ordinance NCM
7-2003 Bond NCM
8-2003 4-22-2003 Brush, grass, weeds and
debris amendment
Ch. 85
9-2003 4-22-2003 Noise amendment Ch. 166
10-2003 4-22-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
11-2003 4-22-2003 Garage/yard sales Ch. 212, Art. IV
12-2003 4-22-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
13-2003 4-22-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
14-2003 4-22-2003 Household and
nonhousehold animals
Ch. 88, Art. IV
15-2003 4-22-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
16-2003 4-22-2003 Enforcement of Uniform
Fire Safety Act
amendment
Ch. 128, Art. I
17-2003 4-22-2003 Street vacation Ch. A263
18-2003 6-24-2003 Soil removal amendment Ch. 199
19-2003 9-9-2003 Hotel and motel tax NCM
20-2003 10-14-2003 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 82
21-2003 12-9-2003 Food-handling
establishments
Ch. 134
§ DL-1 STREET VACATIONS, ACCEPTANCES AND § DL-1
A263:607
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2004 NCM
2-2004 NCM
3-2004 NCM
4-2004 NCM
5-2004 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
6-2004
6-2004 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 82
7-2004 4-13-2004 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 215
8-2004 Tabled
9-2004 5-11-2004 Vehicles and traffic
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 232, Art. I
10-2004 6-8-2004 Vehicles and traffic
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 232, Art. I
11-2004 6-8-2004 Household and
nonhousehold animals
amendment
Ch. 88, Art. IV
12-2004 6-8-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
13-2004 6-8-2004 Housing standards Ch. 254
14-2004 Bond NCM
15-2004 7-13-2004 Street name change Ch. A263
16-2004 7-13-2004 Bond NCM
17-2004 9-14-2004 Vehicles and traffic
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 232, Art. I
18-2004 9-14-2004 Vehicles and traffic
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 232, Art. I
19-2004 9-14-2004 Street vacation Ch. A263
20-2004 12-14-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 232
21-2004 12-14-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
1-2005 Interlocal agreement NCM
§ DL-1 WESTAMPTON CODE § DL-1
A263:608
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-2005 2-22-2005 Enforcement of Uniform
Fire Safety Act
amendment
Ch. 128, Art. I
3-2005 4-26-2005 Bond NCM
4-2005 4-26-2005 Salary NCM
5-2005 4-26-2005 Salary NCM
6-2005 4-26-2005 Salary NCM
7-2005 4-26-2005 Salary NCM
8-2005 4-26-2005 Establishing CAP Bank NCM
9-2005 5-24-2005 Vehicles and traffic:
parking spaces in
residential zones
Ch. 232, Art. III
10-2005 6-14-2005 Stormwater management
regulations
NCM
11-2005 5-24-2005 Stormwater
management:
containerized yard waste
Ch. 209, Art. I
12-2005 5-24-2005 Stormwater
management: improper
disposal of waste
Ch. 209, Art. II
13-2005 5-24-2005 Stormwater
management: yard waste
collection
Ch. 209, Art. III
14-2005 5-24-2005 Stormwater
management: wildlife
feeding
Ch. 209, Art. IV
15-2005 5-24-2005 Stormwater
management: illicit
connections
Ch. 209, Art. V
16-2005 6-14-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
17-2005 6-28-2005 Department of Public
Safety
Repealed by Ord. No.
17-2008
18-2005 6-28-2005 Returned check fee Ch. 1, Art. IV
19-2005 6-28-2005 Tax increase for open
space
NCM
20-2005 9-13-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
21-2005 9-27-2005 Ethics: state law Ch. 35, Art. I
22-2005 9-27-2005 Ethics: dual office
holding
Ch. 35, Art. II
§ DL-1 STREET VACATIONS, ACCEPTANCES AND § DL-1
A263:609
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
23-2005 9-27-2005 Ethics: pay for play Ch. 35, Art. III
24-2005 9-27-2005 Ethics: gift/honoraria
ban
Ch. 35, Art. IV
25-2005 9-27-2005 Ethics: private/personal
use of government
property or personnel
Ch. 35, Art. V
26-2005 9-27-2005 Ethics: nepotism ban Ch. 35, Art. VI
27-2005 9-27-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
28-2005 11-22-2005 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 128
29-2005 12-13-2005 Defense and
indemnification
Ch. 26
1-2006 2-28-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
2-2006 CAP NCM
3-2006 Salaries NCM
4-2006 Salaries NCM
5-2006 Salaries NCM
6-2006 Bond NCM
7-2006 4-11-2006 Towing and storage
amendment
Ch. 224
8-2006 Swim club lease NCM
9-2006 7-11-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
10-2006 Traffic amendment Pending
11-2006 Water service
amendment
NCM
12-2006 8-8-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
13-2006 9-12-2006 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 254
14-2006 10-24-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
15-2006 Salaries NCM
16-2006 12-12-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
1-2007 3-13-2007 Stormwater management On file in Township
offices
2-2007 3-13-2007 CAP bank NCM
3-2007 3-13-2007 Bond NCM
4-2007 4-10-2007 Licensing of dogs
amendment
Ch. 88, Art. I
§ DL-1 WESTAMPTON CODE § DL-1
A263:610
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-2007 4-10-2007 Salaries NCM
6-2007 4-10-2007 Salaries NCM
7-2007 4-10-2007 Salaries NCM
8-2007 4-10-2007 Salaries NCM
9-2007 4-10-2007 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 99
10-2007 5-8-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
11-2007 5-22-2007 Environmental Advisory
Committee
Ch. 33
12-2007 7-10-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
13-2007 Pending state
approval
14-2007 10-23-2007 Licensing of dogs
amendment
Ch. 88, Art. I
1-2008 3-11-2008 Disorderly conduct
amendment
Ch. 117
2-2008 3-11-2008 Purchase of property NCM
3-2008 3-25-2008 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
4-2008 Tabled
5-2008 5-27-2008 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 152
6-2008 6-10-2008 Fire prevention: key lock
boxes
Ch. 128, Art. II
7-2008 Open space Not adopted
8-2008 6-24-2008 Environmental Advisory
Committee amendment
Ch. 33
9-2008 7-8-2008 Salaries NCM
10-2008 7-8-2008 Salaries NCM
11-2008 7-8-2008 Salaries NCM
12-2008 7-8-2008 Salaries NCM
13-2008 7-8-2008 Bond NCM
14-2008 Real estate acquisition NCM
15-2008 Bond NCM
16-2008 10-28-2008 Licensing of dogs
amendment
Ch. 88, Art. I
§ DL-1 STREET VACATIONS, ACCEPTANCES AND § DL-1
A263:611
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
17-2008 10-28-2008 Department of Public
Safety repealer;
Emergency Services
Department
Chs. 32A; 54, footnote
only
18-2008 10-28-2008 Police Department Ch. 54
19-2008 Willingboro MUA
agreement
NCM
1-2009 2-24-2009 Prohibited conduct
amendment
Ch. 117
2-2009 3-10-2009 Solid waste: recycling
amendment
Ch. 206, Art. II
3-2009 3-24-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
4-2009 4-14-2009 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
5-2009 4-28-2009 Bond NCM
6-2009 5-26-2009 Salaries NCM
7-2009 5-26-2009 Salaries NCM
8-2009 5-26-2009 Salaries NCM
9-2009 5-26-2009 Salaries NCM
10-2009 Payment of claims
amendment
Ch. 17 (withdrawn)
11-2009 9-22-2009 Affordable housing
administration:
Municipal Housing
Liaison and
Administrative Agent
Ch. 6, Art. I
12-2009 10-13-2009 Cable television
franchise: Comcast of
Garden State, L.P.
Ch. A261, Art. II
13-2009 10-13-2009 Lease agreement NCM
14-2009 11-10-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
15-2009 11-24-2009 Fire prevention:
enforcement of Uniform
Fire Safety Act
amendment
Ch. 128, Art. I
16-2009 11-24-2009 Appropriation for Tax
Map update
NCM
17-2009 11-24-2009 Real estate acquisition NCM
18-2009 11-24-2009 Real estate acquisition NCM
§ DL-1 WESTAMPTON CODE § DL-1
A263:612
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
19-2009 11-24-2009 Loitering repealer Ch. 158, reference
only
1-2010 1-26-2010 Emergency appropriation NCM
2-2010 2-9-2010 Bond NCM
3-2010 2-9-2010 Fee schedule Ch. 122, Art. I
4-2010 2-23-2010 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 99
5-2010 4-27-2010 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
6-2010 5-11-2010 Bond NCM
7-2010 6-22-2010 Bond NCM
8-2010 7-13-2010 Stormwater
management: private
storm drain inlet
retrofitting
Ch. 209, Art. VI
9-2010 7-13-2010 Solid waste: refuse
containers and
dumpsters
Ch. 206, Art. III
10-2010 8-10-2010 Parks and recreation:
hours and curfew in park
areas
Repealed by Ord. No.
12-2017
11-2010 Towing and storage
amendment
Tabled
12-2010 10-12-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
13-2010 9-28-2010 Salaries NCM
14-2010 9-28-2010 Salaries NCM
15-2010 9-28-2010 Salaries NCM
16-2010 10-12-2010 Towing and storage
amendment
Ch. 224
17-2010 10-12-2010 Tax exemption NCM
1-2011 2-8-2011 Solid waste: recycling Ch. 206, Art. II
2-2011 2-8-2011 Solid waste: recycling
storage locations
Ch. 206, Art. IV
3-2011 2-8-2011 Billing system for EMS
services
NCM
4-2011 3-8-2011 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
5-2011 4-12-2011 Bond NCM
6-2011 5-10-2011 Farmers' market Ch. 119
7-2011 5-24-2011 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 STREET VACATIONS, ACCEPTANCES AND § DL-1
A263:613
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
8-2011 5-24-2011 Salaries NCM
9-2011 5-24-2011 Salaries NCM
10-2011 5-24-2011 Salaries NCM
11-2011 8-9-2011 Site plan review
amendment; subdivision
of land amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 196; 215; 250
12-2011 11-8-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
13-2011 Snow emergency parking Tabled
14-2011 12-13-2011 Bingo and raffles: games
of chance amendment
Ch. 92
15-2011 12-13-2011 Vehicles and traffic:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 232, Art. I
1-2012 2-28-2012 Preservation easement NCM
2-2012 2-28-2012 Cap bank NCM
3-2012 3-27-2012 Bond NCM
4-2012 4-10-2012 Enforcement of Uniform
Fire Safety Act
amendment; outdoor
fires
Ch. 128, Arts. I and III
5-2012 4-10-2012 Hours and curfew in park
areas amendment
Ch. 172, Art. I
6-2012 4-24-2012 Site plan review
amendment
Ch. 196
7-2012 4-24-2012 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 215
8-2012 4-24-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
9-2012 4-24-2012 Salaries NCM
10-2012 4-24-2012 Salaries NCM
11-2012 4-24-2012 Salaries NCM
12-2012 4-24-2012 Salaries NCM
13-2012 5-22-2012 Extension of tax
abatement
NCM
14-2012 7-10-2012 Cable television
franchise amendment
Ch. A261
15-2012 7-10-2012 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 99
§ DL-1 WESTAMPTON CODE § DL-1
A263:614
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
16-2012 9-11-2012 Vehicles and traffic:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 232, Art. I
17-2012 9-25-2012 Bond NCM
18-2012 10-9-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
1-2013 2-12-2013 Property conveyance NCM
2-2013 2-26-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
3-2013 3-12-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
4-2013 4-9-2013 Bond NCM
5-2013 5-28-2013 Brush, grass, weeds and
debris amendment
Ch. 95
6-2013 6-11-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
7-2013 6-11-2013 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 122, Art. I
8-2013 6-18-2013 Project Freedom
agreement amendment
NCM
9-2013 9-10-2013 Sale of property NCM
10-2013 9-24-2013 Salaries NCM
11-2013 9-24-2013 Salaries NCM
12-2013 9-24-2013 Salaries NCM
13-2013 9-24-2013 Salaries NCM
14-2013 12-10-2013 Solicitors and canvassers
amendment
Ch. 203
1-2014 2-25-2014 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2-2014 3-25-2014 Bond NCM
3-2014 3-25-2014 Dedication of revenues to
open space
NCM
4-2014 4-8-2014 Bond NCM
5-2014 5-13-2014 Redevelopment plan NCM
6-2014 5-27-2014 Towing and storage
amendment
Ch. 224
7-2014 5-27-2014 Stormwater
management:
containerized yard waste
amendment; yard waste
collection program
amendment
Ch. 209, Arts. I and III
§ DL-1 STREET VACATIONS, ACCEPTANCES AND § DL-1
A263:615
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
8-2014 6-10-2014 Vehicles and traffic:
general provisions
amendment
(handicapped parking)
Ch. 232, Art. I
9-2014 9-9-2014 Redevelopment plan NCM
10-2014 9-23-2014 Bond NCM
11-2014 10-14-2014 Salaries NCM
12-2014 10-14-2014 Salaries NCM
13-2014 10-14-2014 Salaries NCM
14-2014 11-25-2014 Acquisition of property NCM
1-2015 3-10-2015 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2-2015 3-10-2015 Bond NCM
3-2015 3-10-2015 Acquisition of property NCM
4-2015 3-10-2015 Acquisition of property NCM
5-2015 4-28-2015 Redevelopment plan NCM
6-2015 5-26-2015 Timbuctoo Advisory
Committee
Ch. 73
7-2015 5-26-2015 Tax exemption NCM
8-2015 6-23-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
9-2015 7-14-2015 Emergency Services
Department amendment
Ch. 32A
10-2015 7-14-2015 Fire prevention:
enforcement of Uniform
Fire Safety Act
amendment
Ch. 128, Art. I
11-2015 Woodmont PILOT
agreement
Tabled
12-2015 10-13-2015 Government equipment
and vehicles
Ch. 39
13-2015 10-13-2015 Vacant and abandoned
property
Ch. 182
14-2015 10-13-2015 Redevelopment plan NCM
15-2015 11-24-2015 Salaries NCM
16-2015 11-24-2015 Salaries NCM
17-2015 11-24-2015 Salaries NCM
18-2015 11-24-2015 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 WESTAMPTON CODE § DL-1
A263:616
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2016 3-7-2016 Prohibited conduct
amendment
Ch. 117
2-2016 3-7-2016 Acquisition of property NCM
3-2016 3-21-2016 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 99
4-2016 3-21-2016 Redevelopment plan NCM
5-2016 4-4-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 232, Art. I
6-2016 4-18-2016 Financial agreement NCM
7-2016 4-4-2016 Emergency Services
Department amendment
Ch. 32A
8-2016 4-4-2016 Administrator
amendment
Ch. 4
9-2016 4-18-2016 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
10-2016 5-4-2016 Bond NCM
11-2016 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Tabled
12-2016 5-16-2016 Brush, grass, weeds and
debris amendment
Ch. 95
13-2016 5-16-2016 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 54
14-2016 5-16-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 232, Art. I
15-2016 6-6-2016 Woodmont PILOT
program
NCM
16-2016 6-20-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 232, Art. I
17-2016 Bond Tabled
18-2016 8-1-2016 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 99
19-2016 11-21-2016 Salaries NCM
20-2016 11-21-2016 Salaries NCM
21-2016 11-21-2016 Salaries NCM
22-2016 11-21-2016 Vacant and abandoned
property amendment
Ch. 182
§ DL-1 STREET VACATIONS, ACCEPTANCES AND § DL-1
A263:617
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
23-2016 12-5-2016 Salaries NCM
24-2016 12-5-2016 Fire prevention: outdoor
fires amendment;
general provisions
Ch. 128, Art. III; Ch.
128, Art. IV
25-2016 12-5-2016 Fire prevention:
enforcement of Uniform
Fire Safety Act
amendment; key lock
boxes amendment
Ch. 128, Art. I; Ch.
128, Art. II
26-2016 12-5-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
1-2017 3-6-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 250
2-2017 3-20-2017 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
3-2017 5-15-2017 Bond NCM
4-2017 Street acceptance Tabled
5-2017 6-19-2017 Sale of property NCM
6-2017 7-17-2017 Extension of Open Space
Tax
NCM
7-2017 8-7-2017 Salaries NCM
8-2017 8-7-2017 Salaries NCM
9-2017 8-7-2017 Salaries NCM
10-2017 8-7-2017 Salaries NCM
11-2017 9-5-2017 Reappropriation NCM
12-2017 9-18-2017 Parks and recreation Ch. 172
13-2017 9-18-2017 Floodplain management Ch. 131
14-2017 10-2-2017 Vehicles and traffic:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 232, Art. I
15-2017 11-20-2017 Brush, grass, weeds and
debris amendment
Ch. 95
16-2017 12-18-2017 Streets and sidewalks:
maintenance of
sidewalks and driveway
aprons
Ch. 212, Art. V
17-2017 11-20-2017 Streets and sidewalks:
openings and
excavations amendment
Ch. 212, Art. II
1-2018 2-20-2018 Timbuctoo Advisory
Committee Amendment
Ch. 73
§ DL-1 WESTAMPTON CODE § DL-1
A263:618
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-2018 2-20-2018 COLA NCM
3-2018 6-18-2019 Bond NCM
4-2018 6-19-2018 Salaries: Overtime, Flex-
Time and Compensatory
Time
Ch. 63, Art. III
5-2018 7-17-2018 Smoking: Smoking on
Township Property
Ch. 197, Art. I
6-2018 9-4-2018 Animals: Animal Debris
and Cleanup Amendment
Ch. 88, Art. III
7-2018 9-4-2018 Salaries NCM
8-2018 9-4-2018 Salaries NCM
9-2018 9-4-2018 Salaries NCM
10-2018 12-18-2018 Police Department
Amendment
Ch. 54
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
1-2019 2-19-2019 Termination of
Easements
NCM 53
2-2019 3-19-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 53
3-2019 5-21-2019 Bond NCM 53
4-2019 6-18-2019 Building Construction
Amendment
Ch. 99 53
5-2019 8-20-2019 Salaries NCM 53
6-2019 8-20-2019 Redevelopment Plan NCM 53
7-2019 9-17-2019 Food-Handling
Establishments
Amendment
Ch. 134 53
8-2019 9-17-2019 Redevelopment Plan NCM 53
9-2019 9-17-2019 Salaries NCM 53
10-2019 9-17-2019 Salaries NCM 53
11-2019 10-15-2019 Vehicles and Traffic:
General Provisions
Amendment
Ch. 232, Art.
I
53
§ DL-1 STREET VACATIONS, ACCEPTANCES AND § DL-1
A263:619