Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Definitions and Word Usage
[Adopted 12-27-1979 by Ord. No. 79-39 as Ch. 1 of the Revised
General Ordinances]
§ 1-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Code and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require, the following definitions shall apply:
ADMINISTRATOR — The Administrator of the township duly appointed
pursuant to law.
CLERK or TOWNSHIP CLERK — The Municipal Clerk duly appointed
pursuant to law.
DEPARTMENT — An organizational unit of the government established
or designated by ordinance or this Code as a department, together with
any agency or instrumentality of the government assigned to such
organizational unit by the Mayor.[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-07]
LICENSED1 — Licensed in accordance with the appropriate section or
chapter of this Code.
MONTH — A calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided.
OATH — An affirmation where an affirmation may be substituted for an
oath. In such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be construed to be
equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed."
OCCUPANT — See "tenant."
OFFICER or OFFICIAL — The title of an officer or official shall be construed
as if the words "of the Township of West Windsor" followed it.
ORDINANCE — Any act of local legislation heretofore or hereafter adopted,
and including this Code, so long as it is adopted by the procedure required
for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it remains in force and effect
pursuant to law.
OWNER — Any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in
partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part
of a building or land.
PERSON — Includes corporations, companies, associations, societies, firms,
partnerships and joint stock companies, as well as individuals, and shall
also include all political subdivisions of this state or any agencies or
instrumentalities thereof.[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Goods and chattels, rights and credits, moneys
and effects, evidences of debt and all written instruments by which any
1. Editor's Note: The definitions of "food market area" and "food preparation area," which
immediately preceded this definition, were deleted 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-97.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3
right to, interest in or lien or encumbrances upon property or any debt
or financial obligation is created, acknowledged, evidenced, transferred,
discharged or defeated, in whole or in part, and every thing, except real
property as herein defined, which may be the subject of
ownership.[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
PRECEDING and FOLLOWING — Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY — Real and personal property.
PUBLIC GROUNDS, PUBLIC SQUARES, PUBLIC PLACE or PUBLIC
PLACES — Any and every public ground, public square, public park or other
public place within the township.
REAL PROPERTY — Lands, tenements and hereditaments, all rights thereto
and interests therein.
SIDEWALK — Any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.
STREET — A street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk and crosswalk and every class of
road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general public.
TENANT or OCCUPANT — Any person who occupies the whole or part of
such building or land, whether alone or with others.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of West Windsor in the County of Mercer and
State of New Jersey.
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE or COMMITTEE — The governing body of the
township through June 30, 1993.[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-07]
WEEK — Seven days.
YEAR — A calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-2. Word usage.
For the purposes of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
A. The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future the
present.
B. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter; and the
feminine gender includes the masculine and neuter. [Amended
4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
C. The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
D. "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
E. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first and including the last day, and if the last day be a
§ 1-1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 1-2
1:4
Sunday, a legal holiday or a day on which the offices of the township are
closed, that day shall be excluded.
F. "Writing" and "written" shall include printing, typewriting and any
other mode of communication using paper or similar material which is
in general use, as well as legible handwriting.
G. "And" may be construed as meaning "or" and "or" as "and" if the sense
requires and indicates such meaning.
H. Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the
prevailing and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey
during any day in any year.
I. Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in this Code shall
be deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance, as amended,
whether or not such designation is included in the citation.
J. "Chapter" shall mean one of the major divisions identified by an Arabic
number and divided by subject matter. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-07]
K. "Section" shall mean a major subdivision of a chapter.
L. "Subsection" shall mean a subdivision of a section identified by a capital
letter, an Arabic number in parenthesis or any other subdivision below
that point. 2 [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
2. Editor's Note: Former Subsection M, the definition of "paragraph," which immediately
followed this subsection, was deleted 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07.
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:5

ARTICLE II
Penalty
[Adopted 12-27-1979 by Ord. No. 79-39 as Sec. 3-1 of the Revised
General Ordinances]
§ 1-3. General penalty.
§ 1-4. Health penalty. [Added 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
A. Maximum penalty. For violation of any provision of this chapter, any
other chapter of this Code or any other ordinance of the Township
where no specific penalty is provided regarding the section violated, the
maximum penalty, upon conviction, shall be one or more of the
following: a fine not exceeding $2,000 or imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, at the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5).
[Amended 6-25-1984 by Ord. No. 84-23; 11-6-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-14; 5-19-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08]
B. Separate violations. Except as otherwise provided, every day in which a
violation of any provision of this chapter or any other ordinance of the
township exists shall constitute a separate violation.
C. Application. The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended
to state an appropriate penalty for every violation. Any lesser penalty,
including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for
a particular case or violation.
D. Additional remedies. The imposition of a penalty as provided in
Subsection A, or as specifically provided in any other chapter of this
Code or in another ordinance of the township, shall be in addition to any
injunctive or remedial relief which is authorized under the laws of the
state, with the same force and effect as though provided for in this
Code. Such penalty shall not be deemed to be in lieu of any provision for
revocation or suspension of any license or permit. [Added 4-19-1999
by Ord. No. 99-07]
E. Repeat offender. Any person who is convicted of violating an ordinance
within one year of the date of a previous violation of the same ordinance
and who was fined for the previous violation shall be sentenced by a
court to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine
imposed by the court upon a person for a repeated offense shall not be
less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine fixed for a violation
of the ordinance, but shall be calculated separately from the fine
imposed for the violation of the ordinance. [Added 4-19-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-07]
A. Maximum penalty. The penalty for violation of any health ordinance, as
so designated in this Code, shall be a penalty of not more than $500 nor
less than $5.
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:7
B. Separate violations. Except as otherwise provided, every day in which a
violation of any provision of this chapter or any other ordinance of the
township exists shall constitute a separate violation.
C. Application. The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended
to state an appropriate penalty for every violation. Any lesser penalty,
including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for
a particular case or violation.
D. Additional remedies. The imposition of a penalty as provided in
Subsection A, or as specifically provided in any other chapter of this
Code or in another ordinance of the township, shall be in addition to any
injunctive or remedial relief which is authorized under the laws of the
state, with the same force and effect as though provided for in this
Code. Such penalty shall not be deemed to be in lieu of any provision for
revocation or suspension of any license or permit.
§ 1-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 1-4
1:8
ARTICLE III
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
§ 1-5. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of West
Windsor of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Township
Council of the Township of West Windsor, as revised, codified and
consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp.,
and consisting of Chapters 1 through 200, together with an Appendix,
are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the
Township of West Windsor," hereinafter known and referred to as the
"Code."
§ 1-6. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-7. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-8. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Township Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Township
of West Windsor by impressing thereon the Seal of the township, as
provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office
of the Clerk of the township, to be made available to persons desiring to
examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-9. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of West
Windsor" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:9
§ 1-10. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Township of West Windsor, pursuant to law, shall cause to
be published, in the manner required, a copy of this Adopting Ordinance
in a newspaper of general circulation in the township. Sufficient copies
of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection
by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-11. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee to
be set by the Township Council. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures
for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township of
West Windsor to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more
of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-14. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-10 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 1-15
1:10
§ 1-15. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-16. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-17. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-16 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 1-11-1999.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the township's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:11
§ 1-18. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Township Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Nomenclature changes. The following nomenclature changes have been
made:
(1) References throughout the Code to the Department of
Environmental Protection and Energy are changed to Department
of Environmental Protection.
(2) Throughout Chapter 4, Administration of Government, references
to the "governing body" are changed to "Council." However, the
definition of "governing body" has been retained. In addition,
references in this chapter to "this act" are changed to "N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq."
(3) Throughout Chapter 34, Alarm Systems, references to the "Police
Department" and "Fire Department" are changed to "Police
Division" and "Fire Division."
(4) In Chapter 48, Brush, Grass and Weeds, references to dwellings are
included in addition to the mention of "land" or "lands," in
conformance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.13.
(5) In Chapter 86, Firearms, references to the "Police Department" are
changed to "Police Division" and references to the "Director of
Public Safety" are changed to "Director of the Department of Public
Safety." In addition, "Engineering Department" is changed to
"Division of Engineering."
(6) Throughout Chapter 152, Article IV, Traffic Controls During
Construction, references to the "Traffic Safety Division" are
changed to the "Traffic Safety Bureau" and references to the
"Police Department" are changed to "Police Division."
§ 1-17 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 1-18
1:12
(7) Throughout Chapter 168, Traffic and Parking, references to the
"Police Department" are changed to "Police Division."
(8) Throughout Chapter 200, Land Use, references to the "Subdivision
Council" are changed to "Technical Review Committee."
[Amended 7-30-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-20]
(9) Throughout Part 5, Flood Damage and Prevention of Chapter 200,
Land Use, references to the "Federal Insurance Administration" are
changed to the "Federal Emergency Management Agency."
C. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith,
to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter
and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)3
3. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-18C, the chapters, articles and sections which were
amended, added or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by a
footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-07." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
township offices.
§ 1-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:13
Chapter 4
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 63.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 89.
Parking areas, public and private — See Ch.
118.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 122.
Sewerage Authority — See Ch. 133, Art. I.
Sewer use — See Ch. 133, Art. II.
Land use — See Ch. 200.
Council procedural guidelines — See Ch.
A205.
§ 1-18 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 1-18
1:14
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 4-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Administrative Code
of the Township of West Windsor" and is herein referred to as the "code."
§ 4-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to establish departments, boards,
commissions, authorities and committees; allocate the Township's
functions, powers and duties among and within the departments; establish
official relationships; and prescribe standards and procedures for the
conduct of the public business, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq. and
any and all statutory provisions of the State of New Jersey applicable to the
Township.
§ 4-3. Definitions.
A. Terms defined. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
ADVICE and CONSENT — The majority vote of a quorum of the Council,
but in no case less than two affirmative votes if two is sufficient to grant
advice and consent. If consent is not granted, the Mayor shall have the
right to resubmit the matter to the Council.
CHARTER — The Mayor-Council Plan pursuant to the Optional
Municipal Charter Law, N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq., as amended and
supplemented, and any and all statutory provisions of the State of New
Jersey applicable to the Township.
CLERK — The Township Clerk appointed pursuant to the Charter and
the Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
COUNCIL — The local legislative body of the municipality elected
pursuant to the Charter and designated as the Municipal Council of the
Township of West Windsor.
DEPARTMENT — An organizational unit of the municipal government
established by or pursuant to this code and headed by a director.
DIRECTOR — The head of a department appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council.
GENERAL LAW — Any law or provisions of law not inconsistent with the
Optional Municipal Charter Law, N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq., heretofore
or hereafter enacted, which is by its terms applicable or available to
all municipalities, and the following additional laws, whether or not
such additional laws are so applicable or available to all municipalities:
legislation relating to taxation, local courts, health, public authorities
serving more than one municipality and municipalities in unsound
financial conditions.4
§ 4-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-3
1:15
GOVERNING BODY — The Township Council as constituted under the
Charter.5
MAYOR — The Chief Executive Officer of the Township of West Windsor
exercising the executive powers of the Township as set forth in the
Charter.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of West Windsor in the County of
Mercer, State of New Jersey.[Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No.
96-10]
ORDINANCE — All ordinances of the Township of West Windsor in force
and effect on the date of adoption pursuant to the Code of Township
of West Windsor, County of Mercer, State of New Jersey, as amended,
unless specifically repealed by this code, and all ordinances hereinafter
adopted by the Council of the Township of West Windsor. An ordinance
shall also be defined as an act or regulation of the Council required to
be reduced to writing and read at more than one meeting thereof and
published pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-1 et seq.
PRESIDENT — The President of the Council.
QUORUM — A majority of the whole number of members of the Council.
RESOLUTION — Any act or regulation of the Council required to be
reduced to writing, but which may be finally passed at the meeting at
which it is introduced.
ROLL CALL VOTES — The vote upon every motion, resolution or
ordinance by yeas and nays as entered on the minutes of each meeting.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of West Windsor, in the County of Mercer,
State of New Jersey.
B. Word usage. For the purpose of this code and any other ordinance or
resolution heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context may
otherwise require:
(1) The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the
future tense includes the present.
(2) The singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes
the singular.
(3) "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
(4) The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first day and including the last day, and if the last day
is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, that day shall be excluded
and the next following working day shall be the last day. [Amended
5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 4-3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-3
1:16
(5) "Writing" and "written" includes any printed, typewritten,
computer-generated and any other mode of communication using
paper or similar material which is in general use, including but not
limited to data sheets, data processing cards, photographs,
photographic negatives, phono records, tape recordings, wire
recordings, transcripts of recordings, as well as legible
handwriting.
(6) The feminine shall include the masculine. The masculine shall
include the feminine.
§ 4-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-3
1:17

ARTICLE II
Office of Mayor
§ 4-4. Executive power. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-37]
The executive power of the Township shall be exercised by the Mayor
pursuant to the Charter and law (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.).
§ 4-5. General powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Mayor shall be to:
A. Enforce the Charter and ordinances of the Township and all general
laws applicable thereto.
B. Report annually to the Council and to the public on the state of the
municipality and the work of the previous year; the Mayor shall also
recommend to the Council whatever action or programs the Mayor
deems necessary for the improvement of the municipality and the
welfare of its residents. The Mayor may from time to time recommend
any action or programs the Mayor deems necessary or desirable for the
municipality to undertake.
C. Supervise, direct and control all departments of the Township
government and shall require each department to make an annual and
such other reports of its work as the Mayor may deem desirable.
D. Require such reports and examine such accounts, records and
operations of any board, committee, commission or other agency of
Township government as the Mayor deems necessary.
E. Prepare and submit to the Council for its consideration and adoption an
annual operating budget and a capital budget, establish the schedules
and procedures to be followed by all municipal departments, offices and
agencies in connection therewith and supervise and administer all
phases of the budgetary process.
F. Supervise the care and custody of all municipal property, institutions
and agencies and make recommendations concerning the nature and
location of municipal improvements and execute improvements
determined by the Council.
G. Sign all contracts, bonds or other instruments requiring the consent of
the Township.
H. Review, analyze and forecast trends of municipal services and finances
and programs of all boards, commissions, agencies and other municipal
bodies and report and recommend thereon to the Council.
I. Supervise the development, installation and maintenance of centralized
budgeting, personnel and purchasing procedures as may be authorized
by ordinance.
§ 4-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-5
1:19
§ 4-6. Appointment power (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-3 et seq.). [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-37]
J. Negotiate contracts for the Township subject to Council approval.
K. Assure that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the Township
or its inhabitants in any statute, franchise or other contract are
faithfully kept and performed.
L. Except as provided by law, serve as an ex officio nonvoting member of
all appointive bodies in Township government of which the Mayor is not
an official voting member. [Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
M. Subject to law, direct any municipal department or division to perform
the work, either in part or in whole, of any other department or division
and, at the request of the director, require an employee of another
department to perform services in the department of the director
making such request.
A. The Mayor shall appoint all officers and employees for whose selection
or appointment no other provision is made by Charter, ordinance or
general law.
B. The Mayor shall appoint the directors of each department with the
advice and consent of the Council. Each director shall serve during the
term of office of the Mayor and until the appointment and qualification
of a successor.
C. The Mayor shall have such further appointment power as is provided by
general law or this code.
D. The Mayor may remove any director after giving the director notice and
an opportunity to be heard. Prior to removing the director, the Mayor
shall file written notice of the Mayor's intention with the Council, and
such removal shall become effective on the 20th day after the filing of
the notice unless the Council prior to that day adopts a resolution by a
two-thirds vote of the whole membership of the Council disapproving
the removal.
E. Whenever a vacancy exists in any office required by the Charter or the
Administrative Code to be filled by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council and if there is no holdover incumbent, the Mayor
may temporarily fill a vacancy (in the absence of any contrary provision
in the Charter or ordinances) by appointing an acting officer, including
the designation of the Mayor as Acting Director in the event of a
vacancy in any department. The appointee shall have all the functions,
powers and duties of the office until it shall be permanently filled. Any
such appointment shall terminate 90 days after the date of the
appointment unless the Council shall, by resolution, authorize one or
more extensions of such period of up to 90 days.
§ 4-5 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-7
1:20
§ 4-7. Attendance and participation in Council meetings; special
meetings.
§ 4-8. Approval or veto of ordinances.
All ordinances adopted by the Council shall be submitted to the Mayor
within three calendar days by the Township Clerk. The Mayor shall within
10 days after receiving an ordinance either approve the ordinance by
signing it or return it to the Council by delivering it to the Township
Clerk, together with a statement setting forth the Mayor's objections to the
ordinance or to any item or part thereof. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-41, no
ordinance or any item or part thereof shall take effect without the Mayor's
approval unless the Mayor fails to return the ordinance to the Council
within 10 days after it has been presented to the Mayor or unless Council,
upon reconsideration after the third day following its return by the Mayor,
shall by a vote of 2/3 of the total membership of the Council resolve to
override the Mayor's veto.
§ 4-9. Acting Mayor.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-42, the Mayor shall designate the Business
Administrator, any other department head or the Township Clerk to act
as Mayor whenever the Mayor shall be prevented by absence from the
Township, disability or other cause from attending to the duties of the
Mayor's office. During such time, the person so designated by the Mayor
shall possess all of the rights, powers and duties of the Mayor. Whenever
the Mayor has been unable to attend to the duties of the Mayor's office for a
period of 60 consecutive days for any of the above-stated reasons, an Acting
Mayor shall be appointed by the Council, who shall succeed to all the rights,
powers and duties of the Mayor or the then Acting Mayor.
§ 4-10. Election; term of office. [Amended 3-1-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-046]
The Mayor shall be elected by the voters of the Township in a nonpartisan
election to be held at the time of the November general election and shall
serve for a term of four years, beginning on January 1 following such
A. The Mayor may attend meetings of the Council and may take part in
discussions of Council, but shall not vote except in the case of a tie on
the question of filling a vacancy in the Council, in which case the Mayor
may cast the deciding vote (N.J.S.A. 40A:16-8 et seq.). [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-37]
B. The Mayor may, and upon written request of a majority of the members
of the Council shall, call a special meeting of the Council. In calling the
meeting, the Mayor shall designate the purpose of the special meeting,
and no other business shall be considered.
6. Editor’s Note: This ordinance stated it would be effective 1-1-2011 as provided by Chapter
196 of the Laws of 2009.
§ 4-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-10
1:21
election. Accordingly, the term of the Mayor holding office at the time of
the adoption of this section shall be extended until December 31 beyond the
expiration date of the Mayor's present term.
§ 4-10 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-10
1:22
ARTICLE III
Council
§ 4-11. Legislative power.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-36, the legislative power of the Township shall
be exercised by the Township Council, except as may be otherwise provided
by general law, subject to the procedures set forth in this plan of
government. Legislative powers shall be exercised by ordinance, except for
the exercise of those powers that under this plan of government or general
law do not require action by the Mayor as a condition of approval for the
exercise thereof and may, therefore, be exercised by resolution, including,
but not limited to:
§ 4-12. General powers and duties.
The Council has the general powers and duties to:
A. The override of a veto of the Mayor.
B. The exercise of advice and consent to the actions of the Mayor.
C. The conduct of a legislative inquiry or investigation.
D. The expression of disapproval of the removal by the Mayor of officers or
employees.
E. The removal of any municipal officer for cause.
F. The adoption of rules for the Council.
G. The establishment of times and places for Council meetings.
H. The establishment of the Council as a committee of the whole and the
delegation of any number of its members as an ad hoc committee.
I. The declaration of emergencies respecting the passage of ordinances.
J. The election, appointment, setting of salaries and removal of officers
and employees of the Council, subject to any pertinent civil service
requirements and any pertinent contractual obligations and within the
general limits of the municipal budget.
K. The designation of official newspapers.
L. The approval of contracts presented by the Mayor.
M. The actions specified as resolutions in the Local Budget Law (N.J.S.A.
40A:4-1 et seq.) and the Local Fiscal Affairs Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:5-1 et
seq.).
N. The expression of Council policies or opinions which require no formal
action by the Mayor.
§ 4-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-12
1:23
A. Adopt the annual budget of the Township and salary ordinances
establishing salaries for all department directors and Township
employees and elected officials as required.
B. At the Council's discretion, separate and apart from the required
Township audit, cause to be made an annual audit of the Township's
accounts and financial transactions as required by law. Such annual
audit, if caused, shall be made by a registered municipal accountant of
the State of New Jersey appointed by the Council and shall not be the
same auditor as retained by the Township as the Township Auditor.
[Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
C. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-37.1, deal with employees of the
Department of Administration and other administrative departments
solely through the Mayor or designee. All contact with the employees
and all actions and communications concerning the administration of
the government and the provision of municipal service shall be through
the Mayor or designee, except as otherwise provided by law. Nothing in
this section shall be construed to prohibit the Council's inquiry into any
act or problem of the administration of the Township. Any Council
member may at any time require a report on any aspect of the
government of the Township by making a written request to the Mayor
with copies to the Township Clerk and the other Council members. The
Mayor shall respond to such request within a reasonable period of time,
not to exceed 30 days without the written permission of the requesting
Council member, by providing a written report to such Council member
with copies to the Township Clerk and the other Council members. The
Mayor's written report shall restate the request made by such Council
member and shall be limited to answering the specific requests made
by the Council member. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the
Mayor from delegating to staff and/or appropriate professionals the
research and preparation of answers for the Mayor to include in the
Mayor's report to the Council member. "Written" includes electronic
communications such as e-mail and attachments to e-mail. [Amended
8-20-2012 by Res. No. 2012-R189A]
D. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-37(b), remove, by at least 2/3 vote of the
whole number of the Council, any Township officer other than the
Mayor or a member of the Council, for cause, upon notice and an
opportunity to be heard, unless otherwise provided by state statutes.
E. Require any municipal officer, in its discretion, to prepare and submit
sworn statements regarding said officer's official duties and the
performance thereof and otherwise to investigate the conduct of any
department, office or agency of the Township government. The Council
may, by a majority vote of the whole number of its members, require the
Mayor or designee to appear before Council, sitting as a committee of
the whole, and to bring before the Council those records and reports
and officials and employees of the Township as the Council may
determine necessary to ensure clarification of the matter under study.
§ 4-12 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-12
1:24
§ 4-13. Membership; term of office. [Amended 3-1-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-047]
The Township Council shall consist of five members, elected at-large by
the voters of the Township at the regular nonpartisan municipal election
to be held at the time of the November general election. The terms of
the members of the Council shall be four years, beginning on January 1
following such election. Accordingly, the terms of the Council members
holding office at the time of the adoption of this section shall be extended
until December 31 beyond the expiration of their present term of office.
§ 4-14. President and Vice President; term; presiding officer; annual
meeting. [Amended 6-1-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-118; 12-11-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-32]
The Council, at its annual organizational meeting, to be held on January 1
at 12:00 noon or at some other hour on any day during the first week of
January of each year, shall elect a President and Vice President to serve for
one-year terms and until the election and qualification of their successors.
If a vacancy occurs in the position of President during the year, the Vice
President will move into the position and the Council will elect a member to
fill the position of Vice President for the reminder of the term. If a vacancy
occurs in the position of Vice President during the year, the Council will
elect a member to fill position for the remainder of the term. In the absence
F. At the Council's discretion, by a majority vote of the whole number of its
members, designate any number of its members as an ad hoc
committee to consult with the Mayor or designee to study any matter
and report to the Council President. [Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-10]
G. Appoint a Township Clerk pursuant to § 4-17A as hereinafter set forth.
H. Adopt rules and regulations for conduct of business at its annual
organization meeting. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
I. Establish, alter or abolish such committees, commissions or agencies of
the Township as permitted by law.
J. At the Council's discretion, separate and apart from Township
mandated committees or commissions or agencies, create advisory
committees to assist it in its legislative function. [Amended 5-13-1996
by Ord. No. 96-10]
K. Reserve one business meeting in January for the Mayor to present the
State of the Township Address to the Council and to the public. [Added
5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
7. Editor’s Note: This ordinance stated it would be effective 1-1-2011 as provided by Chapter
196 of the Laws of 2009.
8. Editor’s Note: This ordinance stated it would be effective 1-1-2011 as provided by Chapter
196 of the Laws of 2009.
§ 4-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-14
1:25
of both President and Vice President of the Council, the Council shall elect a
temporary presiding officer, who shall have the functions, powers and duties
of the President during the President's absence. Upon the arrival of the
President or the Vice President, as the case may be, the officer presiding
shall relinquish the chair immediately upon the conclusion of the particular
item of business before Council. At its annual organizational meeting, the
Council shall approve its rules of procedure and set forth the format of its
formal agenda.
§ 4-15. Local legislation.
Legislation powers shall be exercised by ordinance, except for those powers
that may be exercised by resolution or do not require action of the Mayor as
a condition of approval.
A. All ordinances and/or resolutions shall be prepared by the appropriate
department director or by the Township Attorney or reviewed by the
Township Attorney upon direction of the Council or Mayor. Each
proposed ordinance or resolution requiring or permitting
administrative action may be submitted to the Business Administrator
and the director concerned, who shall, if required, provide the basis for
such ordinance/resolution to the Council.
B. An ordinance or resolution may be introduced by any member of the
Council. Each ordinance and each resolution shall be limited to a single
subject, which shall be expressed in its title.
C. All ordinances shall be introduced, read, heard and enacted in the
manner provided by general law. Each ordinance passed by the Council
shall within three calendar days be delivered by the Township Clerk to
the Mayor for approval or veto, and the Mayor shall within 10 calendar
days after receiving any ordinance either approve the ordinance by
signing it or return it to the Council by delivering it to the Township
Clerk, together with a statement setting forth the Mayor's objections
thereto or to any part thereof. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-41, no
ordinance or any item or part thereof shall take effect without the
Mayor's approval unless the Mayor fails to return an ordinance to the
Council within 10 days after it has been presented to the Mayor or
unless the Council, upon reconsideration thereof on or after the third
day following its return by the Mayor, shall by a vote of 2/3 of the entire
membership of the Council resolve to override the Mayor's veto.
D. Passage over veto. Whenever an ordinance has been reconsidered by
the Council following a veto by the Mayor, the Township Clerk shall
append to such ordinance a certification of the action of the Council
upon such reconsideration in substantially the following form:
§ 4-14 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-15
1:26
§ 4-16. Public meetings.
I HEREBY CERTIFY that the above ordinance adopted by the Council
on the __________ day of __________________, ________, was delivered
to the Mayor on the _____ day of _______, ____, and was returned to
me on the ______ day of _________, ______, together with the Mayor's
statement of the reasons for which the Mayor was constrained to
withhold approval of such ordinance, item or part thereof. On
reconsideration thereof on the _____ day of ______, _______, (the Council
duly resolved by the affirmative vote of 2/3 of its members to enact
such Ordinance, item or part thereof notwithstanding the Mayor's
veto) or (the Mayor's veto was sustained).
__________________________
Township Clerk
E. Ordinances not returned by Mayor. Whenever an ordinance shall take
effect without the Mayor's signature by reason of the Mayor's failure to
return it to the Council by filing it with the Township Clerk within 10
days after it has been presented to the Mayor, the Township Clerk shall
append to such ordinance a certificate in substantially the following
form:
I HEREBY CERTIFY that the above ordinance adopted by the Council
on the __________ day of __________, _____, was presented to the Mayor
duly certified on the ________ day of ____________, _____, and upon the
Mayor's failure to sign it or return and file it with the Township Clerk
within the 10 days thereafter, the said ordinance took effect in like
manner as if the Mayor has signed it.
__________________________
Township Clerk
F. Filing of reports and resolutions. The Council shall file with the
Township Clerk all petitions, resolutions or other papers considered by
it on each matter. All reports to the Council and all resolutions shall be
filed with the Clerk.
A. Council shall hold its regular meetings and work sessions as per a
resolution to be adopted at the annual organizational meeting, but not
less than one meeting per month. This resolution may be amended or
modified by subsequent resolutions duly adopted. [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-37]
B. Notice.
(1) In conformity with the Open Public Meetings Act,9 written notice of
all meetings of the Council and every other public body as defined
in the Act shall be noticed at least 48 hours in advance, giving time,
9. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 4-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-16
1:27
date, location and, to the extent known, the agenda of any regular,
special or rescheduled meeting. Such notice shall accurately state
whether formal action may or may not be taken and shall be
prominently posted on at least one place reserved for such or
similar announcements on a bulletin board in the lobby of the
Municipal Building and be mailed, telephoned, telegraphed or
hand-delivered to at least two newspapers designated by the
Township Council. Designated newspapers must publish often
enough for the forty-eight-hour notice to be given to members of
the public. Copies of the notice shall be filed with the Township
Clerk.
(2) Where the Council announces annual notice of its regular
meetings, no further notice shall be required concerning such
meetings. Such notice shall be in accordance with the schedule of
the regular meetings of the Council to be held during the ensuing
year, which the Township Clerk shall prepare, post and submit
within seven days following the annual organizational meeting of
the Council, or, if there be no such organizational meeting in the
year, then not later than January 10 of such year, pursuant to the
terms of the Open Public Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq. The
Township Clerk shall, whenever a special meeting of the Council is
called in accordance with the law, issue and cause notices thereof
to be served upon the members of the Council, and other persons
whose presence may be required, pursuant to law. [Amended
6-1-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-1110; 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-37]
C. Emergencies. Upon the affirmative vote of 3/4 of the members present,
the Council may hold a meeting, notwithstanding the failure to provide
adequate notice, if:
(1) Such meeting is required in order to deal with matters of such
urgency and importance that a delay for the purpose of providing
adequate notice would be likely to result in substantial harm to the
public interest.
(2) The meeting is limited to discussion of and acting with respect to
such matters of urgency and importance.
(3) Notice of such meeting is provided as soon as possible following the
calling of such meeting by posting written notice and notifying the
two newspapers by telephone, telegraph or personal delivery.
(4) Either the Council could not reasonably have foreseen the need for
such meeting at a time when adequate notice could have been
provided or, although the public body could reasonably have
foreseen the need for such meeting at a time when adequate notice
could have been provided, it nevertheless failed to do so.
10.Editor’s Note: This ordinance stated it would be effective 1-1-2011 as provided by Chapter
196 of the Laws of 2009.
§ 4-16 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-16
1:28
D. Minutes. At the commencement of every meeting, the person presiding
shall announce publicly and shall cause to be entered into the minutes
an accurate statement to the effect that adequate notice for the meeting
has been provided or that notice was not provided, in which case the
reasons shall be stated. The Council shall keep reasonably
comprehensive minutes of its meetings, showing time and place, the
members present, subjects considered, actions taken and the votes of
each member.
E. Quorum. A majority of the whole number of members of the Council
shall constitute a quorum, and no ordinance shall be adopted by the
Council without the affirmative vote of a majority of the quorum of the
Council. If a quorum is not present 1/2 hour after the appointed time for
any meeting, the presiding officer or the Township Clerk may declare
the meeting adjourned.
F. Roll call votes; minutes. The vote upon every motion, resolution or
ordinance shall, when requested, be taken by roll call, and the yeas and
nays shall be entered on the minutes. The minutes of each meeting shall
be signed by the Township Clerk.
G. Public participation. Public participation in the meetings of the Council
shall be in accordance with the Open Public Meetings Act.11
H. Requests for schedules. Any person may request that the Council mail
copies of any regular meeting schedule or revision thereof, including
notice of regular, special or rescheduled meetings. The Council may
pass a resolution to provide a reasonable prepayment fee for this
service. All requests for meeting schedules shall terminate at 12:00
midnight, December 31 of each year, but shall be subject to renewal
upon request to the Council. [Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No.
96-10; 6-1-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-1112]
11.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
12.Editor’s Note: This ordinance stated it would be effective 1-1-2011 as provided by Chapter
196 of the Laws of 2009.
§ 4-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-16
1:29

ARTICLE IV
Township Clerk
§ 4-17. Appointment.
§ 4-18. Powers and duties.
The Township Clerk or, during the absence or disability of the Township
Clerk, the Deputy Township Clerk shall have but not be limited to the
following powers and duties:
A. The Council shall appoint a Township Clerk, who shall serve as Clerk of
the Council. The Township Clerk shall prior to appointment have been
qualified by training or experience to perform the duties of the office.
The Township Clerk shall devote full time to the duties of the office. The
Township Clerk shall serve until appointment or qualification of a
successor.
B. The Council may appoint a Deputy Township Clerk, who shall serve
during the absence or disability of the Township Clerk and shall prior to
appointment have been qualified by training or experience to perform
the duties of the office.
A. Act as Secretary of the municipal corporation and custodian of the
Municipal Seal and of all minutes, books, deeds, bonds, contracts and
archival records of the municipal corporation, except those records
which the Council may provide, by ordinance, that any other officer
shall have custody of, or any other specific class of records. [Amended
5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
B. Act as Secretary to the Council, prepare meeting agendas at the
discretion of the Council, be present at all meetings of the Council, keep
a journal of the proceedings of every meeting, retain the original copies
of all ordinances and resolutions and record the minutes of every
meeting.
C. Serve as the chief administrative officer in all elections held in the
municipality, subject to the requirements of Title 19 of the New Jersey
Statutes Annotated.
D. Serve as chief registrar of the voters in the Township, subject to the
requirements of Title 19 of the Revised Statutes.
E. Serve as the administrative officer responsible for the acceptance of
applications for licenses and permits and the issuance of licenses and
permits, except where statute or municipal ordinance has delegated
that responsibility to some other municipal officer.
F. Serve as coordinator and records manager responsible for
implementing local archives and records retention programs as
mandated pursuant to Title 47 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
§ 4-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-18
1:31
§ 4-19. Public records; inspection by public; fees and service
charges.
Public records of the Township shall be open for inspection by members
of the public as provided by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq. Such inspection shall
be made only during business hours and only upon the availability of the
Township Clerk or designee. All requests for public records shall be made,
in writing, to the Township Clerk or other officer of the Township who may
be authorized to have custody of the records. All fees and service charges
shall be paid to the Division of Finance, which shall issue a receipt therefor.
The fees for services shall be set by ordinance of Council unless otherwise
prescribed by law.
G. Perform such other duties as are now hereafter imposed by statute,
regulation or by municipal ordinance or regulation.
H. Be the depository for and custodian of all performance bonds running to
the Township as obligee or any other form of security given by a
contractor, subdivision developer or other person on account of work
done or to be done in or for the Township.
I. Serve as the Assessment Search Officer.
J. Number all ordinances and resolutions consecutively. At the close of
each year, with the advice and assistance of the Township Attorney, the
Township Clerk shall bind, compile or codify all ordinances and
resolutions or true copies thereof of the municipality which then remain
in force and effect. The Township Clerk shall also properly index the
record books, compilation or codification of ordinances and resolutions.
§ 4-18 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-19
1:32
ARTICLE V
Budget and Expenditures
§ 4-20. Budget preparation.
§ 4-21. Administration of budget.
§ 4-22. Awarding of contracts; bidding procedures.
A. The budget shall be prepared by the Mayor with the assistance of the
Business Administrator, the Township Chief Financial Officer and other
applicable Directors. During the month of November, the Mayor shall
require all Directors to submit requests for appropriations for the
ensuing budget year and to appear at public hearings before the Mayor
and/or Business Administrator about the various requests.
B. The Business Administrator, with the assistance of the Chief Financial
Officer, shall prepare all estimates of nonproperty tax revenues
anticipated for the support of each annual budget.
C. The budget document shall be prepared in such form as is required by
law for municipal budgets and in accordance with the Charter. There
shall be appended to the budget a detailed analysis of all items of
expenditure and revenue.
D. On or before January 15, the Mayor shall submit to the Council the
recommended budget, together with such explanatory comment or
statement as deemed desirable. At this time the budget shall become
the Council's budget (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-46 et seq.). [Amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-37]
E. Council may reduce any item or items in the Mayor's budget by a vote of
the majority of the Council, but any increase in any item or items shall
become effective only upon an affirmative vote of 2/3 of the entire
membership of the Council.
A. After consultation with the Chief Financial Officer, the Mayor may
establish quarterly or other periodic allotment of appropriations as may
be deemed necessary. Each department shall plan and administer its
expenditure program within the limits of these allotments.
B. If at any time during the budget year the Mayor shall ascertain that the
Township government is faced with the probability of incurring a cash
deficit for the current year, the Mayor shall reconsider the work
programs and allotments of the several departments. Upon such
reconsideration and with the approval of the Council, the Mayor may
revise budget allotments so as to forestall, as far as possible, the
making of commitments and expenditures in excess of the revenues to
be realized during the fiscal year. The Mayor shall file with the Chief
Financial Officer a copy of such revised allotments, and the Chief
Financial Officer shall control all expenditures within the limits thereof.
§ 4-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-22
1:33
A. Public bids received pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq. may be
received at a time and place designated by the Mayor and/or designee.
Public bid openings shall be attended by, at least, a representative of
the Business Administrator and the Township Clerk.
B. The Mayor is empowered to prepare specifications for the performance
of work or the purchases or furnishing or hiring of any materials,
supplies or services needed by the Township to publicly advertise for
and receive bids on the aforesaid, to require bidding deposits made in
conjunction with the bids and performance security from contractors
who are awarded bids and, when desirable, to establish regulations for
the qualification of prospective bidders, to require standard
questionnaires for prospective bidders and classify and reclassify
prospective bidders, all in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
C. All advertisements for the bids shall be published at least once, 10
calendar days prior to the date fixed to receive bids, in a newspaper of
general circulation within the Township of West Windsor. All bids
requiring public advertisement shall designate the manner of
submitting bids, the method of receiving bids and the time and place for
receipt of bids.
D. Bids received in advance shall remain sealed and shall only be opened
for examination at the time and place fixed for the receipt of bids. At the
time and place set for the receipt of bids, all bids tendered shall be
publicly received and immediately unsealed and their contents
announced publicly in the presence of any present bidding parties or
their agents. The price and terms of the bids shall become incorporated
as a part of the minutes of the Council meeting at which the Council
takes action thereon.
E. The Council shall award the contract by authorizing the Mayor and
Township Clerk to execute such or reject all bids within 60 calendar
days after receipt. The Council shall reserve the right at all times to
reject any and all bids received.
F. The security delivered with the bids shall be returned to the
unsuccessful bidders within three days, Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays excepted. The security of the successful bidder shall be
retained until a contract is executed and any performance security has
been submitted.
G. If an award of contract cannot be made within the sixty-day period, the
three lowest responsible bidders may agree to an extension in making
the award, which shall not exceed an additional 30 calendar days.
H. In awarding the bid, any authorized formal contract shall be executed
by the Mayor, attested to by the Township Clerk and the seal of the
Township affixed thereto. In lieu of a formal contract, the Business
Administrator or Mayor may issue a purchase order to the successful
bidder for the required purchase for amounts up to the required bid
minimum in any fiscal year, pursuant to the Local Public Contracts
§ 4-22 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-22
1:34
§ 4-22.1. Awarding of public professional service contracts. [Added
3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-02; amended 3-17-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-09]
Law.13 The successful bidder shall then be required to perform in
accordance with the terms set forth in the specifications for such items.
I. A certification from the Chief Financial Officer that a sufficient
unencumbered balance of appropriation is available to pay therefor
shall accompany each contract/bid award.
A. Prohibition of awarding public contracts to certain contributors.
(1) Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the
Township or any of its purchasing agents or agencies or those of its
independent authorities, as the case may be, shall not enter into an
agreement or otherwise contract to procure services from any
professional service provider if that provider has solicited or made
any contribution of money or pledge of a contribution, including inkind
contributions, to a campaign committee of any West Windsor
Township candidate or holder of public office within the Township
having responsibility for the award of the contract or to any West
Windsor Township or Mercer County Party Committee within one
calendar year immediately preceding the date of the contract or
agreement.
(2) No professional service provider which enters into negotiations for
or agrees to any contract or agreement with the Township or any
department or agency thereof or of its independent authorities for
the rendition of professional services shall knowingly solicit or
make any contribution of money or pledge of a contribution
including in-kind contributions, to any West Windsor Township
candidate or holder of public office within the Township having
responsibility for the award of the contract or to any West Windsor
Township or Mercer County Party Committee between the time of
first communications between that service provider and the
Township regarding a specific professional services agreement and
the later of the termination of negotiations or the completion of the
contract or agreement.
(3) For purposes of this section, a "professional service provider"
seeking a public contract means an individual, including the
individual's spouse, if any, and any child living at home; person;
firm; corporation; professional corporation; partnership;
organization; or association. The definition of a service provider
includes all principals who own 1% or more of the equity in the
corporation or business trust, partners and officers in the
aggregate employed by the provider as well as any subsidiaries
directly controlled by the service provider.
13.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 4-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-22.1
1:35
(4) For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
responsibility for the award of the contract shall be:
(a) The West Windsor Township Council if the contract requires
approval or appropriation from the Council or a public officer
who is responsible for the award of a contract if that public
officer is appointed by Council; or
(b) The Mayor of West Windsor Township if the contract requires
the approval of the Mayor or a public officer who is responsible
for the award of contract if that public officer is appointed by
the Mayor; or
(c) Both of the above.
B. Contributions made prior to the effective date. No contribution of
money or any other thing of value, including in-kind contributions,
made by a professional business entity to any West Windsor Township
candidate for Mayor or Township Council or West Windsor Township
party committee shall be deemed a violation of this section nor shall an
agreement for property, goods or services of any kind whatsoever be
disqualified thereby if that contribution or agreement was made by the
professional business entity prior to the effective date of this section.
C. Contribution statement by professional business entity.
(1) Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure services
with any professional service provider, the Township or any of its
purchasing agents or agencies or independent authorities, as the
case may be, shall receive a sworn statement from the professional
business entity made under penalty of perjury that the professional
service provider has not made a contribution in violation of
Subsection A hereof.
(2) The professional service provider shall have a continuing duty to
report any violations of this section that may occur during the
negotiation or duration of a contract. The certification required
under this subsection shall be made prior to entry into the contract
or agreement with the Township and shall be in addition to any
other certifications that may be required by any other provision of
law.
D. Penalty.
(1) All Township of West Windsor professional service agreements
shall provide that it shall be a breach of the terms of the
government contract for a professional service provider, as defined
in Subsection A(3), to violate Subsection A(2) or to knowingly
conceal or misrepresent contributions given or received or to make
or solicit contributions through intermediaries or any Mercer
County Party Committee for the purpose of concealing or
misrepresenting the source of the contribution.
§ 4-22.1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-22.1
1:36
§ 4-22.2. Awarding of contracts for any redevelopment works under
the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law (hereinafter referred to
as a "redeveloper"). [Added 4-10-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-05]
(2) Any professional service provider, as defined in Subsection A(3)
who knowingly fails to reveal a contribution made in violation of
this section or who knowingly makes or solicits contributions
through intermediaries, including but not limited to Mercer County
Party Committee, for the purpose of concealing or misrepresenting
the source of the contribution shall be disqualified from eligibility
for future Township contracts for a period of four calendar years
from the date of the violation.
A. Prohibition of awarding contracts for redevelopment work to certain
contributors.
(1) Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the
Township or any of its purchasing agents or agencies or those of its
independent authorities, as the case may be, shall not enter into an
agreement or otherwise contract with any private party for the
planning, replanning, construction or undertaking of any project or
redevelopment work, including the acquisition or leasing of any
public property in conjunction with the redevelopment of any area
within the Township of West Windsor pursuant to the Local
Redevelopment and Housing Law (LRHL, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et
seq.), if that redeveloper has solicited or made any contribution of
money or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind contributions,
to a campaign committee of any West Windsor Township candidate
or holder of public office within the Township having responsibility
for the awarding of such contracts or to any West Windsor
Township political party campaign committee for West Windsor
Township election or political party campaign committees at the
county level within one calendar year preceding the date of the
contract or agreement.
(2) No redeveloper who enters into negotiations for or agrees to any
contract or agreement with the Township or any department or
agency thereof or of its independent authorities for the rendition of
redevelopment work under the LRHL shall knowingly solicit or
make any contribution of money or pledge of a contribution,
including in-kind contributions, to any West Windsor Township
candidate or holder of public office within the Township having
responsibility for the award of the contract or to any West Windsor
Township political party campaign committee for West Windsor
Township election or political party campaign committees at the
county level within one calendar year preceding the date of the
contract or agreement between that redeveloper and the Township
regarding a specific agreement for redevelopment work and the
later of the termination of negotiations or the completion of the
contract or agreement.
§ 4-22.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-22.2
1:37
(3) For purposes of this section, a "redeveloper" means an individual,
including the individual's spouse, if any, and any child living at
home, a person, firm, corporation, professional corporation,
partnership, organization or association seeking or obtaining
redevelopment work as defined above. The definition of a
redeveloper includes all principals who own 1% or more of the
equity in the corporation or business trust, partners and officers in
the aggregate employed by the provider as well as any subsidiaries
directly controlled by the redeveloper.
(4) For the purposes of this section, the office that is considered to
have responsibility for the award of the contract under the Act shall
be:
(a) The West Windsor Township Council if the contract requires
approval or appropriation from the Council or a public officer
who is responsible for the award of a contract if that public
officer is appointed by Council; or
(b) The Mayor of West Windsor Township if the contract requires
the approval of the Mayor or a public officer who is responsible
for the award of contract if that public officer is appointed by
the Mayor; or
(c) Both of the above.
B. Contributions made prior to the effective date. No contribution of
money or any other thing of value, including in-kind contributions,
made by a redeveloper to any West Windsor Township candidate for
Mayor or Township Council or West Windsor Township or Mercer
County party political campaign committee shall be deemed a violation
of this section nor shall an agreement for property, goods or services of
any kind whatsoever be disqualified thereby if that contribution or
agreement was made by the redeveloper prior to the effective date of
this section.
C. Contribution statement by redeveloper.
(1) Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure services
with any redeveloper, the Township or any of its purchasing agents
or agencies or independent authorities, as the case may be, shall
receive a sworn statement from the redeveloper that the
redeveloper has not made a contribution in violation of Subsection
A hereof.
(2) The redeveloper shall have a continuing duty to report any
violations of this section that may occur during the negotiation or
duration of a contract. The certification required under this
subsection shall be made prior to entry into the contract or
agreement with the Township and shall be in addition to any other
certifications that may be required by any other provision of law.
§ 4-22.2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-22.2
1:38
§ 4-23. Standards and tests for materials purchased.
§ 4-24. Purchasing procedure.
D. Penalty.
(1) All redevelopment contracts, leases or other undertaking shall
provide that it shall be a breach of terms of such agreements, as
defined in Subsection A(3), to violate Subsection A(2) or to
knowingly conceal or misrepresent contributions given or received
or to make or solicit contributions through any intermediaries for
the purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the
contribution.
(2) Any redeveloper, as defined in Subsection A(3), who knowingly fails
to reveal a contribution made in violation of this section or who
knowingly makes or solicits contributions through any
intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or misrepresenting
the source of the contribution shall be disqualified from eligibility
for future redevelopment contracts for a period of four calendar
years from the date of the violation.
A. The Mayor and the Business Administrator shall establish and approve
uniform standards for requisitions and purchases. The Department of
Administration, in consultation with other appropriate department
directors, shall control the delivery of all supplies, materials, equipment
and other items purchased and may make or cause to be made proper
test checks and inspections thereof. The Department of Administration,
in consultation with other appropriate department directors, shall
ascertain whether the supplies, materials, equipment and other items
purchased comply with the specifications and shall cause laboratory or
other tests to be made whenever in the opinion of the applicable
director it is necessary to determine whether the materials or supplies
are of a quality and standard required.
B. Purchase controls. All purchases of any supplies, materials or
equipment or contractual services for the Township's account shall be
made by the Department of Administration, with a copy given to the
Chief Financial Officer, pursuant to a written requisition from the
director of the department whose appropriation will be charged.
[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
A. Each department shall follow such procedure and use such forms for
purchasing as the Business Administrator or designee shall prescribe.
Upon request of the Mayor, each director shall submit a complete
statement of the work and labor under contract and the materials,
supplies and equipment which will be required by the department
during the ensuing year, half year or quarter year as the Mayor may
determine according to the best estimate of the director. Such
statement shall be in such form and detail as the Mayor or Business
Administrator may require.
§ 4-22.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-24
1:39
§ 4-25. Disbursement of funds.
The method of disbursement of funds for any purpose shall be on a check
drawn on the Division of Finance and after being signed by the Mayor,
countersigned by the Chief Financial Officer.
§ 4-26. Swimming Pool Utility. [Added 5-1-1995 by Ord. No. 95-19]
B. A certification from the Chief Financial Officer that a sufficient
unencumbered balance of appropriation is available to pay therefor
shall accompany each purchase order.
C. Where purchases in excess of $1,000 are made without competitive
bidding, the Department of Administration or other appropriate
department director shall obtain and record, wherever possible, at least
three price quotations for the item or items of purchase. Whenever
circumstances permit, the purchase shall be made from the lowest
responsible vendor providing such quotations, price and other factors
considered, pursuant to the Local Public Contracts Law.14
D. The Business Administrator or designee shall establish a procedure for
the purchase of any item required for the immediate protection, public
health, safety or welfare of the Township, which will permit such
emergency purchases to be made for specific purposes in accordance
with the Local Public Contracts Law, in a manner other than that
prescribed by this section. [Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
E. Except as the Mayor, or such other officer as the Business
Administrator may designate, may authorize in case of emergency, no
purchase shall be made and no bill, claim or voucher shall be approved
unless the procedures prescribed by or pursuant to the Charter, the
Local Public Contracts Law and this code have been followed.
[Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
F. Immediately upon delivery of any purchased item, the director or the
division head so designated by the director shall certify receipt thereof
on the voucher properly prepared and executed by the vendor, which
shall be submitted to the Chief Financial Officer or the Treasurer, if so
designated, who shall not authorize payment unless and until the Chief
Financial Officer is satisfied that the items billed were properly
authorized and delivered in accordance with a duly issued purchase
order authorized by the Department of Administration. [Amended
5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
A. Utility established. There is hereby established a separate utility in the
Township to be known as the "West Windsor Swimming Pool Utility"
(the "Pool Utility").
14.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 4-24 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-26
1:40
B. Pool Utility Fund. All revenue and accounting from the Pool Utility shall
be on a dedicated utility basis in conformance with the provisions of the
Local Budget Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 et seq. All moneys derived from the
operation of the Pool Utility and any other moneys applicable to its
support shall be segregated and kept in a separate fund, which shall be
known as the "Swimming Pool Utility Fund," and all disbursements for
the operation and maintenance of the Pool Utility shall be taken from
the Pool Utility Fund. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
C. Pool Utility budget. The Pool Utility budget shall set forth the
appropriations in the form and detail prescribed by regulations to be
adopted by the Township and shall include categories for operations,
interest and debt retirement and deferred charges and statutory
expenditures.
§ 4-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-26
1:41

ARTICLE VI
Administrative Branch
§ 4-27. Departmental organization. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-07]
The Township government shall, to the maximum feasible extent, organize
into departments as provided by this Charter with the goal of achieving
maximum efficiency and effectiveness. The departments of the Township
shall be as follows:
§ 4-28. Department directors.
A. Department of Administration.
B. Department of Public Safety.
C. Department of Human Services.
D. Department of Community Development.
E. Department of Public Works.
F. Department of Law.
A. Each department shall be headed by a director, who shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. Each director
shall serve during the term of the Mayor appointing the director and
until the appointment and qualification of a successor. The Mayor shall,
with the advice and consent of the Council, appoint the municipal
assessor and all other municipal officers not assigned within municipal
departments, subject to the terms of any general law providing for
these offices, unless a different appointment procedure is clearly
required by this plan of government or by general law. A department
director may simultaneously serve as a division manager.
B. Powers and duties of department directors. Directors shall hire
subordinate officers and employees within their respective departments
and may, with approval of the Mayor, remove such officers and
employees, subject to the provisions of general law. The director of each
department shall, subject to the supervision of the Mayor or designee,
the code and ordinances of the Township: [Amended 5-13-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-10]
(1) Devote such time as required for the purpose and efficient
discharge of the duties of the respective office.
(2) Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of
the department.
(3) Prescribe the internal organization of the department and the
duties of the subordinates and assistants, subject to approval of the
Mayor.
§ 4-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-28
1:43
(4) Administer the work of the department with respect to the
functions established by this code.
(5) Appoint subordinate officers and employees to be employed within
the department and upon the basis of a written job description and
assign functions, powers and duties to them and delegate such
powers as may be deemed necessary for the efficient
administration of the department to be exercised by subordinate
officers and employees.
(6) Report at least annually to the Mayor and Council, in such form as
may be approved by the Mayor, on the work of the department
during the preceding year.
(7) Certify the correctness and propriety of all payrolls and vouchers
or provide the certification for them.
(8) Prepare budgets and maintain proper accounts.
(9) Appoint and hire qualified individuals for all positions, pursuant to
the personnel policies of the Township.
(10) Perform such other duties and responsibilities as directed by the
Mayor or designee.
C. Vacancies in office of director of department. Whenever a vacancy
exists for any reason in the office of a director of any Township
department, the Mayor may temporarily fill such vacancy by appointing
either the Mayor, as provided in the Optional Municipal Charter Law,15
or another officer or employee of the Township as Acting Director, who
shall perform all the duties and functions of such department director
until the office shall be filled permanently. Any such appointment of an
Acting Director shall terminate not later than 90 days after the date of
the appointment unless the Council shall by resolution authorize one or
more extensions.
15.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.
§ 4-28 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-28
1:44
ARTICLE VII
Department of Administration
§ 4-29. Department established; department director.
There shall be a Department of Administration, the head of which shall be
the Business Administrator.
§ 4-30. Business Administrator.
A. Appointment. The Mayor shall, with the advice and consent of the
Council, appoint a Business Administrator, who shall be chosen solely
on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications, with special
reference to actual experience in or knowledge of the duties of the
office and who shall serve until the appointment and qualification of a
successor. At the time of the appointment, the Business Administrator
need not be a resident of the Township or the state, but during the
Business Administrator's tenure of office, the Business Administrator
may reside outside the Township only with the approval of the Council
(N.J.S.A. 40:69A-44). [Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
B. Full-time position; holding of other offices. The Business Administrator
shall devote full time to the duties of the office, except that nothing
herein shall prevent the Business Administrator from also holding any
other appointive municipal office of the Township and fulfilling the
duties thereof.
C. Functions, powers and duties. Under the direction and supervision of
the Mayor, the Business Administrator shall:
(1) Prescribe and require each department and other spending agency
for which Township appropriations are made to maintain records
and produce reports of their respective workload and performance,
expressed in appropriate work units, which the Business
Administrator may prescribe or approve for each of the
departments and other spending agencies.
(2) Develop and enforce, in cooperation with other directors,
standards and procedures for the most efficient management of the
Township government, not inconsistent with the Charter and
ordinances of the Township.
(3) Assist the Mayor in the preparation of the annual budget and
maintain a continuing review and analysis of budget operations,
work programs and costs of municipal services.
(4) Serve as purchasing agent and administer a uniform centralized
purchasing system program as the efficient management of the
Township government may require.
(5) Serve as chief personnel officer; develop and administer the
personnel systems and all matters pertaining to personnel.
§ 4-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-30
1:45
§ 4-31. Division of Finance.
(6) Subject to the direction of the Mayor, supervise the administration
of each of the departments established by this code or by
ordinance. For this purpose, the Business Administrator shall have
power to investigate the organization and operation of any and all
departments, to prescribe standards and rules of administrative
practice and procedure and to consult with the heads of the
departments under the Business Administrator's jurisdiction,
provided that, with respect to the Department of Law, the authority
of the Business Administrator shall extend only to matters of
budgeting, personnel and purchasing.
(7) Serve as the Affirmative Action Officer or be authorized to
designate the Affirmative Action Officer and oversee the
implementation and monitoring of the affirmative action program
of the Township.
(8) Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance or
resolution. [Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
D. Construal of provisions. Nothing herein shall derogate from the powers
and duties of the elective or appointive officials of the Township or of
the boards and commissions thereof established pursuant to law or
authorize the Business Administrator to exercise the powers and duties
thereof.
E. Acting Business Administrator. Whenever and so long as there is a
vacancy in the office of Business Administrator, the Mayor may serve as
Acting Business Administrator without additional compensation, or the
Mayor may appoint another suitable person to act as Acting Business
Administrator. Any such appointment shall terminate after 90 days,
unless the Council shall, by resolution, authorize one or more
extensions. The Acting Business Administrator shall have all the
functions, powers and duties of the Business Administrator.
A. Within the Department of Administration there shall be a Division of
Finance. In the Division of Finance there shall be the following offices:
(1) Office of the Chief Financial Officer/Treasurer.
(2) Office of the Tax Collector.
(3) Office of the Tax Assessor.
B. Office of the Chief Financial Officer; functions, powers and duties.
Under the direction and supervision of the Mayor and Business
Administrator, the Chief Financial Officer's duties shall include, but not
be limited to the following:
(1) Receiving funds entrusted to or under the control of any
department and depositing all funds received in depositories
§ 4-30 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-31
1:46
authorized by resolution of the Council within 48 hours after their
receipt.
(2) Keeping books and records of accounts for the exercise of financial
budgetary control over each department, office and agency of the
Township government and keeping such accounts as will show the
amount of each appropriation, the cumulative amount paid therefor
and the unpaid obligations and unencumbered balance. The control
function shall also include provision for an encumbrance system of
budget operations, for expenditures only upon written requisition,
for the preaudit of all claims and demands against the Township
prior to payment and for the control of all payments out of any
public funds by individual warrants for each payment to the official
having custody thereof.
(3) Authorizing the payment of bills, claims, demands and payroll upon
the proper certification of the appropriate director of the amount
due and owing.
(4) Auditing receipts and disbursements of each department and
requiring reports to be made at such intervals as will most
efficiently protect the public interest.
(5) Disbursing moneys for the payment of claims approved by a
department director and the Business Administrator by means of
checks signed by the Mayor and by the Chief Financial Officer.
[Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
C. Office of the Treasurer. The Treasurer shall also serve as the Chief
Financial Officer.
D. Tax Collector. The Tax Collector, prior to appointment, shall be qualified
by training and experience in the administration of municipal tax
collections and tax accounting procedures and certified by the State of
New Jersey. The Tax Collector shall be appointed by the Mayor and
serve a term of four years from the first day of January next following
the appointment or as otherwise provided by law. The Municipal Tax
Collector's duties shall include, but not be limited to the following:
(1) Extending each year's tax on the tax duplicate, preparing and
mailing tax bills and maintaining tax accounting records in such
manner as prescribed by law.
(2) Receiving and collecting all current and delinquent real and
personal property taxes, charging and receiving penalties and
interest and accounting for all collections in such form and manner
as may be prescribed by law.
(3) Making or causing to be made and certifying searches for tax and
other liens on any real property in the Township as may be
authorized by law and charging and collecting for the use of the
Township the fee required by law for such search.
§ 4-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-31
1:47
(4) Preparing and mailing all utility bills and receiving and accounting
for them in the manner provided by law.
(5) Performing any and all other duties as the Mayor and/or Business
Administrator or Chief Financial Officer shall assign.
E. Tax Assessor. The Tax Assessor shall be appointed by the Mayor for a
term of four years from the first day of July next following the
appointment. The Tax Assessor's duties shall include, but not be limited
to the following: [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
(1) Valuing all real and personal property in the Township for the
purpose of assessments and taxation in accordance with general
law, Mercer County Board of Taxation rules, the Charter and
ordinances of the Township, and exercising all the powers of a Tax
Assessor pursuant to law.
(2) Preparing the tax list and duplicating as required by law and
maintaining adequate records of each and every parcel of real
property assessed.
(3) Having custody of and maintaining an up-to-date Township Tax
Map and coordinating with the Township Engineer for the
recording thereon of all changes in ownership or character of the
property assessed.
(4) Making all special assessments of benefits for local improvements.
(5) Being responsible for all appraisals of property for any Township
purpose, provided that the Tax Assessor may, within limits of
available appropriations, retain outside experts or appraisers
whenever the public interest requires.
(6) Representing the Township of West Windsor before the Mercer
County Board of Taxation and the State Tax Court and before such
other boards, agencies and governmental authorities as may be
necessary and requisite in connection with the performance of the
Tax Assessor's duties.
(7) Performing such other duties as may be required of the Tax
Assessor by the laws of the State of New Jersey, Mercer County
Board of Taxation and the ordinances of the Township of West
Windsor.
§ 4-31 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-31
1:48
ARTICLE VIII
Department of Public Safety
[Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10; 2-7-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-01; 11-10-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-27; 6-28-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-14; 11-29-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-32; 9-4-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-17; 4-2-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-05; 4-6-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-06; 7-9-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-10; 5-28-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-11; 9-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
§ 4-32. Department established; Department Director.
There shall be a Department of Public Safety headed by the Public Safety
Director, who shall be the Mayor.
§ 4-33. Department divisions.
In the Department of Public Safety, there shall be the following divisions:
§ 4-34. Division of Fire and Emergency Services.
A. Division of Fire and Emergency Services.
B. Volunteer Fire Division.
C. Office of Emergency Management.
D. Police Division.
A. There shall be a Division of Fire and Emergency Services headed by a
Fire and Emergency Services Manager. In addition to the Manager of
Fire and Emergency Services, the Division shall consist of fire captains
and firefighters, per-diem members as well as volunteer emergency
medical technicians. The Manager of Fire and Emergency Services
shall be appointed by the Director of Public Safety. The Division of Fire
and Emergency Services is established to provide assistance to the
Volunteer Fire Division in the control and extinguishment of fires and to
provide Fire Code enforcement as well as other assigned duties.
[Amended 11-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-35]
B. Command and authority.
(1) The Division of Fire and Emergency Services shall have supervisory
authority over all paid and volunteer personnel and the operation of
the Volunteer Emergency Medical Services Unit and its respective
officers, but no supervision over the volunteer fire companies.
(2) The Division of Fire and Emergency Services shall have operational
command authority of patient care at all EMS incidents.
(3) The Division of Fire and Emergency Services shall assist the
Volunteer Fire Division to administratively manage all matters of
municipal finance, municipal purchases and municipal personnel
§ 4-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-34
1:49
for the volunteer organizations, in conjunction with the Township
Business Administrator and/or Chief Financial Officer.
(4) The Division of Fire and Emergency Services shall have no
authority over any funds provided to the volunteer fire companies.
(5) The Division of Fire and Emergency Services will, in concert with
the volunteer fire companies, develop job descriptions and
procedures for any municipal personnel hired to perform duties
related to the Fire and Emergency Services Division and Volunteer
Fire Division.
C. Volunteer Emergency Medical Services Unit.
(1) Establishment. There is hereby established in the Township a
Volunteer Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Unit in the Division
of Fire and Emergency Services. The Volunteer EMS Unit shall
consist of volunteer members. Members of the Volunteer EMS Unit
shall not be paid in any manner or by any organization to perform
emergency medical services to the Township. However, members of
the Volunteer EMS Unit shall be eligible for the length-of-service
award program (LOSAP) in compliance with municipal and state
regulations.
(2) Qualification for membership. No person shall become a patient
care provider of the Volunteer EMS Unit unless he/she is at least 18
years of age and a resident of the United States, resides within 10
miles of Township borders and has obtained a New Jersey EMT-B
certification.
(3) Membership. Individuals may become members of the Volunteer
EMS Unit by applying in a manner determined by the Manager of
Fire and Emergency Services.
(4) Responsibilities and authority. Operational command authority and
patient care responsibility at all EMS incidents or responses shall
rest with the Division of Fire and Emergency Services. The
Volunteer EMS Unit provides volunteer EMS to West Windsor
Township. Specific EMS command responsibilities of the Volunteer
EMS Unit shall be determined by the Manager of Fire and
Emergency Services.
(a) The Volunteer EMS Unit may, with the approval of the Manager
of Fire and Emergency Services, select its own officers. Officer
titles for the Volunteer EMS Unit will be determined by the
Manager of Fire and Emergency Services.
D. Civilian Emergency Response Team (CERT).
(1) Establishment. The Township of West Windsor establishes and
creates the West Windsor CERT Team as a program within and
under the direction of the Division of Fire and Emergency Services.
§ 4-34 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-34
1:50
(2) The criteria for membership in CERT shall be as follows:
(a) Citizen or legal resident of the United States.
(b) Resident of the Township of West Windsor or business owner or
employee of a business within the Township.
(c) Eighteen years of age or older.
(d) Subject to background check.
(e) Successful completion of FEMA/NJ State Police approved
CERT training.
(f) Members shall be approved by the Director of Public Safety
and shall serve indefinitely unless or until their resignation,
ineligibility, removal or inability to serve for any other reason.
(g) Completion of any future training required for CERT
volunteers.
(3) West Windsor CERT shall be managed by the Manager of Fire and
Emergency Services, who is also the Deputy Coordinator of
Emergency Management, Coordinator or his designee.
(4) When needed, West Windsor CERT shall be comprised of the
following officers:
(a) CERT Team Coordinator. It shall be the responsibility of the
CERT Coordinator to maintain membership certification,
training and attendance records for all CERT members.
(b) CERT Team Squad Leader(s), each squad being comprised,
ideally, of six persons in addition to the Squad Leader.
(5) CERT members shall serve without compensation for their services
provided.
(6) The authorized role of trained CERT members includes but is not
limited to the following:
(a) Assisting as a resource center/shelter aid.
(b) Assistance to emergency services teams in areas of
recordkeeping, communication and logistical support.
(c) Performing public assistance checks for senior citizens and
disabled residents.
(d) Assisting first responders or public works employees in
nonhazardous duties at disaster scenes or during rescue
operations as authorized by, and under the direction of, the
Manager of Fire and Emergency Services or his/her designee.
§ 4-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-34
1:51
(e) Assisting with large nonemergency events within the Township
under the direction of and as authorized by the Manager of
Fire and Emergency Services or his/her designee.
(f) In the event of an emergency, the CERT will be activated
through the West Windsor Office of Emergency Management
under order of the OEM Coordinator.
E. Responsibilities of the Manager of Fire and Emergency Services shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Supervision of paid fire and emergency services personnel in the
control and extinguishment of fires and the provision of emergency
medical services as well as other assigned duties.
(2) Public safety education activities in conjunction with the Volunteer
Fire Companies.
(3) Administration/command of all hazardous materials activities and
incidents with relation to the United States Environmental
Protection (EPA), Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act
requirements.
(4) Public employees — OSHA activities as they relate to emergency
services and other personnel.
(5) Purchasing of municipally funded fire and emergency services
equipment and vehicles.
(6) Coordination and implementation of any rules, regulations or laws
which would affect fire and emergency medical services.
(7) Supervision of personnel hired to fulfill operational duties for fire
and emergency service units.
(8) Mediation of any activities or disputes involving the volunteer
emergency service organizations when requested by any
organization or Township administration.
(9) Planning for the overall development of emergency services,
including the orderly growth of the paid professional fire and
emergency services personnel in conjunction with the fire
companies.
(10) Performance of other relevant duties as determined by the Mayor
or Township Business Administrator.
(11) Development and enforcement of rules, regulations, general orders
and standard operating procedures for the management and
oversight of the Division of Fire and Emergency Services.
(12) Supervision of volunteer personnel assigned to the Volunteer EMS
Unit.
§ 4-34 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-34
1:52
§ 4-35. Volunteer Fire Division.
(13) Supervising volunteer CERT Team members.
F. Appointment and duties of a Fire Marshal.
(1) There shall be a Fire Marshal of the Township appointed by the
Business Administrator, who may be the same as the Manager of
Fire and Emergency Services.
(2) Duties of the Fire Marshal. The duties of the Fire Marshal shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
(a) Serving as Fire Official of the Local Enforcing Agency (LEA) as
established by the New Jersey Uniform Fire Safety Code16 and
any local amendments to the New Jersey Uniform Fire Safety
Act.17
(b) Performing all plan review and inspections relative to fire
protection on applications submitted to the Planning Board
and Zoning Board. [Amended 7-30-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-20]
(c) Performing the periodic inspections of life hazard uses
required by the Uniform Fire Safety Code on behalf of the
Commissioner of the New Jersey State Department of
Community Affairs.
(d) Performing any and all other duties as required by law or by
the appropriate Township officials.
G. Board of Appeals. Pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Uniform
Fire Safety Act, any person aggrieved by any order of the Fire Marshal's
office, Fire Official and/or any agent thereof as it applies to the Uniform
Fire Safety Act or its regulations shall have the right to appeal to the
Mercer County Construction Board of Appeals.
A. Establishment. There is hereby established in the Township a Volunteer
Fire Division. The Volunteer Fire Division shall consist solely of the
Princeton Junction Volunteer Fire Co. No. 1, Inc., and the West Windsor
Volunteer Fire Company No. 1, Inc.
B. Designation of companies. Membership in the Volunteer Fire Division
shall be limited to those members belonging to the Princeton Junction
Volunteer Fire Company No. 1, Inc., of Princeton Junction, and to the
West Windsor Volunteer Fire Company No. 1, Inc., of Dutch Neck.
C. Responsibilities and authority. The Volunteer Fire Division shall have
complete responsibility for all fire suppression and control activities in
West Windsor Township, with the support of paid staff within the
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Fire Prevention.
17.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
§ 4-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-35
1:53
§ 4-36. Office of Emergency Management.
§ 4-37. Police Division.
Division of Fire and Emergency Services. In addition, the Volunteer
Fire Division shall have responsibility for any incidents in West Windsor
Township which, through the threat of fire, are considered a threat
to public safety or property. Operation command authority shall rest
solely with the fire company having jurisdiction as delineated by the
map entitled "West Windsor Fire Dispatch Line Map," dated August 13,
1979, and on file in the office of the Township Clerk, unless the ranking
officer turns over the operational command to the Manager of Fire and
Emergency Services.
D. Qualifications for membership. No person shall hereafter become an
active firefighter in the Township Volunteer Fire Division unless said
person is at least 18 years of age and a resident of the United States.
Said person shall be physically fit to perform all duties of a firefighter,
as evidenced by a certificate to that effect by a practicing physician of
the State of New Jersey after physical examination for the purpose.
E. Dispatch procedures. All fire calls shall be dispatched to the
appropriate volunteer company in accordance with a map entitled
"West Windsor Township Fire Dispatch Line Map," dated August 13,
1979, and on file in the office of the Township Clerk and in accordance
with 9-1-1 regulations.
A. There shall be an Office of Emergency Management, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. App. A:9-40.1 et seq. and Executive Order No. 101, in the
Department of Public Safety, and there shall be a Coordinator of
Emergency Management.
B. The Coordinator of Emergency Management shall be responsible for
the planning, coordinating, directing and control of emergency
management operations.
C. All departments of the Township of West Windsor shall cooperate with
and assist the Office of Emergency Management.
A. The Police Division of the Township is hereby established with such
number of subordinate police officers and sworn police positions as
designated by the Mayor and authorized by the Council. The Police
Division shall be headed by a Chief of Police or ranking sworn officer,
who shall be appointed by the Director of Public Safety and whose
duties and responsibilities shall be those as governed by law, Township
Code, where applicable, and the rules and regulations of the West
Windsor Police Division.
B. Each regular police officer shall hold office and continue in said
employment during good behavior and efficiency after having properly
completed a one-year probationary period, pursuant to law, and no
§ 4-35 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-37
1:54
§ 4-38. (Reserved)
police officer shall be removed from office or employment for any
causes other than incapacity, misconduct, neglect of duty, conduct
unbecoming a police officer or disobedience of the rules and
regulations established and hereafter established for the Division or
absence from duty without just cause.
C. Any permanent member of the Police Division may be suspended,
removed/discharged, fined or reduced in rank from or in office for just
cause upon due notice and written charges filed with the Director of
Public Safety or his/her designee and served upon the member so
charged with notice of a hearing thereon. The Director of Public Safety
or his/her designee shall have the power to suspend without pay the
member so charged, pending determination of such charges. The
hearing shall be held not less than 10 nor more than 30 days from the
date of service of the complaint. Said hearing shall take place pursuant
to the rules and regulations of the Police Division.
D. The Mayor of the Township shall serve as Public Safety Director and as
the appropriate authority responsible for adopting and promulgating
the rules and regulations of the Police Division.
E. The Police Division shall consist of no more than one Chief of Police,
four Lieutenants, eight Sergeants, 35 patrol officers and 10 special law
enforcement officers Class III (SLEOIII) pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:
14-146.10 et seq. [Amended 6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-19;
9-4-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-23]
§ 4-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-38
1:55

ARTICLE IX
Department of Human Services
§ 4-39. Department established; department director. [Amended
5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
There shall be a Department of Human Services, the head of which shall
be the Director of Human Services. The Director, who shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council, shall be qualified
by training and experience to be the head of the Department. The Director
shall serve during the term of office of the Mayor appointing the Director
and until the appointment and qualification of a successor.
§ 4-40. Department divisions.
In the Department of Human Services there shall be the following Divisions:
§ 4-41. Division of Health.
The Division of Health shall be administered by a licensed Health Officer,
who shall perform such duties as, but not limited to the following:
§ 4-42. Division of Recreation and Parks.
The Division of Recreation and Parks shall be headed by the Manager of
Recreation. The Manager of Recreation shall perform such duties as, but
not be limited to the following:
A. Division of Health.
B. Division of Recreation and Parks.
C. Division of Senior and Social Services.
D. Division of Affordable Housing.
A. Enforcing state and local laws and regulations related to public health.
B. Administering the public health programs of the Township, including
public health nursing, community health education, environmental
health, communicable disease control and chronic disease control.
C. Administering the laws relating to vital statistics and supervising the
local Registrar of Vital Statistics.18
D. Enforcing laws and ordinances providing for the prevention and control
of disease and related inspection, including but not limited to the
obligations of occupants and residents for the storage, collection and
disposal of garbage and trash.
18.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:8-1 et seq.
§ 4-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-42
1:57
§ 4-43. Division of Senior and Social Services.
There shall be a Division of Senior and Social Services headed by a Manager
of Senior and Social Services. The Manager of Senior and Social Services
shall perform such duties as, but not limited to the following:
§ 4-44. Division of Affordable Housing.
There shall be a Division of Affordable Housing. The Division of Affordable
Housing shall:
A. Administering and operating indoor and outdoor athletic and
recreational programs and activities for children and adults in parks,
playgrounds and facilities.
B. Planning and promoting the immediate and long-term recreational
needs of the Township.
A. Administering programs for senior citizens residing in the Township,
including social services, health, education and recreational activities.
B. Administering maintenance and repair functions of the senior center
facilities, including building and equipment.
C. Administering social services, counseling, assessment and other
support services to the residents of the Township.19
A. Oversee and manage the housing application process; log in new
applications, maintain and update waiting lists and affordable housing
files, respond to applicants' questions and concerns in person, by
telephone and in writing and assist in the applicant appeal process.
B. Represent the Township's interest with Avalon Watch and any future
rental management; prepare waiting lists as needed, review their files
and procedures and ensure compliance with Township affordable
housing guidelines and procedures. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-07]
C. Provide support for residents of affordable units as needed and act as
liaison to the Division of Senior and Social Services.
D. Serve as liaison and support to the Affordable Housing Committee and
provide information to any other board or committee; work with the
Housing Committee, Township staff and professionals to develop new
affordable housing projects without adverse impact on the community.
E. Monitor affordable housing issues and their impacts on West Windsor,
COAH, state legislation and court decisions. Prepare reports and
updates for the Mayor and Planning Board as required.
19.Editor's Note: Former Subsections D and E, both regarding the administration of the
general assistance program, which immediately followed, were repealed 2-7-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-03.
§ 4-42 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-44
1:58
F. Serve as a member of the Township professional team in analyzing any
development application that contains an affordable housing
component.
G. Regularly review ordinances and policies of the affordable housing
program and recommend changes as appropriate. Seek and apply for
grant applications.
H. Manage the resales of purchase units. Recommend resales policies.
I. Interface with other government and cooperative efforts, especially
Mercer County.
§ 4-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-44
1:59

ARTICLE X
Department of Community Development
§ 4-45. Department established; department director.
§ 4-46. Department divisions.
The Department of Community Development shall include the following
divisions:
§ 4-47. Division of Engineering.
A. There shall be a Department of Community Development, the head of
which shall be the Director of Community Development. The Director
shall be qualified by training and experience to be the head of the
Department, especially as set forth below. The Director shall serve
during the term of office of the Mayor appointing the Director and until
the appointment and qualification of a successor.
B. The Director of Community Development shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council.
A. Division of Engineering.
B. Division of Land Use.
C. Division of Code Enforcement.
A. Township Engineer. The Township Engineer shall serve as the Director
of the Division of Engineering and may also serve as the Director of
Community Development. The Township Engineer shall be a duly
licensed professional engineer of the State of New Jersey.
B. The Township Engineer shall perform such duties including, but not
limited to the following:
(1) Working with the Director of Public Works in coordinating and
planning for the maintenance and expansion of the roads of the
Township and reporting annually on their status.
(2) Preparing all plans and specifications for public works and
improvements undertaken by the Township and certifying
satisfactory completion of work to authorize progress payments
pursuant to the contract.
(3) Providing, maintaining and updating maps, plans, specifications,
surveys and records with respect to public property, works and
facilities owned and operated by the Township. [Amended
5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
(4) Providing engineering services to the various departments, boards
or agencies of the Township, as directed by the Mayor or designee.
§ 4-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-47
1:61
§ 4-48. Division of Land Use. [Amended 7-30-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-20]
The Division of Land Use shall be headed by a licensed professional planner.
The planner shall also be responsible for zoning enforcement and giving
advice and assistance to the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment,
Technical Review Committee and other applicable boards, bodies,
commissions and committees of the Township.
§ 4-49. Division of Code Enforcement.
(5) Issuing such certifications as may be necessary and approving all
bills with respect to work performed under the Township
Engineer's supervision.
(6) Preparing maps, plans and specifications and preparing or causing
to be prepared surveys and maps, including the tax maps.
(7) Reviewing proposed preliminary and final subdivision plats and site
plans for conformity with Township ordinances and advising the
Planning Board as to such matters.
(8) Inspecting and recommending acceptance of construction
activities which will be decided as public improvements to the
Township.
C. All papers, documents, memoranda, reports and other material relating
to the administration of engineering duties of the Township Engineer
shall be and remain the property of the Township. Upon termination of
the Township Engineer's services with the Township, the Township
Engineer shall forthwith surrender to any successor all such property.
A. The Division of Code Enforcement shall be headed by a Construction
Code Official. The Division shall also serve as the Uniform Construction
Code Enforcing Agency.
B. Uniform Construction Code Enforcing Agency. The various officials
comprising the Uniform Construction Code Enforcing Agency shall
have such qualifications as are specified in the Uniform Construction
Code20 and its regulations. The powers and duties of such officials shall
be as otherwise designated in Township ordinances.
C. The Division shall be responsible for Building Code enforcement of both
preexisting and new construction.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 63, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 4-47 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-49
1:62
ARTICLE XI
Department of Public Works
§ 4-50. Department established; department head.
§ 4-51. Department divisions.21
Within the Department of Public Works, the Department shall have the
following divisions:
A. There shall be a Department of Public Works, the head of which shall be
the Director of Public Works. The Director shall be qualified by training,
experience and in accordance with the law.
B. The Director shall serve during the term of office of the Mayor
appointing the Director and until the appointment and qualification of a
successor. The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council.
A. Division of Streets and Roads.
B. Division of Sewer Maintenance.
C. Division of Facilities and Open Space.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 4-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-51
1:63

ARTICLE XII
Department of Law
§ 4-52. Township Attorney.
A. The Township Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council and shall serve during the term of the office
of the Mayor appointing the Attorney and until the appointment and
qualification of the Attorney's successor. The Township Attorney shall
receive such compensation as shall be provided by contractual
agreement. The Township Attorney shall certify that to the best of the
Attorney's knowledge there are no conflicts of interest with the
Township Attorney's outside practice. The Township Attorney shall have
sufficient experience in municipal law to serve in said position. The
Township Attorney's duties shall include, but not be limited to the
following:
(1) Being the legal advisor to the Mayor, to the Council and to all
departments. The Township Attorney shall prosecute and defend all
actions and proceedings by and against the Township and every
department thereof, except as otherwise provided by law.
(2) Conducting appeals from orders, decisions or judgments affecting
any interest that the Township Attorney may, in the Township
Attorney's discretion, determine to be necessary or desirable or as
directed by the Mayor.
(3) Subject to the approval of the Council, having the power to enter
into any agreement, compromise or settlement of any litigation in
which the Township is involved.
(4) Rendering opinions, either orally or in writing, upon any questions
of law submitted to the Township Attorney by the Mayor, Council,
Business Administrator, Township Clerk or the Director of any
department with respect to the official powers or duties.
[Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
(5) Reviewing and approving as to form all contracts, deeds,
documents and instruments prior to the execution thereof by or on
behalf of the Township.
(6) Maintaining a record of all actions, suits, proceedings and matters
which relate to the Township's interest, and reporting thereon from
time to time as the Mayor may require.
(7) Defending, at the request of any current or, where applicable,
former Township officer or employee, any action brought against
such officer or employee (other than an action brought against such
officer or employee by the Township) for any act or omission arising
out of or incidental to the performance of the duties as an officer or
employee of the Township. [Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No.
96-10]
§ 4-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-52
1:65
§ 4-53. Township Prosecutor.
There shall be a Township Prosecutor appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council for a term of one year and until the
appointment and qualification of a successor. The Township Prosecutor may
also be the Township Attorney; if not, the Township Prosecutor shall report
to the Township Attorney. The duties of the Township Prosecutor shall be as
follows:
§ 4-54. Public Defender.
There shall be a Public Defender appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council for a term of one year and until the appointment
and qualification of a successor. The duties of the Public Defender shall be
as follows:
B. Whenever the Township Attorney believes the interests of the Township
require, the Township Attorney may appoint special counsel to assist in
specialized legal matters and in the preparation, trial or argument of
such legal matters or proceedings. The employment of special counsel
shall be on a contractual basis and shall be within the limits of available
appropriations, with the approval of the Mayor and subject to
contractual approval by the Council, as required by the Local Public
Contracts Law.22
C. If the Township Attorney should be disqualified with respect to any
matter, the Mayor, upon request of the Township Attorney, shall appoint
special counsel. Such appointments by the Mayor shall be on a
contractual basis and shall be subject to contractual approval by the
Council, as required by the Local Public Contracts Law.
D. Records and papers. All papers, documents, memoranda, reports and
other materials relating to the administration of the Department of Law
shall remain the property of the Township. Upon the termination of the
Township Attorney's service with the Township, the Township Attorney
shall promptly surrender to the successor all such property, together
with a written consent to substitution of the successor in all legal
actions and proceedings then pending in which the Township is a party.
A. Participating in and prosecuting all cases when necessary or practical
in the Township Municipal Court, including all criminal and quasicriminal
matters and all complaints by Township officials, inspectors
and directors, unless otherwise directed by the Township Attorney.
B. Having the power and authority, to the extent not inconsistent with any
statutes of the State of New Jersey or Township ordinances, to settle,
compromise, downgrade or dismiss any complaints when in the
Prosecutor's judgment the best interests of the Township will be served.
22.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 4-52 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-54
1:66
A. The Public Defender shall attend all sessions of the Municipal Court as
required and shall serve as the defense attorney for any and all indigent
defendants charged with a disorderly persons offense or with a
violation of any law, ordinance or regulation of a penal nature which
could result in a penalty of incarceration, substantial fine or, in the
opinion of the court, any other consequence of magnitude. [Amended
4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
B. It shall be the duty of the Township Municipal Judge to ascertain
whether such indigent defendants desire the services of a Public
Defender and are in fact indigent and determine whether or not the
charges sufficiently warrant the assignment of the Public Defender and,
in such cases, to make the assignment to the Public Defender.
C. In the event that the Public Defender ascertains that such defendant(s)
so assigned is/are not in fact indigent, the Public Defender will so
advise the Judge, who will make the final determination in regard to
whether such defendant(s) is/are entitled to the service of the Public
Defender. [Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
D. The Public Defender shall provide the Township Attorney with a
monthly report outlining the activities and including the number of
cases handled, disposition thereof, number of appeals and their
disposition.
§ 4-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-54
1:67

ARTICLE XIII
Separate Agencies and Boards Not Assigned
§ 4-55. Boards and agencies not assigned to Township departments.
A. The following boards and agencies of Township government are not
assigned to any department within the Township. [Amended
4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07; 11-29-1999 by Ord. No. 99-34;
11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-27; 4-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-02]
(1) Affordable Housing Committee.
(2) Agricultural Advisory Committee.
(3) Board of Health.
(4) Board of Recreation Commissioners.
(5) Cable Television Advisory Board.
(6) Emergency Management Council.
(7) Environmental Commission.
(8) Human Relations Council.
(9) (Reserved)23
(10) Parking Authority.
(11) Planning Board.
(12) Shade Tree Commission.
(13) (Reserved)24
(14) Stony Brook Regional Sewerage Authority.
(15) Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. In addition to the appointments set forth herein, there may be
appointed, where applicable, advisers and/or liaisons to the various
boards/bodies/committees listed above for one year in the same manner
as regular appointments are made to the boards and agencies listed
above.
C. Unless specifically provided otherwise, all members of and advisers
and/or liaisons to the various boards/bodies/committees listed above
shall be residents of the Township. [Added 5-13-1996 by Ord. No.
96-10]
23.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(9), which listed Local Assistance Board, was repealed
2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-03.
24.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(13), which listed the Site Plan Review Advisory Board
(SPRAB), was repealed 7-30-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-20.
§ 4-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-55
1:69
§ 4-56. Affordable Housing Committee.
D. Unless specifically provided otherwise, all terms of all members of and
advisers and/or liaisons to the various board/bodies/committees listed
above shall run from January 1 to December 31. [Added 5-13-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-10; amended 6-1-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-1125]
A. Preamble. Under the direction of the Mayor, the Affordable Housing
Committee shall recommend policies as they relate to the sale, rental,
re-rental, marketing and general administration of low/moderate
income units established in the Township. In addition, the Committee
will continue to monitor new laws and regulations which may affect the
affordable housing program of the Township and report to the Mayor on
their potential impact. The Committee will also work with the Planning
Board on the development of affordable housing strategies and monitor
their implementation and provide an annual report and other such
reports as it feels necessary to the Mayor on the status of issues which
relate to the administration of the Township's affordable housing
program.
B. Membership; terms of office.
(1) The Committee shall consist of seven members, six of whom shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council. The seventh member shall be a member of the Township
Council, appointed by the Council. One of the remaining members
shall be an occupant of low/moderate income housing and one
member may be a developer of low/moderate income housing
within the Township who may be a nonresident of the Township.
[Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10; 4-20-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-08]
(2) Committee members appointed by the Mayor shall have a term of
three years, except during the initial terms of office, when two
members shall have a one-year term, two members shall have a
two-year term and three members shall have a three-year term.
The Council member shall serve a one-year term. [Amended
4-20-1998 by Ord. No. 98-08]
(3) The Mayor, with advice and consent of the Council, may appoint
two alternates to be designated at the time of appointment as
Alternate No. 1 and Alternate No. 2. The length of the terms of the
alternate members shall be the same as the length of the terms of
the regular members of the Committee (three years). However,
Alternate No. 2's initial term shall be two years so that the terms of
the alternates shall be staggered.
25.Editor’s Note: This ordinance stated it would be effective 1-1-2011 as provided by Chapter
196 of the Laws of 2009.
§ 4-55 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-56
1:70
(4) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in
order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate
member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote. [Added 5-13-1996
by Ord. No. 96-10]
(5) Attendance by four members or alternates shall constitute a
quorum. Passage of any motion requires an affirmative vote by a
majority of members present.
(6) The Committee shall elect a Chair and Vice Chair from amongst its
ranks, though neither the Chair nor the Vice Chair shall be the
Council member or the developer member. Their terms of office
shall be one year and they shall be eligible for re-election; the
Committee may also select a Secretary, who may not be a member
of the Committee. [Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
(7) The Mayor may remove any member of the Committee for cause on
written charges served upon the member and after a hearing
thereon, at which time the member can be represented by an
attorney. A vacancy in the Committee occurring otherwise than by
expiration of the term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the
same manner as an original appointment.
C. Powers and duties.
(1) The Committee is hereby granted, in conjunction with those
officials/employees who are entrusted by the Township to handle
matters involving affordable housing, and shall have all the powers
necessary and appropriate to carry out and execute the purposes
set forth below:
(a) Preparing and forwarding to the Mayor and Council such rules
and regulations as it deems necessary or appropriate to
implement the purposes of this section.
(b) Supplying information to developers and families of low or
moderate income to help them comply with the provisions of
this section.
(c) Holding hearings upon due notice and adjudicate applications
of individuals or families who believe themselves to be families
of low or moderate income.
(d) Monitoring the Township's housing efforts, identifying
problems and recommending changes and improvements as
experience may suggest.
(2) The Committee shall establish an appeal process regarding the
duties set forth in Subsection C(1)(c) above. The Committee shall
§ 4-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-56
1:71
§ 4-56.1. Agricultural Advisory Committee. [Added 11-13-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-27]
give 10 calendar days' written notice of hearing to all parties
involved and shall give all interested persons an opportunity to be
heard and shall render a decision, where applicable, in writing,
within 10 calendar days of the completion of the hearing, unless
mutually extended.
A. Preamble. A Township goal is to preserve farmland. That goal can be
advanced through the preparation of a farmland preservation element
of the Master Plan and securing grants therefor from higher level
jurisdictions. One form of grant available is a planning incentive grant
through the New Jersey Department of Agriculture. To be eligible for
such a grant, the Planning Board must prepare and adopt a farmland
preservation plan element in consultation with a municipal agriculture
advisory committee. It is in the best interest of the Township to create
such a committee in order to plan systematically for farmland
preservation and to be eligible for planning incentive grants and in
order to best manage Township-owned farmland.
B. Creation; appointment; terms of office; vacancies; compensation.
(1) There is hereby created an Agricultural Advisory Committee
consisting of three members appointed by the Mayor with the
consent of the Township Council. They shall be residents of the
Township, and a majority thereof shall be actively engaged in
farming and shall own a portion of the land they farm. They shall
serve without compensation.
(2) The members shall serve for terms of three years each. The initial
appointments shall be staggered so that one term shall be for one
year, one for two years and one for three years. Terms shall expire
on December 31 of the year of expiration. [Amended 6-1-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-1126]
(3) All appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired term.
(4) A Chairman shall be elected annually by the Committee.
C. Powers. The Committee shall have such powers as are granted by law
to:
(1) Assist the Planning Board in the preparation of the farmland
preservation plan element of the Master Plan.
(2) Advise the Planning Board as to all matters dealing with farmland
preservation.
(3) Report annually to the Planning Board on its activities.
26.Editor’s Note: This ordinance stated it would be effective 1-1-2011 as provided by Chapter
196 of the Laws of 2009.
§ 4-56 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-56.1
1:72
§ 4-57. Board of Health.
§ 4-58. Board of Recreation Commissioners.
(4) Advise the Planning Board, Mayor and Township Council on the
management of Township-owned farmland properties.
D. Annual appropriation; estimate; amount. During the month of
September in each year, the Agricultural Advisory Committee may
forward to the Director of Community Development the estimated sum
necessary for the proper conduct of its work during the ensuing
calendar year. The Township Council may annually appropriate such
sum as it may deem necessary for said purposes.
E. Removal of Committee member. The Mayor may remove any member of
the Committee for cause on written charges served upon the member
and after a hearing thereon before the Committee, at which the
member shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel.
A. Creation; powers. The Board of Health of the Township shall be created
and governed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-1 et seq. The Board's powers
shall be as established by law.
B. Composition; terms of office; appointments. The Board shall consist of
five members, all of whom shall be members of the Township Council.
All appointments shall coincide with the Council member's term of
office. Vacancies shall be filled for the period of the unexpired term.
[Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
A. Creation. There is hereby created a Board of Recreation Commissioners
in the Township under the authority of law.
B. Appointment; terms; vacancies. The Board shall be composed of seven
members who shall be residents of the Township and who shall be
appointed by the Mayor. The Commissioners first appointed shall be
appointed for terms of one, two, three, four and five years respectively,
in such manner that the term of at least one Commissioner and not
more than two Commissioners shall expire in each year. Thereafter, all
appointments shall be for a term of five years and vacancies shall be
filled for the unexpired term only. The respective Commissioners shall
serve until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. The
Commissioners shall receive no compensation for their services, but
shall be entitled to be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in
the performance of their official duties.
C. Alternates.
(1) The Mayor, with advice and consent of the Council, may appoint
two alternates to be designated at the time of appointment as
Alternate No. 1 and Alternate No. 2. The length of the terms of the
alternate members shall be the same as the length of the terms of
the regular members of the Board (five years). However, Alternate
§ 4-56.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-58
1:73
§ 4-59. Cable Television Advisory Board. [Amended 5-13-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-10; 6-25-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-12; 6-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-1127; 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01]
No. 2's initial term shall be four years so that the terms of the
alternates shall be staggered.
(2) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in
order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate
member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote. [Added 5-13-1996
by Ord. No. 96-10]
D. Standing subcommittee for park and landscape planning issues within
the Township. [Added 5-19-1997 by Ord. No. 97-14]
(1) There shall be created an advisory subcommittee (to the Board of
Recreation Commissioners) to deal with the issues of park and
landscape planning within the Township, which activities shall
encompass open space and/or park use, arboriculture, the care and
planting of trees and other landscaping modes and methods for
lands throughout the Township. This subcommittee is advisory in
nature and will coordinate as appropriate with the Environmental
Commission and Planning Board as to such park and open space
issues. The subcommittee shall include a member of the
Environmental Commission, who shall be appointed by the Mayor
and serve in a liaison capacity, a representative of the
neighborhood(s) impacted by a park's development, as well as a
representative each from the sports associations which may be
planning to utilize the facilities. (In the specific case of the
Community Park, the above is to include at least a representative of
the North Mill homeowners, a representative of the Babe Ruth
League and a representative of the Soccer Association, such
representatives appointed by the sending organizations and
subject to consent by the Mayor and the Council.)
(2) This subcommittee shall submit all recommendations to the full
Board, the Mayor, Township Clerk (for the Township Council), the
Planning Board and the Environmental Commission.
E. Authority. [Amended 5-19-1997 by Ord. No. 97-14]
(1) The Board shall have the powers and shall perform the duties as set
forth by law.
(2) Attendance by four members or alternates shall constitute a
quorum. Passage of any motion requires an affirmative vote by a
majority of the members present.
§ 4-58 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-59
1:74
§ 4-60. Emergency Management Council.
A. Creation. There shall be a Cable Television Advisory Board to oversee
matters related to cable television in the Township. The Board shall
consist of five members, including the Mayor or the Mayor's designee:
two members of Council, appointed by Council, and two members of the
public, one of whom shall be appointed by Council and one by the
Mayor. Members of the public serving on the Board shall be residents of
the Township.
B. Terms. The Mayor shall serve as an ex-officio voting member of the
Board. Council members serving on the Board shall be appointed by the
Council annually. Residents serving on the Board shall be appointed to
three-year terms. Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term.
C. Powers and duties. The Board shall advise the Administration regarding
cable television franchise agreements, programming, local origination
and operational issues, and perform such other duties as applicable
under law and as specified in Chapter 60 of this Code.
D. Meetings. Meetings of the Board shall be held in accordance with the
Open Public Meetings Act.28
A. Creation. In accordance with law, the Township is required to create a
local Emergency Management Council to coordinate matters within the
Township in case of an emergency.29
B. Appointment; terms. There shall be a Township Emergency
Management Council composed of 15 individuals, one of whom shall be
the Emergency Management Coordinator (as defined below) and one of
whom shall be a member of the Township Council. The members shall
be appointed by the Mayor and shall hold office at the will and pleasure
of the Mayor. Members may be nonresidents of the Township.
[Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 96-10]
C. Powers. The Council shall assist the appropriate Township officials in
establishing the various local volunteer agencies needed to meet the
requirements of all local emergency management activities in
accordance with the rules and regulations established by the Governor.
The Council is authorized to assist in supervising and coordinating the
emergency management activities of the Township.
D. Coordination. The Mayor shall appoint for a term of three years from
the residents of the Township a Township Emergency Management
Coordinator. As a condition of appointment and continued appointment
within said term, the Coordinator shall, at the time of appointment or
within one year of the appointment, successfully complete the current
27.Editor’s Note: This ordinance stated it would be effective 1-1-2011 as provided by Chapter
196 of the Laws of 2009.
28.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
29.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. App. A:9-41.
§ 4-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-60
1:75
§ 4-61. Environmental Commission (N.J.S.A. 40:56A-3 et seq.).
[Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-37]
approved courses required by law. The Coordinator shall be responsible
for the planning, activating, coordinating and conduct of emergency
management operations within the Township. The Coordinator shall be
a member and serve as Chair of the Emergency Management Council.
The Coordinator shall appoint a Deputy Township Emergency
Coordinator, with the approval of the Mayor. Wherever possible, such
Deputy shall be appointed from among the salaried officers or
employees of the Township.
A. Creation. There is hereby created an Environmental Commission known
as the "West Windsor Environmental Commission" for the protection,
development or use of the natural resources, including water
resources, located within the territorial limits of the Township,
pursuant to the provisions of law.30
B. Appointment; terms of office; vacancies; compensation.
(1) The Mayor shall appoint seven members of the Commission, one of
whom shall be a member of the Planning Board and all of whom
shall be residents of the Township. The terms of office of the first
Commissioners shall be for one, two or three years and are to be
designated by the Mayor in making the appointments so that the
initial terms of approximately 1/3 of the members will expire each
year, and their successors shall be appointed for terms of three
years and until the appointment and qualification of their
successors. The Mayor shall also designate the Chair.
(2) The Mayor may remove any member of the Commission for cause,
on written charges served upon the member, and after a hearing
thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be heard in
person or by counsel.
(3) A vacancy in the Commission occurring otherwise than by
expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the
same manner as an original appointment.
(4) Members shall receive no compensation for their services. [Added
4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
C. Powers. The Commission shall have, but not be limited to, the following
powers:
(1) Conducting research into the use and possible use of the open land
areas of the Township.
(2) Coordinating the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar
purposes, where applicable.
30.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.
§ 4-60 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-61
1:76
§ 4-61.1. Shade Tree Commission. [Added 11-29-1999 by Ord. No.
99-34; amended 4-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-02]
(3) Advertising, preparing, printing and distributing books, maps,
charts, plans and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems
necessary for its purposes.
(4) Keeping an index of all open areas publicly or privately owned,
including open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, in order
to obtain information on the proper use of such areas.
(5) Promoting the conservation and development of the natural
resources of the Township.
(6) Recommending to the Planning Board plans and programs for
inclusion in a municipal Master Plan and the development and use
of such areas.
(7) Studying and making recommendations concerning open space
preservation, water resource management, air pollution control,
solid waste management, noise control, soil and landscape
protection, environmental appearance, marine resources and
protection of flora and fauna.
D. The Commission may, subject to the approval of the Township Council,
acquire property, both real and personal, in the name of the Township
by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease for any of its purposes
and shall administer the same for such purposes subject to the terms of
the conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may be to acquire the fee or
any lesser interest, development right, easement (including a
conservation easement), covenant or other contractual right (including
a conveyance on conditions or with limitations or reversions) as may be
necessary to acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use of
or otherwise conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other land
use water areas in the Township.
E. The Commission shall keep records of its meetings and activities and
make an annual report to the Mayor and Township Council.
F. The Council may appropriate funds for the expenses incurred by the
Commission, and the Commission may appoint such clerks and other
employees as it may require, provided that the same shall be within the
limits of funds appropriated to it. [Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No.
96-10]
A. Preamble. The Township has acquired and will continue to acquire
various public lands, and the Township right-of-way has increased and
will continue to increase with the future development of the Township.
It is in the best interests of the Township to create a Shade Tree
Commission in order to encourage proper arboriculture and desirable
horticultural activities, to develop and periodically update a community
forest and shade tree plan for the care, planting and location of trees
§ 4-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-61.1
1:77
and shrubbery on public land and in public rights-of-way and to set
policy for the maintenance of the trees and shrubbery in such areas.
B. Creation; appointment; terms of office; vacancies; compensation.
(1) There is hereby created a Shade Tree Commission, which shall be
known as the "Shade Tree Commission of West Windsor Township."
The Commission shall consist of five members appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of Township Council. The
members shall be residents of the Township and shall serve without
compensation.
(2) The members shall serve for terms of five years each. However, the
initial appointments shall be staggered for respective periods of
one, two, three, four and five years. The initial term of appointment
shall be designated at the time of appointment. Terms shall expire
on December 31 of the year of expiration. [Amended 6-1-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-1131]
(3) All appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired term.
(4) A Chairperson shall be elected annually by the Commission. The
Chairperson shall serve without compensation.
(5) A Secretary shall be elected annually by the Commission. The
Secretary shall serve without compensation.
C. Powers. The Commission shall have, but not be limited to, the following
powers:
(1) Establish Township policy for the regulation, planting and care of
shade and ornamental trees and shrubbery now located or which
may hereafter be planted in any public right-of-way, park and all
other property owned by the Township, except state and county
highways unless the Department of Transportation or County of
Mercer shall consent thereto. Tree and shrubbery care shall
include trimming; removing any tree, or part thereof, dangerous to
public safety; treating or removing any tree which is believed to
harbor a disease or insects readily communicable to neighboring
healthy trees; spraying; fertilizing; and other care and protection.
(2) Advise the Township concerning the appropriate use of the ground
surrounding shade and ornamental trees and shrubbery insofar as
may be necessary for their proper growth, care and protection.
(3) Encourage proper arboricultural practices throughout the
Township.
(4) Encourage desirable horticultural planting and activities
throughout the Township and particularly on public properties.
31.Editor’s Note: This ordinance stated it would be effective 1-1-2011 as provided by Chapter
196 of the Laws of 2009.
§ 4-61.1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-61.1
1:78
(5) Administer Arbor Day activities within the Township.
(6) Develop a community forestry and shade tree master plan for the
Township, including a tree inventory and tree disaster plan.
(7) Recommend to the Planning Board plans and programs for
inclusion in the Municipal Master Plan for the development and use
of public land and rights-of-way.
D. Community forestry and shade tree master plan. It shall be a function
and duty of the Shade Tree Commission to make, adopt and adhere to a
master plan for the planting of shade and ornamental trees and
shrubbery. This plan shall be reviewed and updated periodically.
E. Municipal arborist. The Shade Tree Commission may use the services of
a Township employee as an arborist who shall consult with the
Commission on arboriculture tasks.
(1) Qualifications. The arborist shall be thoroughly knowledgable and
experienced in tree species, tree diseases, insects affecting trees,
tree damage, tree maintenance, soil conditions affecting trees and
tree transplanting and shall be a certified tree expert (CTE).
(2) Duties. The duties of the arborist may include:
(a) To inspect or supervise planting, maintenance and treatment
work authorized by the Shade Tree Commission.
(b) To assist the Township Engineer with inspection of plantings
required with site development by the Planning Board, Zoning
Board, Township Engineer or Township Council.
(c) To advise or assist the Commission in evaluation of plans,
drawings or specifications involving existing trees or proposed
tree planting in or affecting the Township.
(d) To perform other tasks in the field of arboriculture related to
the Township.
(e) To oversee administration of the West Windsor Trees
Ordinance (Chapter 170 of the West Windsor Code) and this
section.
F. Annual appropriation; estimate; amount. During the month of
September in each year, the Shade Tree Commission shall forward to
the Director of Community Development the estimated sum necessary
for the proper conduct of its work during the ensuing calendar year. The
Township Council shall annually appropriate such sum as it may deem
necessary for said purposes.
G. Removal of Commission member. The Mayor may remove any member
of the Commission for cause on written charges served upon the
§ 4-61.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-61.1
1:79
§ 4-62. Human Relations Council.
member and after a hearing thereon before the Commission at which
the member shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel.
A. Preamble. Under the direction of the Mayor, the Human Relations
Council will develop, coordinate and amplify community awareness of
the diverse cultures represented in the Township. This is to be
accomplished through the development and implementation of
approved programs and services which will foster cultural exchange.
The Council will report annually and/or as requested or needed on its
activities and recommendations.
B. Creation. There is hereby created a Human Relations Council to
develop, coordinate and amplify the community awareness of the
diverse cultures as represented in the Township.
C. Appointment; terms; vacancies; compensation.
(1) The Council shall consist of 12 members, who shall be
representatives of the diverse cultural interests within the
Township. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor, with
advice and consent of the Council. Advisers, but not regular
members, may be nonresidents who are employed within the
Township. [Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
(2) Members shall serve for terms of two years each. Six of the initial
appointments shall be for one year and the other six shall be for
two years. At the expiration of the one-year terms, the ensuing
appointments shall be for two years. All terms shall expire on
December 31 of the year of the expiration.
(3) A vacancy occurring other than by expiration of term shall be filled
in the same manner as other appointments, but said appointment is
for the unexpired term only.
(4) Members shall receive no compensation for their services.
D. Structure. The Council shall designate one of its members as Chair and
that person shall serve as such until the first day of January next
following the appointment and until the successor shall be appointed
and shall qualify. Vacancies in the Chair shall be filled in the same
manner as other vacancies for the unexpired term only.
E. Powers and duties. The Council shall have the following powers and
duties:
(1) Raising the Township's awareness and cultural diversity in an effort
to enhance the quality of life in the Township's citizens.
(2) Developing, conducting and evaluating programs geared to
increase cultural awareness of the Township's population.
§ 4-61.1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-62
1:80
§ 4-63. (Reserved)32
§ 4-64. Parking Authority.
§ 4-65. Planning Board. [Amended 8-29-1994 by Ord. No. 94-33;
5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
(3) Conferring with appropriate governmental and private agencies for
the purpose of developing, implementing and evaluating the scope
of activities.
(4) Submitting, with the cooperation, advice and, where applicable,
approval of the Mayor and Council, proposals for grants for
facilities, programs and services to appropriate governmental and
private agencies.
(5) Reporting annually to the Mayor and Council.
A. Creation; powers. Acting pursuant to law, the Township hereby creates
a public body corporate and politic to be known as the "Parking
Authority of the Township of West Windsor." The Authority shall
constitute a parking authority as contemplated and provided for by law
and shall have all the power and duties given to parking authorities by
law, as supplemented and amended; provided, however, that no real
property shall be acquired by eminent domain without the consent of
the Township Council. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-37]
B. Membership. The Authority shall consist of five members, who shall be
appointed by the Council and serve terms of five years, except that the
members' initial terms shall consist of terms of one, two, three, four and
five years respectively from their date of appointment. Vacancies shall
be filled for the unexpired terms. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-07]
C. Compensation. Members shall receive no compensation for their
services. [Added 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
A. The Planning Board heretofore created by West Windsor Township is
continued and is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 et
seq. as the Planning Board for said municipality. [Amended 4-19-1999
by Ord. No. 99-07]
B. Composition.
(1) The Planning Board shall consist of nine members, who shall be
divided into the following four classes for convenience in
designating their manner of appointment:
32.Editor's Note: Former § 4-63, Local Assistance Board, as amended, was repealed 2-7-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-03.
§ 4-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-65
1:81
(a) Class 1: The Mayor, or the Mayor's designee in the absence of
the Mayor. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
(b) Class 2: One of the officials of the Township other than a
member of the Council, to be appointed by the Mayor, provided
that the member of the Environmental Commission who is also
a member of the Planning Board, as may be required by
N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1, shall be deemed to be a Class 2 Planning
Board member if there is both a member of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education among
Class 4 or alternate members.
(c) Class 3: A member of the Township Council, to be appointed by
it.
(d) Class 4: Six other citizens of the municipality, to be appointed
by the Mayor. The members of Class 4 shall hold no other
municipal office, except that one member may be a member of
the Zoning Board of Adjustment and one may be a member of
the Board of Education. A member of an Environmental
Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board as
required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be a Class 4 Planning Board
member unless there be among the Class 4 or alternate
members of the Planning Board both a member of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education,
in which case the member of the Environmental Commission
shall be deemed to be the Class 2 member of the Planning
Board.
(2) In addition to the nine members set forth above, there are
established two alternate members to be appointed by the same
appointing authority as class 4 members.
(3) The alternate members shall serve for two years from January 1 of
the year of their appointment. The initial terms of the alternate
members shall be for one and two years, respectively, as designated
by the Mayor at the time of their appointment. The Mayor shall
designate the alternate members as "Alternate No. 1" and
"Alternate No. 2." [Amended 6-1-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-1133]
(4) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member of any class. A vote shall not
be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to
which alternate is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
C. Terms.
33.Editor’s Note: This ordinance stated it would be effective 1-1-2011 as provided by Chapter
196 of the Laws of 2009.
§ 4-65 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-65
1:82
(1) The term of the member comprising Class 1 shall correspond with
the Mayor's official tenure of office, or if the member is the Mayor's
designee in the absence of the Mayor, the designee shall serve at
the pleasure of the Mayor during the Mayor's official tenure. The
terms of the members comprising Class 2 and Class 3 shall be for
one year or terminate at the completion of their respective terms of
office, whichever shall first occur, except for a Class 2 member who
is also a member of the Environmental Commission, if any. The
term of a Class 2 or Class 4 member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission, if any, shall be for three years or
terminate at the completion of his term of office as a member of the
Environmental Commission, whichever shall have first occurred.
[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
(2) The term of a Class 4 member who is also a member of the Board of
Adjustment or the Board of Education shall terminate whenever the
Class 4 member is no longer a member of such other body or at the
completion of the member's Class 4 term, whichever shall first
occur.
(3) The terms of all Class 4 members first appointed pursuant to this
section shall be so determined that, to the greatest practical extent,
the expiration of such terms shall be evenly distributed over the
first four years after their appointment as determined by resolution
of the Township Council; provided, however, that no term of any
member shall exceed four years; and, further, provided that
nothing herein shall affect the term of any present member of the
Planning Board, all of whom shall continue in office until the
completion of the term for which they were appointed. Thereafter,
all Class 4 members shall be appointed for terms of four years
except as otherwise herein provided. [Amended 10-22-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-20]
(4) All terms shall run from January 1 of the year in which the
appointment was made. [Added 10-22-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-20; amended 6-1-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-1134]
D. Vacancies. In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy of any class
other than by expiration of term, it shall be filled by appointment as
above provided for the unexpired term.
E. Compensation. Members of the Planning Board shall serve without
salary but may be paid expenses incurred in the performance of duties.
F. Qualifications applicable to majority of members. No member shall be
permitted to act on any matter in which he has, directly or indirectly,
any personal or financial interest.
34.Editor’s Note: This ordinance stated it would be effective 1-1-2011 as provided by Chapter
196 of the Laws of 2009.
§ 4-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-65
1:83
§ 4-66. Technical Review Committee. [Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-10; 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07; 1-14-2002 by Ord. No.
2001-27; 7-30-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-20]
G. Organization of Board. The Planning Board shall elect a Chair and Vice
Chair from the members of Class 4 and select a secretary who may be
either a member of the Planning Board or a municipal employee
designated by it.
H. Planning Board Attorney; other staff and consultants. There is hereby
created the office of Planning Board Attorney. The Planning Board may
annually appoint, fix the compensation of or agree upon the rate of
compensation of the Planning Board Attorney, who shall be an attorney
other than the Municipal Attorney and the Zoning Board of Adjustment
Attorney. The Planning Board may also employ or contract for the
services of experts and other staff and services as it may be deemed
necessary. The Board shall not, however, exceed, exclusive of gifts or
grants, the amount appropriated by the Council for its use.35
A. Function. The Technical Review Committee (TRC) is hereby established
for the purpose of assisting the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment in their duties, as may be required by the Township Land
Use Manager, for site plan and/or subdivision applications; general
development plan applications; concept plans, and requests for change
in zoning, or master plan amendments, according to the following
procedure:
(1) Review technical aspects of the proposed land development,
including, but not limited to, vehicular/bicycle/pedestrian
circulation, parking, and loading, lighting, signage, landscaping,
stormwater management and drainage, utilities design, building
location, layout, and design and related construction details.
(2) Review for noncompliance and compatibility with applicable
development regulations, and designations as specified by
Township Code, Master Plan, and/or existing development
patterns, offering advice to achieve compliance and compatibility.
(3) Submit TRC final report(s) to the Planning Board and/or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, prior to any public hearing.
(4) The Technical Review Committee shall convene at the direction of
the Township Land Use Manager.
(5) Membership: When convened for the purposes outlined in this
article the TRC may consist of the Township Engineer, the
Township Landscape Architect, the Manager of Fire and
Emergency Services, the Planning Consultant, the Planning Board
Attorney, and the Zoning Officer. The Traffic Engineering
35.Editor's Note: Former Section 2-13.11, Sewer Appeals Board, as amended, which
immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07..
§ 4-65 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-66
1:84
§ 4-67. Stony Brook Regional Sewerage Authority.36
§ 4-68. Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Amended 8-29-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-33; 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
Consultant and the Township Environmental Consultant may also
be required for certain proposals and/or applications, at the
discretion of the Land Use Manager.
B. Authority. The Technical Review Committee shall act in an advisory
function, with no approval authority on any application it may review.
A. All powers and duties for the Authority shall be as set forth under the
Sewerage Authorities Law (N.J.S.A. 40:14A-1 et seq.) and Chapter 133,
Sewers, Article I, Sewer Use, of this Code, except the appointment of
the Township's representative to the Authority, which is as set forth
below.
B. Appointment. The Township representative to the Authority shall be a
Mayoral appointment, with advice and consent of the Council, for a
term as provided by law. Vacancy shall be filled in accordance with law.
C. Compensation. Members shall receive no compensation for services.
[Added 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
A. Establishment; membership; terms; officers; staff; rules; compensation.
(1) Establishment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment heretofore created
is continued and is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69 et seq. as the Board of Adjustment for the municipality.
(2) Membership. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall consist of
seven regular members and two alternate members. All members
including alternates shall be appointed by the Council. Alternate
members shall be designated at the time of appointment "Alternate
No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-37]
(3) Terms. The terms of the members first appointed shall be so
determined that, to the greatest practicable extent, the expiration
of such terms shall be distributed in the case of regular members
evenly over the first four years after their appointment and in the
case of alternate members evenly over the first two years after
their appointment, provided that the initial term of no regular
member shall exceed four years and that the initial term of no
alternate member shall exceed two years. Thereafter, the term of
each regular member shall be four years, and the term of each
alternate member shall be two years. All terms of office shall run
from January 1 of the year in which the appointment was made.
36.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 133, Sewers, Art. I, Sewerage Authority.
§ 4-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-68
1:85
[Amended 10-22-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-20; 6-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-1137]
(4) Conflicts of interest; removal; vacancies. No member may hold any
elective office or position under the municipality. No member of the
Board of Adjustment shall be permitted to act on any matter in
which the member has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or
financial interest. A member may, after public hearing if the
member requests it, be removed by the Council for cause. A
vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be
filled for the unexpired term only.
(5) Officers. The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chair and a Vice
Chair from among its members and shall also select a secretary,
who may but need not be a member of the Board or another
municipal employee.
(6) Attorney; staff and services. The office of the Board of Adjustment
Attorney is hereby created. The Board of Adjustment may annually
appoint to such office and fix the compensation or rate of
compensation of an attorney at law of New Jersey, other than the
Municipal Attorney. The Board may also employ or contract for and
fix the compensation of such experts and other staff and services as
it deems necessary. Obligations for the foregoing shall not exceed,
exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the Council
for the Board's use.
(7) Rules and regulations. The Board shall adopt such rules and
regulations as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions
and purposes of this section. In the issuance of subpoenas,
administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the provisions of
the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
(8) Compensation. Members shall receive no compensation for
services. [Added 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
B. Powers.
(1) The powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 et seq., and amendments and
supplements thereto, and with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) It is further the intent of this section to confer upon the Zoning
Board of Adjustment as full and complete powers as may lawfully
be conferred upon such Board, including, not by way of limitation,
the authority in connection with any case, action or proceeding
before the Board to interpret and construe the provisions of this
chapter, or any term, clause, sentence or word hereof, and the
37.Editor’s Note: This ordinance stated it would be effective 1-1-2011 as provided by Chapter
196 of the Laws of 2009.
§ 4-68 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-68
1:86
Zoning Map, in accordance with the general rules of construction,
applicable to legislative enactments.
(3) The Board may in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards grant variances from the terms of this
chapter in accordance with the general or specific rules contained
herein and with the general rule hereby laid down that equity shall
be done in cases where the strict construction of the provisions of
this chapter would work undue hardship. The powers and duties of
the Board having been delegated to and imposed upon it by statute,
the Board shall in all cases follow the provisions applicable to it in
said N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and/or subsequent statutes in such
case made and provided, and it shall from time to time furnish to
any person requesting the same a copy of its rules and information
as to whom appeals or applications may properly be filed with the
Board for its decision thereon.
C. Appeals and applications.
(1) Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested
party affected by any decision of an administrative officer of the
municipality based on or made in the enforcement of Part 4,
Zoning, of Chapter 200, or the Official Map. Such appeal shall be
taken within 20 days by filing a notice of appeal with the officer
from whom the appeal is taken, specifying the grounds of such
appeal. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall
immediately transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(2) Applications addressed to the original jurisdiction of the Board of
Adjustment without prior application to an administrative officer
shall be filed with the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Three or more copies of the application shall be filed. At the time of
filing the appeal or application, but in no event less than 10 days
prior to the date set for hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot
plans, maps or other papers required by virtue of any provision of
this chapter or any rule of the Board of Adjustment. The applicant
shall obtain all necessary forms from the Secretary of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment. The Secretary of the Board shall inform the
applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate proceedings and of the
regular meeting dates of the Board.
(3) An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in
respect of which the decision appealed from was made, unless the
officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of
Adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with that
officer, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in
his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases,
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining
order, which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by the
Superior Court of New Jersey on application or notice to the officer
§ 4-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-68
1:87
from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
[Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-37]
D. Power to reverse or modify decisions. In exercising the abovementioned
power, the Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 et seq. or amendments thereto or
subsequent statutes applying, reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be
made, and to that end have all the powers of the zoning officer from
whom the appeal was taken.
E. Expiration of variance. Any variance from the terms of this chapter
granted by the Board of Adjustment permitting the erection or
alteration of any structure or structures or permitting a specified use of
any premises shall expire unless construction or alteration shall have
actually commenced on each and every structure permitted by said
variance or unless such permitted use has actually been commenced
within one year from the date of publication of the notice of the
judgment or determination of the Board of Adjustment or such greater
time limit as the Board may on a case by case basis grant upon showing
of good cause made by the applicant. Time limits which have been
determined in accordance with the foregoing may thereafter be
extended upon application to the Board of Adjustment (with notice as
required for variance hearings), provided that the application shall be
made prior to the expiration of the time limitations sought to be
extended. Upon a showing of good cause made by the applicant before
the Board of Adjustment, the Board may extend the time limitation by
resolution. The running of the period of time limitation provided shall
be tolled from the date of filing on appeal from the decision of the Board
of Adjustment to the court of competent jurisdiction until the
termination of such appeal or proceeding.38
F. Powers granted by law.
(1) The Board of Adjustment shall have such powers as are granted by
law to:
(a) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant
that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or
refusal made by a zoning official or agency based on or made in
the enforcement of Part 4, Zoning, of Chapter 200.
(b) Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Map or Part
4, Zoning, of Chapter 200 or for decisions upon other special
questions upon which such Board is authorized by said Part 4,
Zoning, to pass.
(c) Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or
shape of a specific piece of property or by reason of exceptional
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 4-68 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-68
1:88
topographic conditions or physical features uniquely affecting
a specific piece of property or by reason of an extraordinary
and exceptional situation uniquely affecting a specific piece of
property or the structures lawfully existing thereon the strict
application of any regulation pursuant to Article 8 of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. would result in peculiar and exceptional
practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardship upon
the developer of such property, grant, upon an application or
an appeal relating to such property, a variance from such strict
application of such regulation so as to relieve such difficulties
or hardship.
(d) Where in an application or appeal relating to a specific piece of
property the purposes of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. would be
advanced by a deviation from the requirements of Part 4,
Zoning, of Chapter 200, and the benefits of the deviation would
substantially outweigh any detriment, grant a variance to allow
departure from regulations pursuant to this chapter; provided,
however, that no variance from those departures enumerated
in Subsection F(1)(e) below shall be granted under this
subsection; and provided, further, that the proposed
development does not require approval by the Planning Board
of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use in conjunction with
which the Planning Board has power to review a request for a
variance pursuant to this chapter.
(e) In particular cases and for special reasons grant a variance to
allow departure from zoning regulations to permit a use or
principal structure in a district restricted against such use or
principal structure, an expansion of a nonconforming use,
deviation from a specification or standard pursuant to
§ 200-147 of Chapter 200, Land Use, pertaining solely to a
conditional use, an increase in the permitted floor area ratio as
defined in § 200-4 or an increase in the permitted density as
defined in § 200-4, except as applied to the required lot area
for a lot or lots for detached one- or two-dwelling unit
buildings, which lot or lots are either an isolated undersized lot
or lots resulting from a minor subdivision. A variance under
this subsection shall be granted only by affirmative vote of at
least five members.
(2) No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and the purpose of the zone plan and Part 4,
Zoning, of Chapter 200. An application under this section may be
referred to any appropriate person or agency, including the
Planning Board for its report, provided that such reference shall
not extend the period of time within which the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall act.
§ 4-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-68
1:89
G. Additional powers. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, in addition to
the powers specified in Subsection B, have power given by law to do the
following:
(1) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved on the
Official Map.
(2) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S,A. 40:55D-36 for a
building or structure not related to a street.
(3) Grant, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as
the Planning Board, subdivision or site plan approval or conditional
use approval pursuant to this chapter whenever the proposed
development requires approval by the Board of Adjustment of a
variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d. The developer may elect
to submit a separate application requesting approval of the
variance and a subsequent application for any required approval of
a subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The separate approval of
the variance shall be conditioned upon granting of all required
subsequent approvals by the Board of Adjustment. No such
subsequent approval shall be granted unless such approval can be
granted without substantial detriment to the public good and
without substantial impairment of the intent and purpose of the
zone plan and Part 4, Zoning, of Chapter 200. The number of votes
of Board Members required to grant any such subsequent approval
shall be otherwise provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. for the
approval in question, and the special vote pursuant to the aforesaid
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d shall not be required.
H. Time frame for decision.
(1) The Board of Adjustment shall render its decision not later than
120 days after the date an appeal is taken from the decision of an
administrative officer or after submission of a complete application
for development.
(2) Whenever an application for development requests relief pursuant
to Subsection C, the Board of Adjustment shall grant or deny
approval of the application within 120 days after submission by a
developer of a complete application to the Zoning Officer or within
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. In the
event that the developer elects to submit separate consecutive
applications, the aforesaid provision shall apply to the application
for approval of the variance. The period for granting or denying any
subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. Failure of the Board of Adjustment to act within
the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the application
and a certificate of the Zoning Officer as to the failure of the Board
of Adjustment to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and
§ 4-68 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-68
1:90
it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other
evidence of approval herein required and shall be accepted by the
county recording officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
§ 4-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-68
1:91

ARTICLE XIV
Municipal Court
§ 4-69. Establishment and authority.39
There shall be a Municipal Court of the Township, pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq., as amended and supplemented, to be
known as the "Municipal Court of the Township of West Windsor, Mercer
County." The Municipal Court shall have a seal which shall bear the impress
of the name of the Court. The Court shall exercise all the functions, powers,
duties and jurisdiction conferred by law upon municipal courts.
§ 4-70. Municipal Judge.40
There shall be a Municipal Judge of the Municipal Court, appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council, who shall serve for a
term of three years from the date of appointment and until a successor shall
be qualified and appointed. The Municipal Judge shall have the functions,
duties, powers and jurisdiction conferred by N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq. or by
general law or ordinance. The Judge shall sit at least once a week until the
calendar is completed and at such other times as the business of the Court
may require, subject to the rules applicable to municipal courts.
§ 4-71. Municipal Court Administrator.
There shall be a Municipal Court Administrator who shall be appointed
by the Business Administrator in consultation with the Mayor and shall
perform the functions and duties prescribed by law. Said duties shall
include, but not be limited to:
A. Carrying out the rules, regulations, policies and procedures relating to
the operation of the Court.
B. Interviewing and speaking to prospective complainants; receiving
complaints and dispensing information relating to Court matters.
C. Maintaining the financial records of the Court.
D. Attending Court, taking minutes of the trials and entering them in the
docket; arranging trial calendars; signing Court documents; preparing
and issuing warrants and commitments.
E. Taking and preparing bail bonds and making inquiry as to their
sufficiency and equity; receiving and accounting for fines and costs.
F. Interviewing persons on informal police court matters to determine if
there is a basis for formal action and, if necessary, issuing summonses
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 4-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-71
1:93
§ 4-72. Additional employees.
There may be additional employees employed in the Municipal Court
appointed by the Municipal Court Administrator, including, but not limited
to, Violations Clerk, who shall be designated pursuant to the New Jersey
Rules of Court and shall have the powers and duties prescribed thereunder.
or warrants requiring court appearances in this regard; maintaining
and classifying records and files.
§ 4-71 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-72
1:94
ARTICLE XV
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 4-73. Division Head vacancies. [Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No.
96-10]
A director may serve as a Division Head without additional compensation.
Whenever a vacancy exists in the office of Head of any Division by reason of
resignation, removal, disability or otherwise, the director of the department
may fill such vacancy temporarily by appointing an Acting Head of such
Division, who shall have and perform all the functions, powers and duties of
such Division Head until the office shall be filled permanently.
§ 4-74. Surety bonds.
§ 4-75. Conflict of interest.
A. Every officer or employee of the Township who by virtue of the office or
position is entrusted with the receipt, custody or expenditure of public
moneys or funds and any other officer or employee who may be so
required by the Council shall before entering upon the duties of the
office or position execute and deliver a surety bond in such amount as
may be fixed by resolution of the Council, binding the officer or
employee to the Township in its corporate name and conditioned upon
the true and faithful performance of the officer's or employee's duty.
Each officer or employee required by law to give bond shall execute
such a bond with sufficient surety and deliver the same to the Township
Clerk before the officer or employee enters upon the discharge of the
duties of the office or employment, except that the Township Clerk shall
deliver the Clerk's bond to the Chief Financial Officer.
B. If any officer or employee shall neglect to execute and deliver the
officer's or employee's bond as herein required within 30 days after due
notification of the officer's or employee's election or appointment, the
office may be declared vacant by the Council.
A. No officer or employee elected or appointed in the Township shall be
interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract with the Township or in
the compensation for work done or for materials or supplies furnished
to the Township or to any contractor or other person furnishing the
same to the Township, nor shall the officer or employee participate in
any profits of such contractor or other persons or receive any
compensation, commission, gift or other reward for services except the
salary or fees established by law or the Mayor or by ordinance or
resolution of the Council.41
41.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, pertaining to the acceptance or solicitation of gifts by
Township officers and employees, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 4-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-75
1:95
§ 4-76. Prohibited conduct.
No officer or employee elected or appointed shall:
§ 4-77. Surrender of funds and records.
Upon the termination of office or employment of any officer, employee or
board member, the appropriate individual shall forthwith deliver to the
successor or, if there be no successor, to the Township Clerk or other person
who may be designated by the Council to receive the same all moneys,
papers, books, memoranda, accounts and data of any nature whatever
pertaining to the appropriate individual's office.
§ 4-78. Payment of funds.
Every municipal officer or employee who receives funds on behalf of the
Township shall pay over said funds to the Chief Financial Officer in a time
B. Any officer or employee who violates any provision of this section or of
any statute or ordinance relating to conflict of interest shall be deemed
guilty of misconduct in office and liable to removal from office therefor.
Any officer or employee who shall knowingly permit any provision of
this section to be violated by any of the officer's or employee's
subordinates shall also be guilty of misconduct in office and liable to
removal therefor.
A. Directly or indirectly use or attempt to use the officer's or employee's
office, position or employment to secure or obtain any unwarranted,
preferential, favored, discriminatory or unlawful rights, benefits,
advantages or privileges for the officer or employee or any others.
B. Vote for the adoption or defeat of any legislation or for the payment or
nonpayment of any indebtedness owing or allegedly owing by this
Township in which the officer or employee has a direct or indirect
personal, pecuniary or other private interest.
C. Recommend or lobby for the adoption or defeat of any legislation or the
institution or defense of any legal or quasi-legal action whatever in
which the officer or employee has or may have a direct or indirect
personal, pecuniary or other private interest.
D. Approve or disapprove or in any way recommend the payment of any
bill, voucher or indebtedness owed or allegedly owed by the Township
in which the officer or employee has a direct or indirect personal,
pecuniary or other private interest.
E. Accept other employment or professional retainers or the promise
thereof that might reasonably conflict with the performance of official
duties or that might reasonably tend to impair the officer's or
employee's independent or impartial judgment or action in the exercise
or performance of the officer's or employee's official duties.
§ 4-75 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-78
1:96
period prescribed by law, together with an itemized report detailing the
items for which said funds had been received.
§ 4-79. Prior ordinances.42
All ordinances heretofore adopted by the Township Council of the Township
of West Windsor or the Board of Health of the Township of West Windsor,
to the extent that the same are consistent with this chapter, are continued
in full force and effect. All references in said ordinances to the Township
Council, Township Board of Health or any board, body, department or office
shall be construed to mean such board, body, department or office to which
the respective functions, powers and duties are allocated and assigned by
this chapter.
§ 4-80. Compensation.
Unless otherwise provided for, rates of compensation established for
persons holding office or employment on the effective date of this chapter
shall be continued with respect to the office or employment to which they
respectively may be transferred.
§ 4-81. Offices abolished.
Any board, office, agency, function or employment not specifically
reconstituted or continued by this chapter shall be deemed abolished.43
§ 4-82. Municipal Seal.
A. The Seal of the Township of West Windsor shall be that Seal adopted by
the Township Council, a depiction of which appears below:
B. Persons authorized to use Seal. The Township Clerk is hereby
authorized to use, exhibit and display the actual Township Seal. The
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
43.Editor's Note: Former § 4-82, Temporary provisions, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 4-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-82
1:97
§ 4-83. Indemnification and defense of public employees.
Mayor and members of the Township Council and any department
director are hereby authorized to use, exhibit and display a replica
of the Township Seal for such purposes associated with Township
business.
C. Unauthorized use; penalty. Any person who is not authorized by law to
use, exhibit or display the Seal of the Township of West Windsor and
who uses, exhibits or displays the Seal of the Township of West Windsor
without the Township's consent shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
penalty pursuant to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Penalty.
[Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10]
A. Intent and purpose. It is the intent and purpose of this section to
provide for the defense of actions against and the indemnification of
public employees as permitted by N.J.S.A. 59:10-1 et seq.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following words shall have the
meanings indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any officer, employee or servant, whether or not
compensated or part-time, individual members of appointed boards and
committees and elected officials who are authorized to perform any
act or service; provided, however, that the term does not include an
independent contractor.
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE — Any employee or former employee of the
Township.
C. Defense of action. The Township shall provide for the defense of any
action brought against a public employee on account of any act or
omission in the scope of such employee's employment, and this
obligation shall extend to any cross-actions, counterclaims or crosscomplaints
against such employee.
D. Exception. The provisions of Subsection C above shall not be applicable
when the Township determines that:
(1) The act or omission was not within the scope of employment.
(2) The act or failure to act was because of actual fraud, willful
misconduct or actual malice.
(3) The defense of the action or proceeding would create a conflict of
interest between the Township and the public employee.
(4) The defense of the action or proceeding is provided for by an
insurance policy or policies, whether obtained by the Township or
by any other person.
(5) The public employee failed to deliver to the Business Administrator
within 10 calendar days after the time the employee is served with
§ 4-82 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 4-83
1:98
any summons, complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading the
original or a copy of the same.
(6) The public employee has failed to cooperate fully with the defense.
E. Methods of providing defense. The Township may provide any defense
required of it under this section through the Township Attorney or by
employing special counsel pursuant to the code.
F. Township control over litigation. Whenever the Township provides any
defense required of it under this section, the Township, through the
Township Attorney or other special counsel, may assume exclusive
control over the representation of the public employee and such
employee shall cooperate fully with the defense.
G. Indemnification.
(1) In any case where the Township is required to provide a defense
under this section, the Township shall pay or shall reimburse the
public employee for:
(a) Any bona fide settlement agreements entered into by the
employee.
(b) Any judgment entered against the employee.
(c) If the Township has failed to provide such required defense, all
costs of defending the action, including reasonable counsel
fees and expenses, together with costs of any appeal.
(2) In addition, in any case where the Township would be required to
provide a defense under this section except for the fact that such
defense is provided for by insurance, the Township shall provide
indemnification as aforesaid, but only to the extent not covered by
insurance.
§ 4-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-83
1:99
Chapter 9
EMERGENCIES, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Office of Emergency Management — See Ch.
4, § 4-36.
Emergency Management Council — See Ch. 4,
§ 4-60.
§ 9-1. Proclamation and determination of emergency.44
Whenever in the judgment of the Mayor, or, in the event of the Mayor's
inability to act, the Acting Mayor, it is determined that an emergency exists
or is imminent as the result of mob action, riot, disorderly assemblage
or other widespread or perilous disturbances which may cause death or
injury to persons or destruction of property or natural disaster or manmade
calamity such as flood, conflagration, earthquake, explosion or the
uncontained presence of corrosive, radioactive or poisonous substances or
gases, the Mayor or the Acting Mayor, as the case may be, shall have the
power and authority to impose by proclamation any or all of the following
regulations necessary to protect and preserve the health, safety and welfare
of the citizens and inhabitants of the Township of West Windsor.
§ 9-2. Regulations.45
The Mayor or the Acting Mayor, as the case may be, shall, in the event of an
emergency, have the power and authority to:
A. Impose a curfew upon all or any portion of the township by requiring all
persons in such designated curfew areas to forthwith remove
themselves from the public streets, alleys, parks or other public places
or lands abutting the same; provided, however, that physicians, nurses
and ambulance operators performing medical services, utility
personnel maintaining essential public service, fire fighters and
township authorized or requested law enforcement officers and
personnel shall be exempted from such curfew.
B. Order the closing of any business establishment anywhere within the
township for a period of the emergency or impose such other limitations
on business activities or sales as may be necessary.
C. Designate any public streets, thoroughfares or vehicle parking areas
closed to motor vehicles and pedestrian traffic.
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 4-83 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 9-2
1:100
§ 9-3. Authority.
This chapter is duly promulgated under the authority granted by N.J.S.A.
40:48-1 and 40:48-2.
§ 9-4. Issuance and termination of proclamation.
Any proclamation of emergency provided herein shall become effective
upon its issuance and dissemination to the public. Any emergency and the
rules and regulations proclaimed thereunder shall remain in full force and
effect until amended or terminated by proclamation.
§ 9-5. Additional powers.46
Any powers granted by this chapter shall be in addition to and supplemental
with any existing authority invested in the Mayor of the Township of West
Windsor and in the West Windsor Township Police Division.
Chapter 12
FIRE COMPANIES AND FIRST AID SQUAD, VOLUNTEER
D. Call upon regular and auxiliary law enforcement agencies and
organizations within or without the township to assist in preserving and
keeping the peace within the township.
E. Impose such other rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary
to implement and carry out emergency control operations and to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens and residents of
the township.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 9-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-5
1:101

ARTICLE I
Length of Service Awards Program
[Adopted 8-7-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-18]
§ 12-1. Program created.
A Length of Service Awards Program is herewith created in accordance with
Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997, to reward members of the West Windsor
Volunteer Fire Company No. 1, Inc., the Princeton Junction Volunteer Fire
Company No. 1, Inc., and Twin "W" First Aid Squad, Inc., for their loyal,
diligent and devoted services to the residents of West Windsor Township,
effective January 1, 2001.
§ 12-2. Contributions; administration.
The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferred income
account for each volunteer member that meets the criteria set forth below;
that such contributions shall be made in accordance with a plan that shall
be established by the Township Council pursuant to P.L. 1997, c. 388; and
that such plan shall be administered in accordance with the laws of the
State of New Jersey, the United States Internal Revenue Code and this
article.
§ 12-3. Eligibility. [Amended 3-17-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-0747]
The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions as credit to each eligible
member that meets the criteria as follows:
§ 12-4. (Reserved)48
§ 12-5. (Reserved)49
§ 12-6. Program points.
A. Number of points required per year for firefighters to qualify: 125.
B. Number of points required per year for first-aid organization members
to qualify: 100.
C. For regular annual service: $1,150.
D. Maximum total to be contributed in one given year: $1,150.
A. Each volunteer member shall be credited with points for volunteer
services provided to the West Windsor Fire Company No. 1, Inc., or
Princeton Junction Volunteer Fire Company No. 1, Inc., as provided
below:
47.Editor's Note: This ordinance was approved by the voters at the election held 5-13-2003.
48.Editor's Note: Former § 12-4, Prior service, was repealed 3-17-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-07.
49.Editor's Note: Former § 12-5, Program costs, was repealed 3-17-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-07.
§ 12-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-6
1:103
LOSAP Point System
125 points per year required
Point Requirements
Point
Entitlement
Maximum Point
Entitlement
Participation in emergency
responses
1 115
Training drills 1 12
Attendance at meetings 1 12
Special events assignment 1 12
Total Points 151
Point
Entitlement
Maximum Point
Entitlement
Other Points Entitlement
Elected or appointed positions
(only one entitlement of 25 points
can be attained)
25 25
Chairmen appointed to
committees (only one entitlement
of 10 points can be attained)
10 10
B. Each volunteer member shall be credited with points for volunteer
services provided to the Twin "W" First Aid Squad, Inc., as provided
below:
LOSAP Points System
100 points per year required
Point Requirements Maximum Point Entitlement
Chief 25
President 25
All other line or elected officers 20
Trustee 5
Duty, night 2
Call responses 1 point per call
Courses 1 point per CEU
Teaching (volunteer) (20 points
per, maximum)
1 point per hour
Meetings 2 points per meeting
Drills 2 points per drill
§ 12-6 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 12-6
1:104
§ 12-7. Vesting members.
A member shall vest in 100% of his or her accumulated contributions and
earnings after five years of eligible service.
§ 12-8. When effective.
This article shall not take effect unless it is approved by voters as a public
question at the next election.50
LOSAP Points System
100 points per year required
Point Requirements Maximum Point Entitlement
Special assignments (standby,
clean-up squad room, landscaping,
vehicles, community education)
5 points per assignment (30 points
maximum)
50.Editor's Note: This article was approved by voters at the election held 11-7-2000.
§ 12-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-8
1:105
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 34
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 82. Fire prevention — See Ch. 89.
§ 34-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the installation,
operation and maintenance of private alarm systems installed in any
residential or commercial building within the Township in order to ensure
that the quality of alarm services rendered to the public will be maintained
at a high level and to alleviate conditions otherwise leading to an
unnecessary drain on the manpower of the Police Division, Fire Division and
other emergency services of the Township of West Windsor
§ 34-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM BUSINESS — Any business operated by a person, partnership,
corporation or other business entity, for profit, which engages in the activity
of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, selling,
servicing or responding to a fire or burglar alarm system or which causes
any of these activities to take place. This definition does not include those
retail establishments which only sell alarm devices or alarm systems over
the counter.
ALARM DEVICE — Any type of alarm-activating equipment which provides
warning of burglary, intrusion, fire, flood or other potential for harm to life
or property.
ALARM SYSTEM — The installation in a building or structure of one or
more alarm devices for the express purpose of giving visual, audible and/or
electronic warning of an emergency such as burglary, intrusion, fire, flood
or other potential for harm to life or property.
ALARM USER — Any person, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind in control of any building, structure or
facility wherein an alarm device or alarm system is operated.
FALSE ALARM — An alarm signal eliciting a response by police, fire
fighters, other emergency personnel or other public officials when a
situation requiring a response by police, fire fighters, other emergency
personnel or other public officials does not in fact exist. A false alarm shall
not include an alarm signal caused by violent conditions of nature, such as,
§ 12-8 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 34-2
1:106
but not limited to, lightning, tornadoes, hurricanes or other extraordinary
circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm business or
alarm user.
INDEPENDENT SMOKE/FIRE DETECTOR — A device giving an audible
alarm indicating smoke and/or fire within a structure and not connected to
an alarm system or to any external warning device.
§ 34-3. Registration of alarm device or alarm system; fees.
A. No person or business entity shall install, operate or maintain any alarm
device or alarm system unless the alarm device or alarm system is
annually registered with the West Windsor Township Police Division. An
alarm device or alarm system shall be deemed registered at such time
as a registration form supplied by the Police Division is completed as to
all information requested therein and is returned to the Police Division
along with the annual registration fee paid in full. This registration shall
take place on the later of March 31 or within 30 days of installation of a
new system. Among the information to be provided on the registration
form is the following:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
property upon which the alarm device or alarm system is installed.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the manager of the
property upon which the alarm device or alarm system is installed.
(3) A list of the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the
person(s) to be contacted in the event of an alarm or in an
emergency situation as determined by the Police Division, Fire
Division or Fire Marshal.
(4) The name, address and telephone number of the installer of the
alarm device or alarm system.
(5) The type of alarm device or alarm system.
(6) The name, address and telephone number of the person(s) or
company maintaining the alarm device or alarm system.
B. Subsequent to annual registration period, if there is any material
change in the information previously provided during the annual
registration with respect to any alarm device or alarm system, it shall
be the duty of the property owner or manager to file an amended
registration form containing accurate current information within 10
days of the change.
C. The change in ownership of a property with an alarm system shall be
deemed a material change and shall require the filing of a new
registration form submitted to the Police Division along with the annual
fee.
§ 34-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-3
1:107
§ 34-4. Installation, activation and operation of alarm device or
alarm system.
D. An annual fee in the amount of $25 shall accompany each annual
registration form.
E. Any alarm device or alarm system installed prior to March 31 that is not
registered with the Police Division by March 31 may be subject to a late
fee of $10 per month.
A. Each alarm device or alarm system shall be installed utilizing discrete
circuitry for multipurpose alarm devices or alarm systems to ensure
appropriate emergency response.
B. Any alarm device or alarm system which requires for its operation
electricity supplied by a public utility may be equipped with a battery
rendering it operable in the event of a power outage, if so desired by the
property owner. Such a battery backup system shall only be required
for any alarm device or alarm system which will trigger itself
automatically in the event of a power fluctuation, surge or outage.
C. All burglar alarm devices or alarm systems must be provided with a
device which will automatically shut off the alarm after 15 minutes of
activation.
D. All burglar alarm devices or alarm systems not fitted with an external
key switch shall be equipped with a time delay of at least 15 seconds,
which may include an audible signal of the same length of time, said
time delay to be designed to prevent accidental activation of the
system. The fifteen-second signal, if utilized, shall be audible only
within the structure and not externally.
E. No person shall install, cause to be installed or permit to be installed
any alarm device or alarm system, by whatever name known, which
automatically selects a telephone line dedicated to the Police Division
or Fire Division for the purpose of playing a recorded message to report
any emergency.
F. In the event that an alarm device or alarm system other than a fire or
burglar alarm system is tied into and/or serviced by a central station or
answering service, upon activation of said alarm device or alarm
system, the central station or answering service shall verify the validity
of the alarm prior to notifying the Police Division of the same.
G. The resetting of any transmitted fire alarm shall be done in the
presence of the Fire Division. In no case shall an alarm be reset prior to
the Fire Division's authorization. In the case of burglary alarms, the
police shall not be responsible for resetting the alarm device or alarm
system.
§ 34-3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 34-4
1:108
§ 34-5. Confidentiality.
All information submitted in compliance with this chapter shall be held in
the strictest confidence and shall be deemed a record exempt from public
disclosure pursuant to state law. Any violation of confidentiality shall be
deemed a violation of this section.
§ 34-6. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any alarm device or alarm
system installed on property occupied by any Township, county or state
or federal government agency or office or to an independent smoke/fire
detector as defined in § 34-2 nor to any medical alert system.
§ 34-7. Violations and penalties.
H. No alarm business or person owning, using or possessing an alarm
device or alarm system shall cause or permit the giving of repeated
false alarms, whether intentional, accidental or otherwise.
A. Any person who fails to register an alarm device or alarm system as
required by the provisions of this section may be subject to fine(s) as
outlined in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3 of the
Code of the Township of West Windsor.
B. Non-fire alarm systems. Any owner or user of an alarm system (other
than a fire alarm system) which experiences more than three false
alarms within any twelve-month period shall be required to modify or
improve said system in such a way as to prevent accidental activation.
The owner or user of said system may be subject to a minimum fine of
$100 for each false alarm after three in any twelve-month period. Any
owner or user of an alarm system (other than a fire alarm system) which
experiences more than 12 false alarms in any calendar period may be
required to disconnect said alarm system for a period of 90 days unless
said system is required by law and provide a statement from those that
service the alarm system that the malfunction has been corrected and,
in addition, pay a fine of $1,000.
C. Fire alarm systems. Any owner or user of an alarm device or alarm
system which experiences more than three false alarms within any
twelve-month period shall be required by the Fire Marshal to modify or
improve said system in such a way as to prevent accidental activation
and may be subject to penalty by the Fire Marshal in accordance with
the Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.1 et seq. or other applicable law.
Prior to modifying any required system, the owner shall submit a
construction permit application accompanied by two sets of drawings
showing the design and nature of the proposed modifications.
D. Any owner or user of an alarm device or alarm system who installs such
an alarm device or alarm system not in compliance with this chapter
may be subject to a minimum fine of $50 or as outlined in Chapter 1,
§ 34-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-7
1:109
Chapter 36
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 82. Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 122.
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3 of the Code of the Township
of West Windsor. Additionally, said owner or user may be required
to remove such an alarm system, unless it is a required system as
determined by the Construction Official.
E. Any owner or user of an alarm device or alarm system other than a fire
alarm system shall be notified by the Township Police Division, in
writing, once three false alarms have occurred with the system within
the twelve-month period noted in Subsection B above.
F. In the event that a fire alarm device or alarm system is reset without
prior authorization from the Fire Division in violation of § 34-4G above,
the owner or user of said system shall be subject to a minimum fine of
$250 for each resetting occurrence.
§ 34-7 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 34-7
1:110
ARTICLE I
Licensing
[Adopted 12-27-1979 by Ord. No. 79-39 as Ch. VI of the Revised
General Ordinances]
§ 36-1. Purpose. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
This article is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Township of West Windsor in accordance with the
provisions of an act of the Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled
"An Act of the Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled the 'Alcoholic
Beverage Law'" comprising N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., its supplements and
amendments, and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State
Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 36-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meaning as in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq. and the rules and regulations of
the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 36-3. Licenses; fees. [Amended 3-28-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-03;
10-26-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-20]
A. Laws applicable. All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all
proceedings under this article shall be in accordance with the act, rules
and regulations referred to in § 36-1 and all other applicable laws of the
State of New Jersey or the United States.
B. Issuing authority. All licenses required by this article shall be issued by
the Township Council, which shall also administer the provisions of this
article.
C. License required. No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages
within the Township without obtaining a license in accordance with the
act referred to in § 36-1 and the provisions of this article.
D. License fees.
(1) The annual fees of licenses for the sale or distribution of alcoholic
beverages in the Township shall be as established in Chapter 82,
Fees.
(2) The license fees shall cover the period from July 1 of each year to
June 30 of the year following.
E. Club licenses. No club license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall
be granted in the Township.
(1) Nothing in this subsection prohibiting the issuance of a club license
for the sale of alcoholic beverages in the Township shall prevent the
issuance in the Township of a club license for the sale of alcoholic
§ 36-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-3
1:111
beverages to a bona fide golf and country club in the Township,
incorporated not for pecuniary gain, provided that the golf and
country club shall have constructed and erected prior to the
issuance of the club licenses a regulation golf course consisting of
a minimum of nine holes and a clubhouse with a minimum of 3,000
square feet of usable floor area.
(2) Nothing in this subsection prohibiting the issuance of a club license
for the sale of alcoholic beverages in the Township shall prevent the
issuance in the Township of a club license for the sale of alcoholic
beverages to a bona fide national war veterans organization or
post, whether incorporated or unincorporated, which is in
possession of suitable premises.51
(3) The annual fee for a club license shall be as established in Chapter
82, Fees.
F. Licenses for hotels.
(1) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 33:1-12.20, the Township may issue a
plenary retail consumption license to a person or entity operating a
hotel or motel containing 100 guest sleeping rooms or who may
hereafter constitute and establish a new hotel or motel containing
100 guest sleeping rooms which has not received a license prior to
the effective date of Ordinance No. 2005-03, on April 17, 2005.
(2) A minimum bid not to exceed $25,000 plus $50 per sleeping room
may be required for the issuance of a license pursuant to the
provisions of this section if the dining facilities of the hotel or motel
are regularly and principally used to provide only meals for catered
events and breakfast for guests of the hotel or motel. This
subsection shall not be construed to prohibit a minimum bid for any
license issued under the provisions of this section to a hotel or
motel that does not meet the criteria set forth in this Subsection
F(2).
(3) The plenary retail consumption licenses for a new qualified hotel or
motel shall be publicly bid on notice based on such terms as the
Township Council may establish by resolution in accordance with
the terms of this ordinance and the procedures, including notice,
set forth in N.J.S.A. 33:1-19.1 et seq.
(4) A "guest sleeping room" shall be defined as a partitioned part of the
inside of a hotel/motel building, which contains a bed or beds, and
is maintained primarily for sleeping purposes and which is let out
by its owner, or any agent of its owner, at any time for
compensation, whether on a daily, periodic, weekly or seasonal
basis and whether to relatives, friends, guests or other third
parties, as defined in N.J.S.A. 33:1-12.20.
51.Editor's Note: Former Subsection E(3), pertaining to the issuance fee for a club license,
which immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07.
§ 36-3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 36-3
1:112
§ 36-4. (Reserved)52
§ 36-5. Regulations.
(5) The requirements of § 36-4, requiring a distance of 2,000 feet
between any premises which are issued a plenary retail
consumption or distribution license, shall not apply to hotel/motel
liquor consumption licenses issued pursuant to this section. This
exclusion is made in recognition of the fact that the primary
consumers will be residents or guests of the hotel/motel.
(6) All hotel or motel retail consumption licenses which have been
issued at any time shall be confined to that hotel or motel property
and shall not be subject to a transfer to another premises.
A. Hours of sale. [Amended 6-13-1983 by Ord. No. 83-16]
(1) On-premises consumption. No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or
permit consumption of alcoholic beverages on licensed premises
during the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., except on Sundays and
New Year's Day, as hereinafter provided. On Sundays, no alcoholic
beverages shall be sold, served or delivered for consumption
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. On New Year's Day,
no alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served or delivered for
consumption between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless
New Year's Day is a Sunday, in which case no alcoholic beverages
shall be sold, served or delivered for consumption between the
hours of 3:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon.
(2) Off-premises consumption. No licensee shall sell or deliver
alcoholic beverages for consumption off the licensed premises
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on any day of the
week, except as hereinafter provided. On New Year's Day, no
alcoholic beverages shall be sold or delivered for consumption off
the premises between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon. The
sale or delivery of wine and malt alcoholic beverages in original
bottles or can containers for consumption off the premises is
permitted during the same hours that the sale of alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises is permitted by
Subsection (1) above.
B. Sales to certain persons. No licensee or employee of a licensee shall
sell, serve or deliver, directly or indirectly, any alcoholic beverages to
any habitual drunkard, intoxicated person or person under 21 years of
age, nor permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on any licensed
premises by any of the above-named classes or persons or permit any
such persons to congregate in or about the licensed premises.
[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
52.Editor's Note: Former § 36-4, Distance required between licensed premises, as amended,
was repealed 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-02.
§ 36-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-5
1:113
§ 36-6. Underage persons. [Amended 6-8-1981 by Ord. No. 81-19;
4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
C. Soliciting restricted. No licensee shall directly or indirectly solicit from
house to house, personally or by telephone, the purchase of alcoholic
beverages, nor allow, permit or suffer such solicitation.
D. Admittance restrictions. No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer in or
upon the licensed premises any known criminals, gangsters,
racketeers, pickpockets, swindlers, confidence men, prostitutes or
other persons of ill repute. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
E. Disturbances and noise restrictions. No licensee shall allow, permit or
suffer in or upon the licensed premises any disturbances, lewdness,
immoral activities, brawls or unnecessary noises or allow, permit or
suffer the licensed place of business to be conducted in such manner as
to become a nuisance.
F. Illegal lotteries. No licensee shall allow, suffer or permit any illegal
lottery to be conducted or any ticket or participation right in any lottery
to be sold or offered for sale on or about the licensed premises.
G. Gambling. No licensee shall engage in or allow, permit or suffer any
pool selling, bookmaking or any playing for money at faro, roulette,
rouge et noir or any unlawful game or gambling of any kind or any
device or apparatus designed for any such purpose on or about the
licensed premises.
H. Gambling devices. No licensee shall possess, allow, permit or suffer on
or about the licensed premises any slot machine or device in the nature
of a slot machine which may be used for the purpose of playing for
money or other valuable thing.
I. Lighting and sanitation requirements. Licensed premises shall at all
times be kept in a safe, clean and sanitary condition. All rooms,
passageways, entrances, exits and stairways must be well lighted.
J. Peace and good order. The public peace, decency and good order shall
be maintained at all times in and about the licensed premises.
K. Stamps or crowns required on containers. No licensee shall possess,
sell, offer for sale, distribute or otherwise dispose of any alcoholic
beverages upon the containers of which stamps or crowns, as required
by the Alcoholic Beverage Tax Law, N.J.S.A. 54:41-1 et seq., as amended
and supplemented, shall not be affixed or attached.
L. Compliance with Alcoholic Beverage Control Act required. No person
shall manufacture, bottle, rectify, blend, treat, fortify, mix, process or
warehouse any alcoholic beverage in violation of the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Law.
§ 36-5 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 36-6
1:114
§ 36-7. Revocation of license.
§ 36-8. Display of fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) warning signs.
[Added 12-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-58; amended 4-19-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-07]
All licensees who sell alcoholic beverages pursuant to this article shall
prominently post on their premises a warning sign describing the dangers
to the unborn children of women who consume alcoholic beverages while
pregnant. The nature and type of warning sign shall be determined by the
Health Officer, which shall prepare and distribute the warning signs. Any
licensee violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a penalty
as provided for in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3.
A. Sales to underage persons. No licensee shall sell or serve any alcoholic
beverages to any person under 21 years of age.
B. Underage persons to be accompanied by responsible adults. Persons
under the age of 21 years shall not be allowed to frequent, loiter or
remain in any room or rooms used or devoted to the sale, service or
consumption of alcoholic beverages upon a licensed premises, unless
accompanied by a parent, guardian or adult husband or wife.
A. Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this article or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State
Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
B. Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31 by service of a five-day notice of
charges preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable
opportunity for a hearing.
C. Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this article.
§ 36-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-8
1:115

ARTICLE II
Public Consumption
[Adopted 6-1-1987 by Ord. No. 87-14 (Sec. 3-13 of the Revised
General Ordinances)]
§ 36-9. Alcoholic beverage consumption in public prohibited.
No person shall serve, sell, dispense, drink or consume any alcoholic
beverage in or upon any public or quasi-public place including, but not
limited to, any public street, highway, avenue, alley or road of the township
or upon any public grounds, park, sidewalk, mall, playground, public
conveyance, parking facility or in any public building.
§ 36-10. Alcoholic beverage possession prohibited.
No person shall possess any alcoholic beverage with intent to violate § 36-9.
§ 36-11. Meeting for the illegal sale, use or possession of alcoholic
beverages or controlled substances. [Amended 6-26-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-27]
No person shall meet, assemble or congregate with any other person or
persons with the purpose or intent of engaging in the illegal sale, illegal
use or illegal possession of alcoholic beverages or controlled dangerous
substances.
§ 36-12. Exceptions. [Amended 2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 93-03]
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the possession or
consumption of alcoholic beverages within or upon premises duly licensed
for the consumption of alcoholic beverages, the possession of beer in
pitchers or other unsealed containers as may be lawfully sold by licensed
premises while in transit to a lawful place for consumption, nor to prohibit
the possession, distribution or consumption of alcoholic beverages in any
public building in connection with any organized function or social affair
for which express prior permission has been received, in writing, from the
Chief of Police, upon prior notice and subject to any terms and restrictions
relating to the public safety and the general welfare of the township, which
may have been imposed upon such permission by the Director.
§ 36-13. Violations and penalties.
Persons found to be in violation of the provisions of this article shall be
subject to the general penalty as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article II, Penalty, § 1-3.
§ 36-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-13
1:117

ARTICLE III
Public Consumption or Possession by Minors
[Adopted 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-1753]
§ 36-14. Alcoholic beverage consumption by minors.
It is hereby unlawful for any person under the legal age ("underage person")
who, without legal authority, knowingly possesses or knowingly consumes
an alcoholic beverage on private property. No person shall be considered
to knowingly possess an alcoholic beverage merely because he or she is
present where alcoholic beverages are being consumed.
§ 36-15. Exemptions to prohibition on alcohol possession and
consumption by minors.
A person under the legal age shall not be prohibited from:
§ 36-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as a guardian of the underage
person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — The underage person's grandparent, aunt or uncle or any
other person related by blood or affinity.
§ 36-17. Penalties for possession or consumption of alcohol by
minors.
A violation by an underage person of this article shall be punished by a fine
of $250 for a first offense and $350 for any subsequent offense.
§ 36-18. Driving privilege suspension of minors for violation of
article.
A. Possessing or consuming an alcoholic beverage in connection with a
religious observance, ceremony or rite, or possession or consuming an
alcoholic beverage in the presence of or with the written permission of
such person's parent, guardian or relative who has attained the legal
age to purchase or consume alcoholic beverages; or
B. The possession of an alcoholic beverage in the preparation of food while
enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel management program at a county
vocational school or post secondary educational institution.
A. The court may, in addition to the penalty authorized for this offense,
suspend or postpone for six months the driving privileges of the
53.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. III, Public Consumption or
Possession by Minors, adopted 11-10-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-26, as continued by Ord. No.
2004-40, adopted 1-4-2005.
§ 36-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-18
1:119
defendant underage person. Upon the conviction of any underage
person and the suspension or postponement of that person's driver's
license, the court shall forward a report to the Division of Motor
Vehicles (Division) stating the first and last day of the suspension or
postponement period imposed by the court pursuant to this article. If a
person at the time of the imposition of a sentence is less than 17 years
of age, the period of license postponement, including a suspension or
postponement of the privilege of operating a motorized bicycle, shall
commence on the day the sentence is imposed and shall run for a period
of six months after the person reached the age of 17 years.
B. If an underage person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a
valid driver's license issued by this state, the court may immediately
collect the license and forward it to the Division along with the report. If
for any reason the license cannot be collected, the court shall include in
the report the complete name, address, date of birth, eye color and sex
of the person, as well as the first and last date of the license suspension
period imposed by the court.
C. The court shall inform the underage person orally and in writing that if
the person is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period
of license suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive
a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt of a
written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a
violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
D. If the underage person convicted under this article is not a New Jersey
resident, the court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the
nonresident driving privilege of the person based on the age of the
person and submit to the Division the required report. The court shall
not collect the license of a nonresident convicted under this section.
Upon receipt of a report by the court, the Division shall notify the
appropriate officials in the licensing jurisdiction of the suspension or
postponement.
§ 36-18 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 36-18
1:120
Chapter 40
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 82.
Animals in parks and recreation areas — See
§ 122-12.
Farm livestock — See § 200-146.
Domestic horse on property — See
§ 200-226B(4).
§ 36-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-18
1:121

ARTICLE I
Dogs
[Adopted 12-27-1979 by Ord. No. 79-39 as Ch. V of the Revised
General Ordinances]
§ 40-1. Provisions supplementary to state statutes.
This article is supplemental to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 through 4:19-15.29.
§ 40-2. Terminology.
§ 40-3. Licensing of dogs; fees.
A. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of
seven months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except
a pet shop.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, every person
having a right of property in such dog and every person who has such
dog in his/her keeping.
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen not
part of a kennel wherein dogs for sale are kept or displayed.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of dogs seized either
under the provisions of this article or otherwise.
SHELTER — Any establishment where dogs are received, housed and
distributed without charge.
B. Word usage.
(1) "And" and "or" may be used interchangeably and either of the two
may be applicable, whichever may be more conducive toward the
giving of full effect to this article.
(2) Personal pronouns shall mean either the singular or the plural,
whichever may be applicable and more conducive toward the
giving of full effect to this article.
(3) The masculine, feminine or the neuter gender shall be implied,
whichever may be most appropriate and conducive toward the
giving of full effect to this article.
A. License and registration tag required. Any person who shall own, keep
or harbor a dog of licensing age shall annually in the month of January
apply for and procure from the Health Officer a license and official
§ 40-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-3
1:123
§ 40-4. Kennels, pet shops, shelters or pounds; fees.
metal registration tag for each such dog owned, kept or harbored and
shall place upon each such dog a collar or harness with the registration
tag securely fastened thereto. [Amended 8-8-1983 by Ord. No.
83-27]
B. Dog licenses; fees; renewals. The persons applying for the license and
registration tag shall pay the applicable fee established in Chapter 82,
Fees, for the license and registration tag of each dog and for each
annual renewal. The license, registration tags and renewals shall expire
on the last day of January of each year. [Amended 7-14-1980 by Ord.
No. 80-15; 8-8-1983 by Ord. No. 83-27]
C. License forms and tags. License forms and uniform official metal
registration tags designed by the State Department of Health shall be
issued and shall be numbered serially and shall bear the year of
issuance and the name of the Township of West Windsor.
D. Newly acquired dogs; dogs attaining licensing age. The owner of any
newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog which attains the
licensing age shall make application for license and registration tag for
such dog within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment. The
application shall contain the information as required by N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.5. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
E. Seeing Eye dogs; exemption from fee. Dogs used as guides for blind
persons and commonly known as "Seeing Eye" dogs, dogs used to assist
handicapped persons and commonly known as "service dogs" or dogs
used to assist deaf persons and commonly known as "hearing ear" dogs
shall be licensed and registered as other dogs hereinabove provided for,
except that the owner or keeper of such dog shall not be required to pay
any fee therefor. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
F. Registration numbers. Registration numbers shall be issued in the
order of the application.
G. Surcharge for dogs not spayed or neutered. A surcharge fee as provided
in Chapter 82, Fees, shall be collected for each license issued unless the
person applying for such license presents a certificate of a veterinarian
or a certificate of verification that the dog has had its reproductive
capacity permanently altered or that the dog is not of reproductive age.
[Added 8-8-1983 by Ord. No. 83-27; amended 4-19-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-07]
A. Licenses required; application data. Any person who keeps or operates
or proposes to establish a kennel, pet shop, shelter or a pound shall
apply to the Division of Health for a license entitling him/her to keep or
operate such establishment. Such application shall describe the
premises where the establishment is located or is proposed to be
located, the purpose for which it is to be maintained and shall be
§ 40-3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 40-4
1:124
§ 40-5. Regulation and control of dogs.
accompanied by the written approval of the Township Health Officer,
showing compliance with the local and state rules and regulations
governing the location of and sanitation at such establishment.
[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
B. Expiration of license; revocation; hearing. All licenses issued for a
kennel, pet shop or shelter shall state the purpose for which the
establishment is maintained, and all such licenses shall expire annually
on the last day of June and be subject to revocation by the township on
recommendation of the State Department of Health or Township
Division of Health for failure to comply with the rules and regulations of
the State Department or the Township Division of Health, after the
owner has been afforded a hearing by either the State Department or
local Division of Health. [Amended 10-17-1988 by Ord. No. 88-36;
4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
C. License fees for kennels and pet shops. See Chapter 82, Fees.
A. Nuisance acts by dogs. [Amended 10-17-1988 by Ord. No. 88-36]
(1) No person who owns, keeps or harbors any dog shall suffer or
permit such dog to bark, howl or cry habitually in such manner as
to constitute a nuisance or to bite or molest any person or to chase
any vehicle upon a public street or to injure or damage any lawn or
shrubbery or flowers or grounds or any property of any person
other than its owner or to behave in any way so as to endanger any
person or property.
(2) No person owning or in charge of any dog shall allow such dog to
defecate upon any public or private property except with the
express authority or permission of the owner of said property. The
restriction in this subsection shall not apply to the portion of the
street lying between the curblines which may be used to curb such
dogs, provided that the person who so curbs such dog shall
immediately remove all feces deposited by such dog by placing the
feces in a closed bag or other container and depositing the same in
a trash receptacle located on his/her own or on public property, and
only in such receptacles. Either the police, the Animal Control
Officer or an individual may file a complaint stating that the actions
of an animal constitute a public nuisance.
B. Restraining or control of dogs required. [Amended 10-17-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-36; 4-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-05]
(1) No person who owns, keeps or harbors any dog shall suffer or
permit such dog to be in or upon any public school property or in or
upon any public park or recreation area with the exception of
properly designated "dog parks" as provided by § 122-12 of the
Township Code. All dogs are to be kept and controlled in
§ 40-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-5
1:125
§ 40-6. Seizure and impoundment; notice to owner; redemption or
disposal.
accordance with regulations promulgated by the public authority
having jurisdiction thereof or in or upon any public property and
shall not enter upon private property without the consent of the
owner of such property and unless accompanied by and under the
control of a responsible person.
(2) No dog shall be permitted off the premises of the person owning,
keeping or harboring it unless such dog is accompanied by a person
who is capable of controlling it and who has securely confined and
controlled the dog by an adequate leash or chain not more than six
feet long.
C. Regulation of female dogs in season. No person who owns, keeps or
harbors any dog shall suffer or permit such dog, if a female in season, to
be off the premises of its owner.
D. Vicious dogs. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
(1) No person who owns, keeps or harbors any dog which shall have
once bitten any person, except on its owner's property, shall, after
being given written notice by the Chief of Police or person
appointed by the appropriate municipal department head, suffer or
permit such dog to be in any place other than its owner's property
without being securely muzzled or confined on a leash and
accompanied by and under the control of a responsible person.
(2) No person shall keep or harbor any dog which shall have bitten any
person or persons three or more times, wherever occurring, after
being given written notice by the Chief of Police or person
appointed by the appropriate municipal department head.
A. The Chief of Police or person appointed by the appropriate municipal
department head is empowered and authorized to take into custody any
dog which commits any of the acts set forth in § 40-5 inclusive upon
receiving complaint, in writing, or which is observed by him or her to
be: [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
(1) Without a current registration tag on its collar or harness as
required by law.
(2) In or upon any public school property or any public park or
recreation area in violation of any regulation promulgated by the
public authority having jurisdiction thereof, or any other public
property, and is not accompanied by and under the control of a
responsible person.
(3) A female in season off the premises of its owner.
§ 40-5 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 40-6
1:126
§ 40-7. Right of entry.
Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to seize a dog hereunder is
hereby authorized and empowered to go upon any premises to take into
custody any dog which said officer or agent may lawfully seize when he or
she is in immediate pursuit of such, except upon the premises of the owner
of the dog if the owner is present and forbids the same.
§ 40-8. Interference with enforcing official.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone in the performance
of any of his or her powers or duties under this article.
§ 40-9. Service of notices.
Any notice required or permitted to be given hereunder may be made and
given information and belief. Any such written notice shall be left at or
(4) Barking, howling or crying in such manner as to constitute a
nuisance or biting or molesting any person or chasing a vehicle
upon a public street or injuring or damaging any lawn or shrubbery
or flowers or grounds or other property of any person other than its
owner or behaving in any way so as to endanger person or property.
B. If any dog so taken into custody wears a collar or harness having
inscribed thereon or attached thereto the name and address of any
person or a registration tag or, if the owner or the person keeping or
harboring such dog is known, the Chief of Police or person appointed by
the appropriate municipal department head shall forthwith notify the
person whose address is given on the collar or harness or, if known, the
owner or the person keeping or harboring such dog, that the dog has
been taken into custody and will be liable to be destroyed or offered for
adoption if not claimed within one week after the giving of such notice.
Such notice may be served by either delivering it to the person on
whom it is to be served or by leaving it at the person's usual or last
known place of abode or at the address given on the collar. [Amended
4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
C. Such person shall be entitled to redeem such dog within one week after
giving of such notice, and, if notice is not required to be given
hereunder, any person claiming such dog shall be entitled to redeem
the dog within one week after its being taken into custody upon
establishing title thereto, and, if the dog was unlicensed or untagged at
the time of its seizure, upon producing a license and registration tag for
the dog and upon paying all expenses incurred by reason of the dog's
detention. [Amended 9-22-1986 by Ord. No. 86-23]
D. If any dog so taken into custody shall not be redeemed as aforesaid, it
shall thereupon be destroyed in a humane manner or offered for
adoption. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
§ 40-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-9
1:127
mailed to the usual or last known place of abode of the person to whom
directed or, when applicable, the address given on a dog's collar or harness.
§ 40-10. Rabies vaccination required.
§ 40-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-07]
§ 40-12. Exceptions.
This article shall not be considered as prohibiting the exercising or training
of dogs as permitted by N.J.S.A. 23:4-25 nor to hunting dogs lawfully used
during hunting season while under the control of the owner, lessee or
A. No person shall own, possess, harbor or keep any dog within the
boundaries of the township which has not been inoculated against
rabies; provided, however, that dogs which have not attained the age of
six months shall not be required to be so inoculated; and further
provided that any dog may be exempt from the requirement of such
inoculation for a specified period of time by the Health Officer upon the
presentation of a certificate from a veterinarian stating that because of
infirmity or other physical condition the inoculation of such dog for a
specified period of time is contraindicated.
B. Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having custody of a dog shall
obtain from the veterinarian who vaccinates this dog against rabies a
certificate on a form supplied by the Health Officer and available at the
Health Office and shall within 10 days of such vaccination or within 10
days after bringing the dog into the township, if the dog was vaccinated
before being brought into the township, deliver the certificate to the
Health Office, who shall file the same with the records of the Health
Officer. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
C. No license shall be issued to any person unless a certificate issued by a
duly licensed veterinarian of the State of New Jersey, as hereinabove
provided, is presented to and filed with the Health Office showing that
such dog has been vaccinated against rabies in the manner provided
herein, such certificate to show and certify that the vaccination has
been made within one year from the date of the filing of the application
for such license. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
A. Any person who violates or who fails or refuses to comply with this
article, except for those provisions contained in §§ 40-5, 40-6 and 40-7,
shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $50 for
each and every offense, except that for the first offense or failure to
secure a license, the penalty shall be not less than $1 and not more than
$50.
B. Any person who violates the provisions of §§ 40-5, 40-6 or 40-7 shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II,
Penalty, § 1-3.
§ 40-9 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 40-12
1:128
custodian. No provision of this article shall be construed to apply to federal,
state, county or municipal governments, agencies thereof or agricultural
stations or schools maintained thereby; or to medical societies, universities,
colleges, philanthropic institutions incorporated or authorized to do
business in this state and having among their corporate purposes
investigation into the causes, nature, prevention and cure of diseases in
humans and animals; or corporations or societies incorporated or organized
for the purpose of the enforcement of all laws enacted for the protection of
dumb animals.
§ 40-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-12
1:129

ARTICLE II
Licensing of Cats
[Adopted 12-19-1990 by Ord. No. BH90-1 (Ch. BH:VIII of the
Revised General Ordinances); readopted 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-07]
§ 40-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — For the purpose of this article, dog or cat.
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Any person or agency designated or
certified by the Township of West Windsor to enforce the provisions of this
article.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species; male, female or altered.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
CATTERY — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein cats for sale are kept or displayed.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The Health Officer of the Township of West
Windsor or any designated representative thereof charged with
administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under
the provisions of this article.
NEUTERED — Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction as certified
by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, every person having
a right of property (or custody) in such cat and every person who has such
cat in his/her keeping or who harbors or maintains a cat or knowingly
permits a cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by that person.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization or
institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
§ 40-14. Rabies vaccination.
A. Vaccination and license requirements. No person shall own, keep,
harbor or maintain any cat over seven months of age within West
Windsor Township unless such cat is vaccinated and licensed. The
provisions of this section do not apply to cats held in a cattery or those
held by a state or federal licensed research facility or a veterinary
establishment where cats are received or kept for diagnostic, medical,
surgical or other treatments or licensed animal shelters, pounds,
kennels or pet shops.
B. Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the latest Compendium of Animal
Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization, published by
§ 40-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-14
1:131
§ 40-15. Licensing requirements; fees.
the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, except as
provided for in Subsection D.
C. Vaccination certificate. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the
owner of each animal vaccinated, on a form recommended by the state.
D. Exemptions. Any cat may be exempted from the requirements of such
vaccination for a specified period of time by the West Windsor Health
Officer upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that,
because of an infirmity or other physical condition or regimen of
therapy, the inoculation of such cat shall be deemed inadvisable.
A. Cats must have license number displayed. Any person who shall own,
keep or harbor a cat of licensing age shall annually apply for and
procure from the licensing authority a license and official registration
tag with license number or a registration sleeve for each cat so owned,
kept or harbored and shall place upon such cat a collar or other device
with the license number securely fastened or displayed thereto.
Acceptable methods of displaying the license number shall include, but
are not limited to, breakaway or elastic collars, ear tags or tattoos
located on the ear. License tags or sleeves are not transferable.
B. Time for applying for license. The owner of any newly acquired cat of
licensing age or of any cat which attains licensing age shall make
application for a license tag or sleeve for such cat within 10 days after
such acquisition or age attainment. This requirement will not apply to a
nonresident keeping a cat within West Windsor Township for no longer
than 90 days.
C. Cats brought into jurisdiction.
(1) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into West
Windsor Township any cat licensed in another state for the current
year and bearing a registration tag or sleeve and shall keep the
same or permit the same to be kept within the Township of West
Windsor for a period of more than 90 days shall immediately apply
for a license and registration tag or sleeve for each such cat.
(2) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the
Township of West Windsor any unlicensed cat and shall keep the
same or permit the same to be kept within the township for a period
of more than 10 days shall immediately apply for a license and
registration tag or sleeve for each such cat.
D. Application; contents; preservation of information. The application shall
state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the cat for which a
license and registration are sought and whether it is of a longhaired or
shorthaired variety; the name, street and post office address of the
owner; and the person who shall keep or harbor such cat. The
information on said application and the registration number issued for
§ 40-14 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 40-15
1:132
the cat shall be preserved for a period of three years by the local official
designated to license cats in the municipality.
E. License forms and tags. License forms and official tags or sleeves shall
be furnished by the municipality and shall be numbered serially and
shall bear the year of issuance and the name of the municipality.
F. Evidence of inoculation with rabies vaccine or certification of
exemption; requirement for license. The Health Officer (or designee)
shall not grant any such license and official registration tag or sleeve
for any cat unless the owner has registered the cat and the cat has been
inoculated with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by and
administered in accordance with the recommendations of the United
States Department of Agriculture and the United States Department of
Human Services or has been certified exempt as provided by § 40-14D
of this article. The rabies inoculation shall be administered by a duly
licensed veterinarian or by such other veterinarian permitted by law to
do the same.
G. License fee schedule. See Chapter 82, Fees.
H. License and registration tags required. Any person who shall own, keep
or harbor a cat of licensing age shall annually, in the month of April,
apply for and procure from the Health Officer a license and official
metal registration tag for each such cat owned, kept or harbored and
shall place upon each such cat a collar or harness with the registration
tag securely fastened thereto.
I. Fees; renewals; expiration date of license.
(1) Licenses from another municipality shall be accepted. The person
applying for the license and registration tag and/or sleeve shall pay
the fee fixed or authorized. The fee for the renewal of a license and
registration tag or sleeve shall be the same as for the original, and
said license, registration tag or sleeve and renewal thereof shall
expire on April 30, in the following year.
(2) Only one license and registration tag or sleeve shall be required in
the licensing year for any cat in the Township of West Windsor. Any
valid New Jersey license tag or sleeve issued by a New Jersey
municipality shall be accepted by this municipality as evidence of
compliance.
J. Loss of license. If a license tag or sleeve has been misplaced or lost, the
licensing authority may issue a duplicate license and/or registration
sleeve for that particular cat at a fee as set forth in Chapter 82, Fees.
[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
K. Proof of licensing. Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person
owning, keeping, maintaining or harboring a cat upon the request of
any health official, police officer, Animal Control Officer or other
authorized person.
§ 40-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-15
1:133
§ 40-16. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, any person who violates or who
fails or refuses to comply with this article shall be liable to a penalty as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-4, to be
recovered by and in the name of the Township of West Windsor.
L. Interfering with persons performing duties under this article. No
person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this article.
M. Disposition of fees collected. License fees and other money collected or
received under the provisions of this article shall be forwarded to the
Treasurer of the municipality and shall be deposited according to
statute in the general fund of the township.
§ 40-15 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 40-16
1:134
Chapter 44
BINGO AND GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 44-1. Purpose; administration. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-07; 7-30-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-19]
This chapter is for the purpose of regulating all games of chance held,
operated or conducted within the Township, pursuant to Acts of the
Legislature of the State of New Jersey known as the "Bingo Licensing Law"
(N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq.), the "Raffles Licensing Law" (N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq.),
and the "Amusement Games Law" (N.J.S.A. 5:8-100 et seq.) in accordance
with the rules and regulations issued or to be promulgated by the Legalized
Games of Chance Control Commission in the Department of Law and Public
Safety of the State of New Jersey. All applications, licenses and proceedings
in connection therewith shall be subject to the provisions of such Acts and
the rules and regulations and any laws, rules and regulations hereafter
enacted and shall be further subject to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 44-1.1. Issuing authority. [Added 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-13;
amended 7-30-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-19]
The Township Clerk of the Township of West Windsor is hereby authorized
and delegated the authority to approve the granting of raffle, bingo, and
amusement game licenses to be held in the Township of West Windsor,
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 13:47-1.1.
§ 44-2. Conduct of games on Sunday. [Amended 7-30-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-19]
All licensees authorized by law to conduct any games of chance, including
raffles, bingo, and amusement games, shall be permitted to conduct the
same on any day of the week, including Sundays.
§ 44-3. Organizations eligible for license.
No license to conduct a game of chance as authorized by law shall be issued
to any organization not having a bona fide situs established in good faith
within the State of New Jersey and actively engaged in serving one or more
of the authorized purposes as defined by the rules and regulations of the
Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission.
§ 44-4. Games of chance during elections prohibited.
No games of chance shall be conducted under any license at any time
during which a general municipal, primary, special or Board of Education
election is being held, while the polls are open for voting.
§ 40-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-5
1:135
§ 44-5. Violations and penalties. [Added 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-07]
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3, or as provided in the New
Jersey Administrative Code.
Chapter 48
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 55. Solid waste — See Ch. 148.
§ 48-1. Purpose.
It is hereby declared to be to the best interests of the citizens of the
township that measures be adopted to eliminate certain fire hazards and
conditions injurious to the public health, safety or general welfare, as
hereinafter provided.
§ 48-2. Notice to remove dangerous accumulations.54
Whenever the owner or tenant of a dwelling or lands lying within the
limits of the township shall make, cause or permit an accumulation of
brush, weeds, dead or dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth,
garbage, trash or debris or any or some of them in, on or upon the owner's
or tenant's lands or dwelling so as, in the opinion of the appropriate
municipal department head, to constitute a fire hazard or a menace or
danger to the public health, safety or general welfare, a written notice shall
be given to the owner or tenant directing the owner or tenant to remove
the same from such lands or dwelling within 10 days after the giving of the
notice.
§ 48-3. Service of notice.
Notice may be given in the same manner as provided for the service of
judicial process in any of the courts of the State of New Jersey or by sending
the same by registered mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid,
addressed to the owner or tenant at his or her last known post office
address. This notice shall specify the condition constituting the hazard or
menace existing upon such lands or dwelling and shall contain a summary
of the provisions of §§ 48-4 through 48-6.
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 44-5 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 48-4
1:136
§ 48-4. Refusal to remove; removal by township.
If the owner or tenant of such lands or dwelling to whom such notice shall
have been given as aforesaid shall refuse or neglect to remove the brush,
weeds, etc., within the ten-day period, then the same shall be removed from
the lands or dwelling by or under the direction of the Chief of Police of
the township, and it shall be lawful for the Chief or Police or the person or
persons employed by the Chief of Police for the purpose to enter upon the
lands or dwelling to remove the same.
§ 48-5. Collection of costs incurred by township.55
In all cases where such brush, weeds, etc., are removed from any lands
or dwelling by or under the direction of an officer, the officer shall certify
the cost thereof to the Business Administrator, who shall examine the
certificate and, if found to be correct, shall cause the cost as shown thereon
to be charged against these lands or dwelling, as provided for in N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.14 et seq. The amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien
upon such lands or dwelling and shall be added to and become and form a
part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lands or dwelling,
payable when the first quarterly installment of taxes shall become due and
payable, the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall be
collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same manner as
taxes.
§ 48-6. Violations and penalties.
Any owner or tenant violating any provision of this chapter by failing to
comply with a notice given as aforesaid within the time therein fixed or by
interfering with, preventing or attempting to interfere with or prevent the
performance by the aforesaid officer or the persons employed by the officer
of the duties hereinbefore imposed upon the officer, or in any other way,
shall be liable to the penalty established in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article II, Penalty, § 1-3.
Chapter 51
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 63.
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 48-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-1
1:137
§ 51-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to require the clear display of authorized and
assigned house or building numbers on every building fronting on any street
in the Township of West Windsor in order to assist the general public and
emergency services, public and private, in identifying any property in case
of emergency or otherwise.
§ 51-2. Applicability.
All dwelling houses, stores or other principal buildings erected or to be
erected within the Township of West Windsor shall display numbers
assigned by the Township Engineer as provided for herein and in conformity
with the specifications provided for herein.
§ 51-3. Placing of numbers required.56
The owner, occupant or lessee of each and every house, store or other
building which is constructed subsequent to the adoption and publication
of this chapter and which fronts upon any public or private street within
the Township of West Windsor shall, at his or her own expense, prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, cause the authorized and assigned
number of each house or dwelling to be permanently and conspicuously
placed in accordance with the specifications set forth herein.
§ 51-4. Specifications.
House or building numbers shall be:
§ 51-5. Visibility of numbers for setback locations.
If said house or building has such a setback location that the provisions of
§ 51-4 cannot be complied with, then the owner, occupant or lessee shall
provide a post, rod or other type of fixture of a substantial nature, including
a mailbox, with the number affixed thereon and so located on the premises
A. In Arabic numerals.
B. A minimum height of three inches.
C. Mounted in a secure fashion to the front wall or porch of the building or
other fixed appurtenance in the front of the building so as to be clearly
visible from the street.
D. Sufficiently legible as to contrasting background, arrangement, spacing
and uniformity so as to be clearly visible from the street.
E. At least 30 inches above ground level and so placed that trees, shrubs
and other obstructions do not block the line of sight of the numbers
from the street upon which the building fronts.
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 51-1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 51-5
1:138
that the number shall be conspicuous and visible from the street upon which
the building fronts.
§ 51-6. Application for assignment of numbers.57
The numbers shall be assigned by the Director of the Department of
Community Development, or the Director's designee, of the Township of
West Windsor. Every owner, occupant or lessee of a building constructed
or to be constructed in the Township of West Windsor shall apply to the
Township Engineer for an authorized number in accordance with this
chapter.
§ 51-7. Affixing of numbers by township; costs.58
Upon the failure of an owner, occupant or lessee to ascertain and affix
upon any building to which this chapter applies the assigned and authorized
number, it shall be lawful for the appropriate municipal department head
of the Township of West Windsor to cause to be affixed to such building
or appurtenance provided for herein the assigned and authorized number.
Such employee shall execute a return to the Mayor of the cost of so affixing
said number, and the Collector of Taxes of the Township of West Windsor,
upon certification, shall charge the same to the owner of the building and
collect the cost in the same manner as all taxes are collected, and such cost
shall be a lien upon said land.
§ 51-8. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 55
BURNING, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 89. Fires in parks — See Ch. 122, § 122-11.
A. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article II, Penalty, § 1-3.59
B. The imposition and collection of the penalty imposed by Subsection A of
this section shall not bar the right of the township to collect the costs
described in § 51-7.
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 51-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-1
1:139
§ 55-1. Outdoor burning prohibited.
No person shall by outdoor fire burn or cause to be burned by outdoor fire:
§ 55-2. Exceptions.60
§ 55-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or notice issued pursuant thereto shall, upon conviction thereof,
be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II,
Penalty, § 1-3.
Chapter 59
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Trees — See Ch. 170. Land use — See Ch. 200.
§ 59-1. Purpose.
The Township hereby grants to Comcast of Central New Jersey, LLC
(hereafter "Comcast") renewal of its nonexclusive municipal consent to
place in, upon, across, above, over and under highways, streets alleys,
A. Vegetation including, but not limited to, trees, tree branches, leaves,
yard trimmings, shrubbery, grass, weeds and crops.
B. Rags, old clothes, leather, rubber, carpets, wood excelsior, paper, ashes,
furniture, tin cans, glass, crockery, masonry and other similar
materials.
C. Waste animal or vegetable matter from houses, kitchens, restaurants,
hotels, produce markets or any source, or food of any kind to be thrown
away.
A. Burning of refuse for training or research exercises in fire protection or
prevention when conducted by a fire company of the township and in
compliance with Title 7, Chapter 27, Subchapter 2, of the New Jersey
Administrative Code (Air Pollution Control).
B. Whenever a permit has been issued under the provisions of Chapter 89,
Fire Prevention, of the Code of the Township of West Windsor and in
compliance with Title 7, Chapter 27, Subchapter 2, of the New Jersey
Administrative Code (Air Pollution Control).
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 55-1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 59-1
1:140
sidewalks, easements, public ways and public places in the Township of
West Windsor, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other
television conductors, fixtures, apparatus, and equipment as may be
necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance in the Township
of a cable television system and cable communications system.
§ 59-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning or
definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) rules and regulations, 47 CFR
Subsection 76.1 et seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C.
§ 521 et seq., as amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et
seq., and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with the
federal and state definitions:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
The "Cable Act" shall refer to Title VI of the U.S. Communications Act of
1934, as amended.
APPLICATION — The company's application for renewal of municipal
consent.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Any service tier, which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by the FCC.
BOARD or BPU — The Board of Public Utilities, State of New Jersey.
COMPANY or COMCAST — The grantee of rights under this chapter and is
known as "Comcast of Central New Jersey."
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission, or successor
governmental entity.
OFFICE or OCTV — The Office of Cable Television of the Board.
PRIMARY SERVICE AREA or PSA — Consists of the area of the Township
currently served with existing plant as set forth in the map annexed to the
company's application for municipal consent.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of West Windsor, County of Mercer, State of
New Jersey.
§ 59-3. Statement of findings.
Public hearings conducted by the Township concerning the renewal of
municipal consent herein granted to the company, were held during
regularly scheduled public meetings of the Township Council between
December of 2016 and March of 2017, after proper public notice pursuant
to the terms and conditions of the Act and the regulations of the Board
adopted pursuant thereto. Said hearings, having been fully open to the
public, and the Township, having received at said public hearings all
comments regarding the qualifications of the company to receive this
§ 59-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-3
1:141
renewal of municipal consent, the Township hereby finds that the company
possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other
qualifications and that the company's operating and construction
arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ 59-4. Duration of franchise.
§ 59-5. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-30, the
company shall, during each year of operation under the consent granted
herein, pay to the municipality 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring
charges in the nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for cable
television reception service in the municipality or any higher amount
permitted by the Act or otherwise allowable by law. The current fee is
3.5% of the company's gross revenues, as defined under N.J.S.A. 48:5A-3x,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-30d.
§ 59-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this chapter for the renewal of the franchise
shall apply to the entirety of the Township and any property subsequently
annexed hereto.
§ 59-7. Extension of service.
The company shall be required to proffer service along any public rightof-
way to any person's residence or business located in all areas of the
franchise territory as described herein, at tariffed rates for standard and
nonstandard installations.
§ 59-8. Construction requirements.
A. The nonexclusive municipal consent granted herein shall expire 15
years from the date of expiration of the previous certificate of approval
issued by the Board.
B. In the event that the Township shall find that the company has not
substantially complied with the material terms and conditions of this
chapter, the Township shall have the right to petition the OCTV,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47, for appropriate action, including
modification and/or termination of the certificate of approval; provided,
however, that the Township shall first have given the company written
notice of all alleged instances of noncompliance and an opportunity to
cure same within 90 days of that notification.
A. Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface
in the natural topography, the company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as reasonably
comparable to the condition as existed prior to the commencement of
§ 59-3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 59-8
1:142
said work. Any restoration shall commence as expeditiously as
practical, but in no event shall restoration be commenced more than
30 calendar days after written notice is issued to the company by the
Township.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent, the
Township shall undertake or approve the construction of any sanitary
sewer or storm drainage line or other street improvement project
(including, without limitation, installation of traffic signals, streetlights,
road improvements including widening, sidewalks and pedestrian
amenities wherein the facility so constructed or approved is or shall
become, by gift, transfer, dedication or otherwise, a public facility
owned, maintained or operated by the Township), the company, upon
reasonable notice by the Township, but no less than 90 business days,
shall remove, re-lay or relocate its equipment, at the expense of the
company prior to approval of the Board. If public funds are available to
any other user of the public way for the purpose of defraying the cost of
any of the foregoing, the Township shall notify the company of such
funding and make available such funds to the company.
C. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public places of the Township so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cable of the company.
Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance of the company's wire and cables.
D. Temporary removal of cables. The company shall, upon request of the
Township, at the company's expense, temporarily raise, lower or
remove its lines in order to facilitate the moving of buildings or
machinery or in other like circumstances, subject to the prior approval
of the Board. Whenever a request for the temporary removal of cables is
made by, for, or on behalf of private parties, the cost of temporary
removal shall be borne by those same parties.
E. Installation of equipment. The company shall install equipment in the
same location and manner as existing public utilities whenever
practicable, in order to minimize the impact of same on surrounding
property. [N.J.A.C. 14:18-2.3(a)].
F. Traffic control. For all work performed by or on behalf of the company
in the streets or public rights-of-way which may disturb the normal flow
of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, the company shall comply with all
state and generally applicable local traffic safety regulations.
G. Minimum interference. The company shall make reasonable efforts to
protect the public and its property from injury or damage and shall
execute due care to reduce hazards to which employees, customers or
the general public may be subjected by reasons of its equipment or
facilities [N.J.A.C. 14:18-2.1(c)].
§ 59-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-8
1:143
§ 59-9. Customer service.
In providing services to its customers, the company shall comply with
N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq. and all applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations. The company shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary
company and industry standards in the delivery of customer service and
shall be prepared to report on it to the Township upon written request of
the Township Administrator or Clerk.
H. Emergency notification. The company shall provide the Township's
Business Administrator with a twenty-four-hour emergency telephone
number at which a representative of the company (not electronic voice
mail or a recording) can be accessed in the event of an emergency.
I. Right of inspection. The company shall be responsible to ensure and be
prepared to show, on request by an authorized representative of the
Office, that the cable system complies with the applicable rules and
regulations of Part 76, Subpart K of Title 47 CFR 76.601 through
76.617, as amended. The rights and obligations of the Township and
Comcast under this section shall at all times be subject to applicable
federal law and FCC regulation.
J. Notice of construction to Township. In accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:18-2.1 et seq., if at any time for the duration of municipal consent
the company proposes to rebuild significant portions of the existing
plant, and/or proposes to build significant areas of new plant, the
company shall file with the Board a schedule for the construction of its
facilities and provide the Township a copy thereof upon request.
K. (Reserved)
L. Temporary hookups. Absent good cause shown, the company shall not
maintain and place any temporary installations for a period that
exceeds 30 calendar days, weather permitting.
M. Company subject to federal, state and local laws. The company is
subject to and shall be governed by all lawful and applicable provisions
of federal and state laws and regulations. This franchise is further
subject to all generally applicable ordinances and resolutions of the
Township in the exercise of its inherent police powers. Without waiving
any of its rights, the Township agrees that, to the extent any term of this
municipal consent is inconsistent with the terms of any Township
ordinance existing prior or subsequent to the effective date, this
municipal consent shall control.
A. The company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding credit for outages, the
reporting of same to regulatory agencies and notification of same to
customers.
B. The company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding the availability of devices for
§ 59-8 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 59-9
1:144
§ 59-10. Municipal complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the Township pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26b. All complaints shall be
received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The Township
shall have the right to request copies of records and reports pertaining to
complaints by Township customers from the OCTV.
§ 59-11. Local office.
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the company
shall maintain a business office or agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:18-5.1 for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving all local
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and
similar matters. Such a business office shall have a publicly listed toll-free
telephone number and be open during standard business hours.
§ 59-12. Performance and construction bond.
During the life of the franchise, the company shall give to the Township a
bond in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to ensure the faithful
performance of all undertakings of the company as represented in its
application for municipal consent incorporated herein. The Township may
the hearing impaired and the notification of same to customers, as
required by N.J.A.C. 14:18-3.18(a)(4).
C. In providing cable services to its customers, the company shall comply
with N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq. and all applicable state and federal
statutes and regulations. The company shall strive to meet or exceed all
voluntary company and industry standards in the delivery of customer
service as noted below. Those standards include, but are not limited to,
the goal of answering 90% of incoming telephone calls within 30
seconds.
D. Upon written request the company shall provide the Township with
annual reports regarding customer service that it is required to provide
to the BPU. These reports shall be submitted simultaneously with
annual payment of the franchise fee, pursuant to § 59-5 of this chapter.
In providing such information to the Township, it shall not be compelled
to violate the privacy provisions under Section 631 of the Cable Act or
applicable federal law.
E. Comcast shall provide the Township with contact information in the
event of an emergency involving the operation of an EG channel.
F. (Reserved)
G. Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the Township
to express any comment with respect to telephone accessibility to the
complaint officer or impair the right of the complaint officer to take any
action that is permitted under law.
§ 59-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-12
1:145
request a higher performance bond than the $25,000 required by the Act
by establishing a need, which normally is found to exist in the event that
the company will be engaging in significant construction within the public
right-of-way to accommodate new or updated equipment. A request for
an increased performance bond is subject to review and approval by the
Board. At the request of the Township, the company shall provide updated
information pertaining to the performance bond on an annual basis.
§ 59-13. Subscriber rates.
The rates of the company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
federal and state law.
§ 59-14. Commitments by company.
A. The company shall provide expanded basic or a similar tier of cable
television service to one outlet to each qualified existing and future
school in the Township, public and private, elementary, intermediate
and secondary, provided that the school building is within 200 feet of
active cable distribution plant or through customer owned conduit.
Each additional outlet installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials
plus labor basis by the school requesting service.
B. The company shall provide expanded basic or a similar tier of cable
television service to one outlet to every Township building listed in
Exhibit A61 and each qualified existing and future municipal building,
police, fire, emergency management facility and public library in the
Township, provided that the facility is located within 200 feet of active
cable distribution plant or through customer owned conduit. Each
additional outlet installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials plus
labor basis by the Township.
C. Within six months of the issuance of a renewal certificate of approval by
the BPU, the company shall provide to the Township a one-time PEG
access capital grant in the amount of $75,000 to meet the PEG access
capital needs of the community.
D. The Communications Act of 1934, as amended [47 U.S.C. § 543 (b)],
allows the company to itemize and/or identify: 1) the amount on the
subscriber bill assessed as a franchise fee and the identity of the
governmental authority to which the fee is paid; 2) the amount on the
bill assessed to satisfy any requirements imposed on the company by
the cable franchise to support public, education, and/or governmental
access channels or the use of such channels; and 3) any grants or other
fees on the bill or any tax, assessment, or charge of any kind imposed by
any governmental authority on the transaction between the operator
and the subscriber. The company reserves its external cost, passthrough
rights to the full extent permitted by law, including the services
set forth in Subsections A and B, above which may be recovered at the
61.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 59-12 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 59-14
1:146
§ 59-15. Educational and governmental access.
§ 59-16. Emergency uses.
fair market value as a pass-through in addition to the franchise fee of
4.0% provided herein.
A. The company will continue to provide one channel for government and
educational access. The channel will be on the expanded basic or
similar tier of service offered by the company in accordance with the
Cable Act, Section 611 [47 U.S.C. § 531], and as further set forth below.
B. The company does not relinquish its ownership of or ultimate right of
control over a channel by designating it for EG use. An EG access user,
whether an educational or government user, acquires no property or
other interest by virtue of the use of a channel so designated and may
not rely on the continued use of a particular channel number, no matter
how long the same channel may have been designated for such use.
C. The company shall not exercise editorial control over the use of any
educational or governmental channel capacity, except the company may
refuse to transmit any educational or governmental access program or
portion of any public or governmental access program that contains
obscenity, indecency, or nudity.
D. Educational access. "Educational access" shall mean noncommercial
use by educational institutions such as public or private schools, but not
home schools, community colleges and/or universities.
E. Government access. "Government access" shall mean noncommercial
use by the governing bodies of the Township for the purpose of showing
the public local government at work.
F. Fallow time. Because blank or underutilized PG channels are not in the
public interest, in the event the Township or other EG access users elect
not to fully program the PG access channel, the company may program
unused time on those channels subject to reclamation by the Township
upon no less than 60 calendar days' written notice.
G. Signal quality. The company shall take any steps that are necessary to
ensure that the signals originated on the access channels are carried
without material degradation, and with a signal whose quality is equal
to that of the other channels that the company transmits.
H. Dedicated channel for EG channels. The company shall continue carry
the educational and governmental access programming on the channel
numbers currently assigned to them. Notwithstanding and pursuant to
§ 59-15B hereinabove, if the company decides to change the channel
designation for any of the EG access channels, it must provide at least
30 days' prior written notice to the Township.
§ 59-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-16
1:147
§ 59-17. Liability insurance.
§ 59-18. Incorporation of application.
All of the statements and commitments contained in the application or
annexed thereto and incorporated therein, and any amendment thereto,
except as modified herein, are binding upon the company as terms and
conditions of this municipal consent. The application and other relevant
writings submitted by the company shall be annexed hereto and made a part
hereof by reference, provided that same do not conflict with application of
state or federal law.
§ 59-19. Competitive equity.
Should the Township grant municipal consent for a franchise to construct,
operate and maintain a cable television system to any other person,
corporation or entity on terms materially less burdensome or more
favorable than the terms contained herein, the company may substitute
such language that is more favorable or less burdensome for the
comparable provision of this chapter subject to the provisions of N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.7, including the provision of copy of an agreement between the
Township and the petitioner to the Board stating that the changes are
acceptable. The company agrees to simultaneously provide a courtesy copy
of the petition to the Township Business Administrator in the event that
it files such a request with the BPU under this section of the consent
agreement.
A. The company will comply with the Emergency Alert System (EAS) rules
in accordance with applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations.
B. The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the
Township or any other person during an emergency if for any reason
the Township is unable to make full use of the cable television system as
contemplated herein.
A. The company agrees to maintain and keep in full force and effect at its
sole expense at all times during the term of this consent, sufficient
liability insurance naming the Township as an insured, and insuring
against loss by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand in
the minimum amounts of $1,000,000 covering liability for any death,
personal injury, property damages or other liability arising out of its
construction and operation of the cable television system, and an excess
liability (or umbrella) policy in the amount of $5,000,000.
B. The company agrees to provide the Township with adequate notice of a
change in or cancellation of its liability insurance policy. The company
further agrees to resubmit proof of insurance coverage upon request.
§ 59-16 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 59-20
1:148
§ 59-20. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or
federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and its validity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
the chapter.
§ 59-21. Third-party beneficiaries.
Nothing in this franchise or in any prior agreement is or was intended to
confer third-party beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce
the terms of such agreements or franchise.
§ 59-22. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon issuance of a renewal
certificate of approval from the BPU.
Chapter 60
CABLE TELEVISION: PROGRAMMING POLICIES AND
PROCEDURES FOR GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS CHANNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public emergencies — See Ch. 9. Cable television franchise — See Ch. 59.
§ 60-1. Policy statement. [Amended 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01]
Programming on the West Windsor government and education channel
("the channel") shall be the sole responsibility of the Township of West
Windsor, at the direction of the Township Council and Administration and by
recommendation of the Cable TV Advisory Board. The channel shall operate
in accordance with applicable provisions of the State Cable Television Act62
and the Federal Telecommunications Act. The relationship between the
municipality and the school district relating to the operation of the channel
shall be in accordance with any shared services agreement in effect.
§ 60-2. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
A. Provide unedited content of cablecasts of Township Council meetings
and other municipal public meetings, as designated. [Amended
2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01]
62.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
§ 59-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-2
1:149
§ 60-3. Channel operation. [Amended 2-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-01]
The channel shall operate on all cable service providers offering service in
the Township pursuant to a franchise authorized pursuant to the provisions
of the State Cable Television Act.63
§ 60-4. Types of programs.
The types of programs shall be as follows:
B. Provide comprehensive information about programs and services
offered to West Windsor residents by municipal departments.
C. Provide information pertinent to West Windsor residents from other
local, state, and federal governmental entities.
D. Widen the dissemination of information on the activities of the
municipal government advisory bodies of the Township.
E. Provide emergency communications in the event of disaster or
widespread service disruption.
F. Provide and distribute programming of interest to the residents, which
will inform, educate and enlighten, as well as encourage participation
in government services, activities and decision making.
A. Live cablecast. Live coverage of designated meetings and events may
be provided. [Amended 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01]
B. Taped-delayed cablecast. Taped meetings, shows and events videotaped
in advance for cablecast at a later time. Some events will be cablecast
live and will also be taped for later playback.
C. Staff-originated programming: approved programming produced by the
municipality, to include programs for local departments, issues related
to municipal government or about groups, committees, boards, etc.,
that are affiliated with government.
D. Outside-originated programming: approved programming that is
related to government that is produced by an outside source. This
programming may be donated, purchased, rented or borrowed for
cablecast. [Amended 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01]
E. Bulletin-board information: messages related to municipal activities,
programs, services and events sponsored in whole or in part by West
Windsor or another governmental unit affecting its residents.
F. Emergency broadcasts, as needed. [Added 2-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-01]
63.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
§ 60-2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 60-4
1:150
The channel is not intended as a mechanism to promote any particular issue
or candidate for public office. However, this provision will not preclude the
channel from cablecasting nonpartisan programs sponsored by mutual third
parties designed to inform and educate the citizens of election issues and
candidates. An example of what is permitted are debates sponsored by the
League of Women Voters.
§ 60-5. Access policy. [Amended 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01]
§ 60-6. Access priorities.
Following is a general list of programming priorities, in order of priority.
The priorities may be altered on a case-by-case basis by the Cable TV
Advisory Board.
G. Promotions. Promotional announcements for Township-sponsored
events, programs and activities will be permitted. Promotional
announcements for events, charities or outside organizations shall only
be permitted when the event is being held in the Township. [Added
2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01]
H. Programming restrictions are as follows: [Added 2-7-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-01]
(1) No obscene or salacious material.
(2) No material which violates federal, state or local law.
(3) A lottery as defined by the Federal Communications Commission
regulations or any advertisement of or information concerning a
lottery.
I. Political programming. [Added 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01;
amended 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-14]
A. All programming requests will be reviewed by the Cable TV Advisory
Board, which shall make its recommendation to the Administration.
B. A weekly log will be kept to record all programming.
C. The channel is not to be utilized for announcements from the general
public. Access to the channel shall be limited to municipal,
governmental or quasi-governmental functions and operations.
Utilization of the channel for personal gain is not permitted. The
channel is not a public access channel.
A. Emergency override communication by the Mayor or designee takes
priority over all broadcasts.
B. Programming of or about meetings of policymaking bodies such as the
Township Council, Etc.
C. Programming of various departments and their services.
§ 60-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-6
1:151
§ 60-7. Management of government access channel. [Amended
2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01]
Management of the government access channel shall be by the station
manager, under the direction of the Administration.64
§ 60-8. Use of equipment.
Township-owned video equipment shall be restricted to municipal activities,
and its uses shall be restricted to trained personnel. Loaning of equipment
for personal or outside use shall not be permitted.
§ 60-9. Copyright of programs.
Programs containing copyrighted materials will be used only if copyright
clearance has been obtained.
§ 60-10. Disposition of meeting tapes.
D. Programming of county, state, federal government and/or Township
boards, commissions and authorities and/or agencies that use public
dollars.
E. Approved programming produced by the Township or outside sources
that is relevant to local government or interests of the community at
large, or identifiable segments thereof.
F. Video bulletin board.
A. The original tape of each public meeting may be maintained by the
channel for production purposes.
B. Both master tapes and copies will be copyrighted in the name of the
Township of West Windsor.
C. Videotapes shall not be considered an official record of any meeting and
there shall be no liability for inadvertent erasure or omissions.
D. Retention period. It is the general policy to retain public meeting tapes
for a minimum of two months.65 [Amended 2-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-01]
64.Editor's Note: Former § 60-8, Political programming, § 60-9, Editing policy, § 60-10,
Endorsements, § 60-11, Promotions, and § 60-12, Programming restrictions, which
immediately followed, were repealed 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01. This ordinance also
renumbered former §§ 60-13 through 60-15 as §§ 60-8 through 60-10, respectively.
65.Editor's Note: Former § 60-16, Government Channel Committee, and § 60-17, Consistency
with interlocal agreements, which immediately followed, were repealed 2-7-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-01.
§ 60-6 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 60-10
1:152
Chapter 63
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction Code Official — See Ch. 4,
§ 4-49.
Fees — See Ch. 82.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 89.
Housing standards — See Ch. 100.
Soil removal — See Ch. 143.
Land use — See Ch. 200.
§ 63-1. Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency.
§ 63-2. Fees; report.
A. Established. There is hereby established in the Township a State
Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the
"Division of Code Enforcement," consisting of a Construction Official,
Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical
Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official and such other
subcode officials for such additional subcodes as the Commissioner of
the Department of Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall
hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction Code.66 The
Construction Official shall be the chief administrator of the enforcing
agency. The Mayor shall appoint a Construction Official and any
necessary subcode officials to administer and enforce the code.
[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et
seq., provided that, in lieu of any particular subcode official, an on-site
inspection agency may be retained by contract pursuant to N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq. More than one such official position may be held by
the same person, provided that such person is qualified pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq. to hold each such position.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location, except for emergencies and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.67
A. The fee for a construction permit shall be as established in Chapter 82,
Fees.
B. Report recommending fee schedule; surcharge fee.
66.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
67.Editor's Note: Original Section 10-1.2, Construction Board of Appeals, was deleted
5-11-1981 by Ord. No. 81-18.
§ 60-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-2
1:153
§ 63-3. Fire limits; biannual report required.
§ 63-4. Electronic submission of documents. [Added 6-3-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-15]
(1) The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode
officials, prepare and submit to the Mayor, who shall forthwith
submit to the Township Council biannually a report recommending
a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the Agency and
any other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to the
enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
(2) In order to provide for the training, certification and technical
support programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act
and the regulations,68 the enforcing agency shall collect in addition
to the fees specified in Chapter 82, Fees, a surcharge fee as
established in Chapter 82, Fees, which shall be charged per cubic
foot of volume of new construction. This surcharge fee shall be
remitted to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, Department of
Community Affairs, on a quarterly basis for the fiscal quarter
ending September 30, December 31, March 31 and June 30, and
not later than one month next succeeding the end of the quarter for
which it is due. In the fiscal year in which the regulations first
become effective, the fee shall be collected and remitted for the
third and fourth quarters only.
(3) The enforcing agency shall report annually at the end of each fiscal
year to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, and not later than July
31, the total amount of the surcharge fee collected in the fiscal
year. In the fiscal year in which the regulations first become
effective, the report shall be for the third and fourth quarters only.
A. Fire limits are not established pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23 because no
areas within the Township require such limits.
B. The Construction Official shall prepare and submit to the Mayor, who
shall forthwith submit to the Township Council biannually a report
reevaluating the need for fire limits. This report shall indicate the
recommendations of the Construction Official, the Building Subcode
Official and the Fire Subcode Official regarding those areas which
should be designated as within fire limits, with the reasons therefor.
[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
A. The following documents shall be submitted electronically and by hard
copy, except that such documents are not required for homeowners
68.Editor's Note: The "regulations" refers to the regulations promulgated by the
Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey
pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.).
§ 63-2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 63-4
1:154
Chapter 66
CONTRACTORS, REGISTRATION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 63.
Development names — See Ch. 70.
Fees — See Ch. 82.
Land use — See Ch. 200.
§ 66-1. Registration requirements.
renovating existing areas either within or attached to the preexisting
structure:
(1) Such project specifications as the Construction Official requires at
the time of application for building permits.
(2) Such testing reports as the Construction Official requires at the
time of application for certificates of occupancy.
(3) Such as-builts for residential and nonresidential space as the
Construction Official requires at the time of applications for
certificates of occupancy.
B. All electronic submissions shall be formatted using AutoCAD for plans
and, for text, using either MS Word or Adobe Acrobat Portable
Document Format (PDF).
A. Except for entities required to register pursuant to the New Home
Warranty and Builders' Registration Act,69 every person and entity
engaged in the business of constructing, erecting, altering, renovating,
repairing, restoring, re-roofing, re-siding, moving or demolishing the
whole or any part of buildings or structures; or providing carpentry,
masonry, HVAC or other work typically provided by subcontractors
(other than plumbers and electricians) therefor; or engaged in the
construction or installation of swimming pools; or engaged in the
business of erecting or altering signs, for any of which a building permit
is required, shall be required to register the name of such person or
firm or corporation with the Division of Code Enforcement.70
B. The owner or occupant of a building or structure applying for a building
permit required herein shall not be required to register, provided that
the owner or occupant does his or her own work without use of any
contractor or subcontractor and executes a sworn statement to this
effect on forms supplied by the Construction Official.
69.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:3B-1 et seq.
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 63-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-1
1:155
§ 66-2. Application procedures.
C. A construction contractor, corporation or partnership needs to register
only once, so long as the work is performed solely by that entity. Work
performed for the contractor, corporation or partnership by a
subcontractor requires registration of each subcontractor for each
relevant class listed in § 66-5. Hereinafter in this chapter, all references
to "contractor" shall also refer to "subcontractor."
A. Applications for the registration of contractors shall be submitted to the
Construction Official on forms supplied by the Construction Official and
shall include, in addition to any other pertinent information the
Construction Official may reasonably deem necessary:
(1) A statement giving the name or corporate or firm name of the
contractor.
(2) In the case of a firm, corporation or partnership, the name and
address of the principal office of the firm or corporation, the names
and addresses of all officers, directors, managerial employees and
stockholders owning, of record or beneficially, 5% or more of the
outstanding stock of any class of the corporation.
(3) In the case of a partnership, the names and addresses of all
partners, whether general, special or limited.
B. Additional information.
(1) This application shall also contain the number of years such person,
firm or corporation has been in the contracting business at the
current location or any prior locations, including the address of any
such prior location, if any.
(2) The application shall indicate, for both the current and any prior
periods of time or locations at which a contracting business has
been conducted, all other former trade names, if any, by which any
such contracting business was conducted or in which any of the
persons listed in answer to Subsection A(2) above participated in
any manner and shall likewise furnish all the information required
in Subsection A(2) above for each such prior business.
(3) The applicant shall state in which class the applicant desires to be
registered, choosing one or more of the classes designated in
§ 66-5 of this chapter.
(4) The applicant shall furnish proof, to the satisfaction of the
Construction Official, of sufficient training or experience in the
relevant class designated in § 66-5. Each such application shall
include at least two signed personal references, indicating the
training received or the location of the work performed by the
applicant and stating that the applicant is, in their opinion,
sufficiently qualified to be registered.
§ 66-1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 66-2
1:156
§ 66-3. Fee.
§ 66-4. Work standards.
(5) A certificate of insurance, in an amount not less than $25,000 but in
any event sufficient in the Construction Official's opinion to provide
coverage for all acts for which the applicant may be held liable in
the conduct of the applicant's business, must be furnished with the
application. Such policy shall remain in effect at all times that such
contractor is licensed, and failure to maintain the required policy in
effect at all times shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of
the license.
C. The registration shall be approved or disapproved within 10 days after
filing.
A. No person or entity shall be registered under this section or be
reregistered after revocation of registration under § 66-7 unless and
until there has been a determination by the Construction Official that
the applicant is capable of compliance with the requirements hereof
and has demonstrated sufficient capability and proficiency in past
business history to justify a reasonable belief that such compliance will
occur and unless and until there is paid to the Construction Official, to
the order of the township, a fee as established in Chapter 82, Fees.
B. After registration and for so long as the registration is not revoked
under § 66-7, no subsequent fee shall be required.
C. Any person or entity whose registration has been revoked three times
shall be presumed not capable or proficient in this trade and shall not
be permitted to reregister under this section.
A. All work performed by registered persons or entities shall be done in
accordance with the Uniform Construction Code71 and other codes and
ordinances applicable to the construction activities described in § 66-1A
and shall be done in a good and workmanlike manner in accordance
with applicable plans and specifications under accepted practice
prevailing in the Mercer County area.
B. After obtaining a building permit, the person or persons doing the work
shall notify the Construction Official within the twenty-four-hour period
prior to commencing any work.
C. On each building permit, the contractor shall designate a person to be
in charge of the work who shall be responsible for:
(1) Review and approval of all shop drawings, documents and details
pertaining to the construction phase.
71.Editor's Note: See Ch. 63, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 66-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-4
1:157
§ 66-5. Classes of registration.
An applicant may apply for registration in one or more classes. For the
purpose of this chapter, there shall be the following classes for registration:
(2) Verification of all controlled materials per building subcode
requirements of testing, certification and identification.
(3) Special inspection of critical construction components.
D. The responsible person in charge of work shall perform the necessary
services and be present on the construction site on a regular and
periodic basis to determine that, generally, the work is proceeding in
accordance with the documents approved for the construction permit.
E. At the completion of the construction, the responsible person in charge
of the work shall submit to the Construction Official a report as to the
satisfactory completion and the readiness of the project for occupancy.
Major deviations from the approved permit documents shall be listed in
the report; minor exceptions to the permit documents not endangering
occupancy need not be included.
A. General contractor: a contractor who is proficient in the construction of
a building or structure from start to finish and the alteration, addition
to or repair of any building or structure. This class of contractor shall be
equipped to handle such work either by and through the contractor's
own organization or through appropriate subcontractors and, in the
latter event, must be completely responsible for the subcontractor's
work as if performed or to be performed directly by the general
contractor.
B. Contractor: a contractor who is proficient in the construction of a
building or structure from start to finish and the alteration, addition to
or repair of any building or structure. This class of contractor shall be
equipped to handle such work by and through the contractor's own
work or his or her own organization of employees.
C. Subcontractor: a skilled tradesperson other than a plumber or
electrician who furnishes specific construction services.
D. Carpenter: a contractor who is engaged in the business of or who is
proficient in building or repairing wooden structures or fixtures.
E. Mason: a contractor who is engaged in the business of or who is
proficient in working in stone, brick, block, concrete, plastering or
stucco.
F. Roofing and siding contractor: a contractor who is engaged in the
business of or who is proficient in applying roofing and siding materials
to existing or new buildings or structures.
§ 66-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 66-5
1:158
§ 66-6. Issuance of building permits.
No building permit shall be issued by the Construction Official of the
township for the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or
removal of any building or structure or any subcontracting work with
respect to a building or structure to anyone except a duly registered person
or entity or duly authorized agent of such person or entity, under the
provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that this provision shall not
apply to plumbers and electricians or those entities registered with the
State of New Jersey pursuant to the New Home Warranty and Builders'
Registration Act.72
§ 66-7. Grounds for revocation of registration.
The Construction Official of the township shall revoke the registration of
any person or entity registered hereunder who shall be guilty of any one or
more of the following acts or omissions:
G. Demolition contractor: a contractor who is engaged in the business of
and who is proficient in the demolishing of any building or structure in
the whole or in part.
H. Moving contractor: a contractor who is engaged in the business of and
who is proficient in the moving of any building or structure.
I. Swimming pool contractor: a contractor who is engaged in the business
of or who is proficient in the installation of swimming pools, their
equipment and appurtenances.
J. Sign or billboard contractor: a contractor who is engaged in the
business of or who is proficient in the erection, alteration or
maintenance of signs or billboards.
K. Miscellaneous contractor: a contractor who is proficient in work of a
special character as determined by the Construction Official.
A. Fraud or misrepresentation or concealment of a material fact in the
information given upon initial registration or upon registration after
revocation.
B. Violation of the building, plumbing and fire protection codes of the
township or of any other ordinance or statute which governs the
activities or nature of work performed by the contractor.
C. Material and substantial breach of contract with the owner or
purchaser.
D. Filing of a voluntary or involuntary petition in a bankruptcy or
insolvency proceeding.
72.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:3B-1 et seq.
§ 66-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-7
1:159
§ 66-8. Procedure for revocation.
E. Violation of any federal or state law or local ordinance which is shown
to be prejudicial to the public health, safety or welfare.
A. The Construction Official, on said Construction Official's own initiative
and on forms to be prescribed by said Construction Official or any
person, firm or corporation which has entered into an agreement for
work, either verbal or written, with any contractor registered
hereunder may file a complaint against any registered contractor by the
filing of the same with the Building Department. Such complaint shall
be in writing and signed by the person filing the same. The complaint
shall contain a statement of facts setting forth the specific facts relating
to the violation of this chapter or of the township building, plumbing,
fire prevention or health codes or any other township ordinance or
statute pertaining to building, construction or the registered
contractor's activities.
B. Upon a complaint being filed in the manner and form herein prescribed,
the Construction Official shall forthwith issue a notice, in writing,
directing the contractor in question to file a written answer within 10
days after the service of notice, answering to the charges or showing
cause, if any, why the registration should not be revoked. A copy of the
complaint shall be served with said notice.
C. Failure of the contractor in question to file a written answer within the
10 days may be deemed an admission by the contractor of the
commission of the act or violations cited in the complaint, and the
contractor's license thereupon may be revoked forthwith by the
Construction Official without further evidence.
D. In the event that the contractor in question shall file a written answer
within the time period prescribed in the notice, a hearing shall be
scheduled, notice of which shall be served no less than 10 days prior to
the date fixed for the hearing. The hearing shall be held by and before
the Construction Official of the township, who shall thereafter make all
decisions as to fact and law concerning revocation of the registration.
At the hearing, the contractor and licensee shall each have the right to
appear personally or by counsel and cross-examine witnesses and
produce witnesses and evidence in the contractor's and licensee's
behalf. Counsel is required if the licensee is a corporation. A certified
Court Reporter shall be present at the contractor's expense, and a
complete transcript shall be presented to the Mayor or designee at no
cost if an appeal is taken.73
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 66-7 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 66-9
1:160
§ 66-9. Appeals.74
Any person aggrieved by any action of the Construction Official taken
pursuant to this chapter shall have the right of appeal to the Mayor or
designee. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Business
Administrator, within 10 days after notice of revocation or other action
complained of, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for
appeal. The Mayor or designee shall thereafter set a time and place for
hearing the appeal upon at least 10 days' prior written notice to the
appellant. The decision and order of the Mayor or designee on such appeal
shall be final and conclusive and shall be based on the evidence presented
at the hearing before the Construction Official, with no further evidence to
be permitted.
§ 66-10. Service of notices.
Whenever notice is required or permitted to be given by this chapter, such
notice may be effected by personal service upon the licensee if an individual
or any general partner, if a partnership, or upon any corporate officer, if
a corporation, or, alternatively, to any of the foregoing, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the last address listed in the Construction
Official's office in conjunction with the registration information. It shall be
the duty of each registered contractor to keep the township advised of
any subsequent change of address. Upon failure of a contractor to comply
with this requirement, any notice returned with the notation "unknown,"
"moved" or "not claimed" shall be deemed proper service of all notices
required by this section.
§ 66-11. Reregistration after revocation.
Any person whose registration has been revoked under the provisions of
§ 66-7 may apply to reregister and be re-entered upon the registration list
upon filing the following:
§ 66-12. Violations and penalties.75
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3.
A. Certification by the Construction Official to the effect that all violations
with reference to which the revocation was secured have been
corrected.
B. Proof that all loss caused by the act or omissions for which the
registration was revoked has been fully satisfied and that all conditions
imposed by the decision of the revocation have been complied with.
C. Payment of a registration fee as established in Chapter 82, Fees.
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
75.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 66-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-12
1:161
Chapter 70
DEVELOPMENT NAMES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Registration of contractors — See Ch. 66. Land use — See Ch. 200.
§ 70-1. Registration of names of developments; purpose.
Developers utilize fictitious and otherwise nonregistered names to identify
their respective developments, and changes often occur in said names
without notice to the township or other governmental agency.
§ 70-2. Filing requirements.
All commercial and residential developers shall file with the Township
Clerk's office a statement containing the following information:
§ 70-3. Filing required for new names.
In the event that a new name is used by a developer, there shall be a
continuing obligation to file the statement set forth in § 70-2 at the time said
name is used.
§ 70-4. Fictitious name certificate.
In the event that a developer files a fictitious name certificate with the
Secretary of State or County Clerk, a copy of said certificate shall be filed
with the Township Clerk.
§ 70-5. Violations and penalties.76
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3.
Chapter 74
DRUG-FREE ZONES
A. The name, address and phone number of the name of the developer.
B. The present name by which a particular development is now being
marketed or sold under.
C. All previous names by which said development has been known.
76.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 66-12 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 70-5
1:162
ARTICLE I
Drug-Free Zones
[Adopted 1-23-1989 by Ord. No. 89-06 (Sec. 3-16 of the Revised
General Ordinances); amended in its entirety 10-28-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-30]
§ 74-1. Adoption of Map.
§ 74-2. Continued viability of Map.
§ 74-3. Responsibilities of school officials.
The School Board or the Chief Administrative Officer, in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Township Engineer and the Township
Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and
A. In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of L. 1988, c. 44
(N.J.S.A. 2C:35 et seq.), the DWI/Drug-Free Zones Map produced by
West Windsor Township Engineer Francis Guzik, dated October 2019, is
hereby approved and adopted as an official finding and record of the
location and areas within the Township of property which is used for
school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and of the areas on or within 1,000
feet of such school property; and is hereby approved and adopted as an
official finding and record of location and boundaries of the area or
areas on or within 500 feet of a public park, public building, or public
housing facility.77
B. The DWI/Drug-Free Zones.78
A. The DWI/Drug-Free Zones Map approved and adopted pursuant to
§ 74-1 shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as to
the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property
owned or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board
which is used for school purposes until such time, if any, that this article
shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to
the location and boundaries of school property and Drug-Free Zones.
B. The DWI/Drug-Free Zones Map approved and adopted pursuant to
§ 74-1 of this chapter shall continue to constitute an official finding and
record as to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 500 feet
of a public park, public building, or public housing facility which is used
for public purposes until such time, if any, that this chapter shall be
amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the
location and boundaries of public property and DWI/Drug-Free Zones.
77.Editor's Note: The Map is on file in the Township offices.
78.Editor's Note: A list of the West Windsor Township Drug-Free Zones is on file in the
Township offices.
§ 74-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-3
1:163
boundaries of any property owned or leased to any elementary or secondary
school or school board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 74-4. Responsibilities of Clerk.
The Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the original
of the Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 74-1 and to provide at a
reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any person, agency or court which
may from time to time request such a copy. It is hereby further directed that
a true copy of such Map and of this article shall be provided without cost to
the County Clerk and to the office of the Mercer County Prosecutor.
§ 74-5. Additional matters.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 74-1
was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in prosecutions
arising under the criminal laws of this state and that pursuant to state
law such Map shall constitute prima facie evidence of the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board.
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
(5) The location and boundaries of those areas in or within 500 feet of
a public park, public building or public housing facility pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2C:35-71.
B. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1, nothing in this section shall be
construed to preclude the prosecution from introducing or relying upon
any other evidence or testimony to establish any element of this offense.
§ 74-3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 74-5
1:164
Chapter 82
FEES
§ 82-1. Collection of fees; issuance of permits and licenses.
The Township Clerk or such other officer as may be designated by ordinance
is authorized to collect and receive the following fees and to issue such
permits or licenses as may be required by ordinance.
§ 82-2. Alcoholic beverage control.79 [Amended 3-22-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-08]
Fees for alcoholic beverage licenses shall be as follows:
§ 82-3. Escrow deposits; application fees; inspection fees.
A. Plenary retail consumption license (annual): $2,500. [Amended
12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
B. Plenary retail distribution license (annual): $2,500. [Amended
12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
C. Club license (annual): $180.
A. Obligation to pay application fees and professional fees incurred during
the course of review. Applicants submitting the applications set forth
herein shall pay such application fees as are due and all reasonable
costs for professional services, including engineering, legal, planning,
landscape architecture, traffic engineering, including review of traffic
reduction plans, and other costs incurred by the Township in
connection with the review and approval by the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment of the applications set forth herein,
including costs incurred during any informal review of a concept plan
by such Board and review to assure that the conditions of approval have
been satisfied. Such professional services may be by Township staff or
by consultants retained by the Township on a general basis or retained
specifically for an application by the board of jurisdiction or the
Township. In conjunction with payment of such professional fees, the
applicant shall make an escrow deposit in the amount and manner set
forth herein, shall execute an agreement in a form provided by the
Township obligating itself to pay such fees and shall furnish a fee bond
or other performance guaranty in favor of the Township guaranteeing
the payment thereof. The application fee is a flat fee to cover direct
administrative expenses and is nonrefundable. [Amended 12-19-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-16]
B. Amount of fees and escrow deposits due. Each applicant shall, prior to
his or her application being deemed complete, submit to the Township
79.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 36, Alcoholic Beverages, Art. I, Licensing.
§ 74-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-3
1:165
Treasurer in cash or by certified check or money order the following
sums as application fees and escrow deposits. Where one application
for development includes more than one approval request, the sum of
the individual required fees shall be paid.
(1) Subdivision fees.80 [Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-10;
12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
Type of Plat
Application
Fee Escrow to be Deposited
Sketch plat $500 $750 per lot for the first 5
lots and $300 per lot for the
remaining lots
Minor subdivision $500 $2,500 per lot
Major subdivision plat
Preliminary plat $750 $1,200 per lot for the first 10
lots, $800 per lot for the next
10 lots and $600 per lot for
the remaining lots
Final plat $500 $1,000 per lot for the first 10
lots and $600 per lot for the
remaining lots
Combined preliminary
plat and final plat
$1,000 $2,500 per lot for the first 10
lots and $1,000 per lot for
the remaining lots
Subdivision certificate
of approval
$125 None required
(2) Site plan fees. [Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-10;
12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
Type of Plan
Application
Fee Escrow to be Deposited
Site plan not involving
any building area
$500 $25 per square foot of site
area being disturbed
Residential concept
plan
$750 $750 per unit for the first 200
units and $225 per unit for
the remaining units
Nonresidential concept
plan
$750 $0.10 per square foot for the
first 200,000 square feet and
$0.05 for the remaining
square feet
Residential major site plan
80.Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Land Use, Part 2, Subdivision.
§ 82-3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 82-3
1:166
Type of Plan
Application
Fee Escrow to be Deposited
Preliminary approval $750 $250 per unit for the first 200
units and $100 per unit for
the remaining units
Final approval $500 $125 per unit for the first 200
units and $50 per unit for the
remaining units
If combined
preliminary and final
approval sought
$1,000 $400 per unit for the first 200
units and $200 per unit for
the remaining units
Nonresidential minor
site plan
$750 $35 per square foot of floor
area
Nonresidential major site plans
Preliminary approval $750 $0.35 per square foot of floor
area for the first 200,000
square feet and $0.15 per
square foot for the remaining
square feet
Final approval $500 $0.10 per square foot of floor
area for the first 200,000
square feet and $0.05 per
square foot for the remaining
square feet
If combined
preliminary and final
approval
$1,000 $0.40 per square foot of floor
area for the first 200,000
square feet and $0.25 per
square foot for the remaining
square feet
(3) Other submissions. [Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-10;
12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
Type of Plan
Application
Fee Escrow to be Deposited
General development
plans
$2,000 $25,000
Conditional use
approval with drivethrough
facilities
$750 $7,500
Conditional use
approvals
$500 $3,000
Appeals under N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70a
$150 $750
§ 82-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-3
1:167
Type of Plan
Application
Fee Escrow to be Deposited
Interpretation or
special questions under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b
$200 $200
Hardship variances
under N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70c
$100 $250 for each variance
Use variances $1,000 $3,500 for each variance
Waivers from sign
requirements
$300 for
all
waivers
$1,500 per waiver
Permits under N.J.S.A.
40:55D-34 and
40:55D-36
$150 $500
Modifications of
previously approved
plans without changes
to MIC or FAR
$1,000 $1,500
All other modifications
of previously approved
plans
$100 Same as if the application
were an original application
List of persons within
200 feet
$10 or
$0.25 per
name,
whichever
is greater
None required
Request for zoning
text/map amendments
$2,500 $10,000
Maintenance guaranty
application
10% of
the
maintenance
guaranty
or $500,
whichever
is greater
None required
(4) If the final total square footage is unknown, fees and escrows shall
be based upon maximum floor area permitted under Part 4, Zoning,
of Chapter 200.
(5) Development review fees for either subdivision or site plan
applications may be proportioned to stages of submittals as
approved by the Planning Board.
§ 82-3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 82-3
1:168
(6) Unexpended escrow deposits for sketch plats and concept plans
shall be credited against escrow deposits due upon filing of an
application for development.
C. Determination of insufficient escrow deposit during completeness
review.
(1) Within 45 days after the filing of an application for development
and before a determination of completeness is made, the Township
shall determine whether the escrow amounts set forth above are
sufficient for the Township to perform required application reviews,
including review and preparation of documents and review to
assure that the conditions of approval have been satisfied. In
conducting such review, the following criteria shall be considered:
(a) The presence or absence of public water or sewer servicing the
site.
(b) Environmental considerations, including but not limited to
geological, hydrological and ecological factors.
(c) Traffic impact of the proposed development.
(d) Impact of the proposed development on the existing aquifer or
water quality.
(e) Impact on improvements which might require off-tract or offsite
contributions agreements.
(2) If additional sums are deemed necessary, the Treasurer shall notify
the applicant of the required additional amount the Township has
determined to be necessary. Each applicant shall, prior to the
application being deemed complete, submit to the Township
Treasurer in cash or by certified check or money order the amount
of escrow deposit due pursuant to Subsection B and the amount of
additional escrow deposit agreed by the applicant and the
Township to be due in accordance with this subsection and shall
complete all forms as required by the Director of Community
Development. The application shall be deemed incomplete if the
applicant and Township do not agree on the additional escrow
amount due pursuant to this subsection.
D. Determination of insufficient escrow deposit after the application has
been deemed complete.
(1) If an escrow account contains insufficient funds to enable the
Township or board of jurisdiction to complete required application
reviews, including follow-up as to documents and conditions, the
Township Treasurer shall provide the applicant with a notice of
insufficient escrow balance. In order for work to continue on the
development or the application, the applicant shall within a
reasonable time period post a deposit to the account in an amount
§ 82-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-3
1:169
to be agreed upon by the Township or board of jurisdiction and the
applicant. Such amount shall be sufficient to pay all unpaid bills,
as well as an amount sufficient to complete all applicant reviews,
including follow- up as to documents and conditions.
(2) In the interim, any required health and safety inspections shall be
made and charged back against the replenishment of funds. Other
than these inspections, no further work shall be done on the
application or development. In addition, no hearing before any
Township board or committee may be convened and no
construction permit or certificate of occupancy may be issued if
such amounts are due and payable. The time to act under the
Municipal Land Use Law81 shall be tolled during the time when
there has been no municipal action on the application because the
applicant has not posted the additional escrow deposit provided for
in this subsection. In addition, all escrow charges which are due
and owing shall become a lien on the premises with respect to
which said charges are required and shall remain so until paid.
Said overdue charges shall accrue the same interest from time to
time as taxes upon real estate in the Township. The Township shall
have the same remedies for the collection thereof with interest,
costs and penalties as it has by law for the collection of taxes upon
real estate and may collect reasonable attorney's fees incurred in
collecting such unpaid fees.
(3) The board of jurisdiction may deny the application if the applicant
has failed to pay any amounts due under Subsections B through D
hereof. Whether or not specifically stated in the resolution of
memorialization, payment in a timely manner of all escrow fees
which become due shall be a condition of the approval of any
application.
E. Periodic accounting of escrow funds and expenditures. The Township
Treasurer shall prepare and send to the applicant a statement which
shall include an accounting of funds listing all deposits, interest
earnings, if applicable, disbursements and the cumulative balance of
the escrow account. This information shall be provided on a quarterly
basis, if monthly charges are $1,000 or less, or on a monthly basis, if
monthly charges exceed $1,000.
F. Close-out procedures. The applicant shall send written notice by
certified mail to the Township Treasurer, to the board of jurisdiction and
to municipal professionals who worked on the application review that
the board of jurisdiction has granted final approval; that, in the case of
subdivisions or site plans, the subdivision or site plan has been signed
by the board of jurisdiction and the approval has otherwise been
perfected; and that, in the case of all other applications for which
escrow deposits are necessary, the approval has been perfected and no
further work by municipal professionals is necessary. After receipt of
81.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 82-3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 82-3
1:170
said notice, each professional shall render a final bill to the Treasurer
within 30 days. The Treasurer shall render a written final accounting
to the applicant on the uses to which the deposit was put within 45
days of receipt of the final bill from the professionals. Any balances
remaining in the escrow account, including interest, if applicable, shall
be refunded to the applicant along with the final accounting. The
refunding process shall be in accordance with the guidelines and
procedures established by the division of local government services in
effect at that time.
G. Fee for inspection of constructed improvements. [Amended
10-29-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-26]
(1) Each developer shall reimburse the Township for all reasonable
costs for the municipal inspection of the construction site and offsite
improvements and shall execute an agreement in a form
provided by the Township obligating itself to do so. An escrow fund
will be established with the Township before construction begins,
and such funds shall be used to pay the fee and costs of
professional services employed by the Township to inspect the
construction.
(2) An initial fee, except for extraordinary circumstances, of the
greater of $500 or 5% of the cost of improvements, both public and
private, shall be deposited prior to the issuance of any construction
permit. The estimated cost of improvements shall be determined by
the Township Engineer pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4 based on a
preliminary itemized cost estimate prepared by the developer.
(a) For those developments for which the reasonably anticipated
fees are less than $10,000, fees may, at the option of the
developer, be paid in two installments. The initial amount
deposited by a developer shall be 50% of the reasonably
anticipated fees. When the balance on deposit drops to 10% of
the reasonably anticipated fees because the amount deposited
by the developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the
Township Engineer for inspections, the developer shall deposit
the remaining 50% of the anticipated inspection fees.
(b) For those developments for which the reasonably anticipated
fees are $10,000 or greater, fees may, at the option of the
developer, be paid in four installments. The initial amount
deposited by a developer shall be 25% of the reasonably
anticipated fees. When the balance on deposit drops to 10% of
the reasonably anticipated fees because the amount deposited
by the developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the
Township Engineer for inspections, the Township Treasurer
shall provide the developer with a notice of insufficient deposit
balance and the developer shall make additional deposits of
25% of the reasonably anticipated inspection fees.
§ 82-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-3
1:171
(3) The Township Engineer shall not perform any inspection if
sufficient funds are not on deposit, except that any required health
and safety inspections shall be made and charged back against the
replenishment of funds.
(4) If an inspection deposit contains insufficient funds to enable the
Township to perform required improvement inspections, the
Township shall require the developer to deposit additional funds in
escrow, provided that the Township delivers to the developer a
written inspection escrow deposit request, signed by the Township
Engineer, which: informs the developer of the need for additional
inspections, details the items or undertakings that require
inspection, estimates the time required for those inspections, and
estimates the cost of performing those inspections.
(5) The Township Treasurer shall provide the developer with an
accounting of the deposit setting forth the information and in the
intervals set forth in Subsection E. Upon the improvements being
approved and all guarantees required under Chapter 200, Land
Use, Article XVII, Improvement Guaranties, having been released,
the deposit shall be closed out in the same manner as is set forth
for escrow accounts in Subsection F.
H. Deposit of escrow funds. The Township Treasurer shall deposit all
escrow funds in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1.
I. Exemptions. [Added 10-9-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-19]
(1) The following organizations or individuals may, to the extent
specified herein, be exempt from the payment of subdivision fees
assessed pursuant to § 82-3B(1) and site plan fees assessed
pursuant to § 82-3B(2):
(a) Any non-profit recreational association holding a tax-exempt
status under the Federal Internal Revenue Code of 1954 [26
U.S.C. § 501(c) or (d)], when the property that is subject of the
subdivision or site plan application is intended to serve the
needs of all West Windsor citizens and the services provided by
the organization would otherwise involve the expenditure of
taxpayer funds.
(b) Any landowner who seeks a subdivision for the purpose of
donating a subdivided parcel of land to West Windsor
Township, to another governmental entity or to a non-profit
land-preservation organization, when the donated land will be
deed restricted to prevent development and when neither
additional residential nor commercial development will be built
on any resultant parcel or enabled in any way by the
subdivision.
(c) A disabled person, or a parent, child or sibling of a disabled
person, in connection with any application for development
§ 82-3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 82-3
1:172
§ 82-4. Construction fees. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07;
7-26-1999 by Ord. No. 99-15; 3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-08;
12-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-48; 4-20-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-09;
3-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-09]
which promotes accessibility to his or her own existing living
unit. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "disabled
person" shall have the same meaning as provided in § 82-4V(3).
(2) Any of the qualifying organizations or individuals may be exempt
from paying the application fee and the escrow deposit set forth in
§ 82-3B(1) and (2). These organizations shall be required to pay any
professional fee or other cost for application review incurred by the
Township which exceeds the application fee and escrow deposit set
forth in the chapter.
A. Construction fees shall be as follows:
Use Group Fee
E Volume x .04
A-1 Volume x .04
A-2 Volume x .04
A-3 Volume x .04
A-4 Volume x .04
A-5 Volume x .04
I-1 Volume x .04
I-2 Volume x .04
I-3 Volume x .04
I-4 Volume x .04
R-1 Volume x .04
R-2 Volume x .04
R-3 Volume x .04
R-4 Volume x .04
R-5 Volume x .04
H Volume x .04
F-1 Volume x .04
F-2 Volume x .04
B Volume x .04
M Volume x .04
S-1 Volume x .03
S-2 Volume x .03
U Volume x .04
§ 82-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-4
1:173
B. Building addition: addition cubic content times unit rate equals building
fee.
C. Alterations, renovations, repairs and minor work: estimated cost per
thousand times $35. The applicant shall submit to the Division of Code
Enforcement cost data by a licensed architect or engineer, qualified
estimating firm or by contractor bid. The Division of Code Enforcement
shall review the estimated construction cost for acceptance.
D. Additions and renovations, alterations or repairs: combination of rates
provided in Subsections B and C.
E. Use Group U and miscellaneous uses. Flat fees are as follows:
(1) Swimming pools, aboveground:
(a) Private pool: $100.
(b) Public pool: $300.
(c) Hot tub/spa: $100.
(2) Swimming pools, in-ground:
(a) Private pool: $260.
(b) Public pool: $650.
(3) Fences:
(a) Group R-5: $100.
(b) All other groups: $35 per $1,000.
(4) Retaining walls:
(a) Group R-5: $100.
(b) All other groups: $35 per $1,000.
F. Signs.
(1) Facade skins shall be $4 per square foot.
(2) Freestanding signs shall be $4 per square foot for the first 100
square feet, $3 per square foot for the next 400 square feet and $2
per square foot thereafter.
(3) Ground signs or wall signs shall be $3 per square foot for the first
100 square feet, $2.10 per square foot for the next 400 square feet
and $1.40 per square foot thereafter.
G. The fee for tents, in excess of 16,800 square feet or more than 140 feet
in any direction, shall be $325.
§ 82-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 82-4
1:174
H. Demolition. Flat rate depending on building class when occupied shall
be as follows:
(1) Class I: $650.
(2) Class II: $520.
(3) Class III: $260.
I. Underground storage tank removal: residential: $100. All other groups:
$325.
J. Limited certificates of approval.
(1) Limitations.
(a) Equipment herein below listed shall be granted a certificate of
approval by the appropriate subcode official or other approved
agency for the duration specified herein:
[1] Cross-connections/backflow preventers, 12 months: $50.
(b) Such equipment shall be periodically reinspected or tested in
accordance with the provisions of the regulations prior to
expiration of such certificate of approval and any violations
corrected before a new certificate may be issued.
(c) No such system or assembly shall continue in operation unless
a valid certificate of approval has been reissued. It shall be a
violation of the regulations for an owner to fail to provide for
such periodic inspection and testing.
(2) Revocation. The enforcing agency may revoke a certificate of
approval whenever a condition of a certificate has been violated.
(3) Time limit. The provisions of the regulations do not preclude
periodic certification pursuant to other applicable laws and
ordinances.
K. Certificate of occupancy.
(1) The fee shall be in the amount of 10% of the new construction
permit fee. The minimum fee shall be $165.
(2) For one- and two-family dwellings, the minimum fee shall be $100.
(3) The fee for a certificate of continued occupancy shall be $400.
(4) The fee for a certificate of occupancy granted to a change of use
group shall be $400.
(5) The fee for the first issuance and renewal of a temporary certificate
of occupancy shall be $35.
L. Fire protection and hazardous equipment.
§ 82-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-4
1:175
(1) Said fees shall be based upon the number of heads or detectors
being installed.
Number of Heads,
Detectors
or Other Initiating Devices Fee
1 to 20
Residential $100
Commercial $165
21 to 100 $234
101 to 200 $448
201 to 400 $1,160
401 to 1,000 $1,605
Over 1,000 $2,048
(2) Independent pre-engineered systems (per system): $165.
(3) Gas- or oil-fired appliance which is not connected to the plumbing
system (per appliance):
(a) Use group R-5: $100.
(b) All other groups: $165.
(4) Smoke control systems, flammable combustible liquid tank or fire
alarm control panel replacement (per system): $165.
(5) Kitchen exhaust system (per system):
(a) Use group R-5: $100.
(b) All other groups: $165.
(6) Supervisory devices: $100.
(7) Signaling devices: $165.
(8) Engineered suppressions pre-action systems, or dry pipe/alarm
valves: $165.
M. Standpipe, hydrant or fire pump (each): $325.
N. Underground water service for protection:
(1) One foot to 500 feet of pipe: $400.
(2) Each additional 100 feet of pipe: $100.
O. Roofing and siding. [Amended 6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-19]
§ 82-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 82-4
1:176
(1) Roofing: $100 Group R-5; (townhouse and duplex structures only);
all other groups $35 per $1,000.
(2) Siding: $100 Group R-5; (polypropylene siding only); all other
groups $35 per $1,000.
P. Administrative fees for asbestos hazard abatement.
(1) An administrative fee of $118 for each construction permit issued
for an asbestos hazard abatement project.
(2) An administrative fee of $24 for each certificate of occupancy
issued following the successful completion of an asbestos hazard
abatement project.
Q. Lead abatement.
(1) The fee for a permit for lead hazard abatement work shall be $196.
(2) The fee for a lead abatement clearance certificate shall be $39.
R. The fee of $65 per hour or part thereof shall be charged for all plan
review revisions. Said fee shall be remitted to the Township of West
Windsor at the time of revision. No revision shall be released until
payment is received by the Township.
S. The change of contractor fee shall be $100 for group R-5; all other use
groups: $165 per contractor. [Amended 6-24-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
T. Variation.
(1) Group R-5: $150.
(2) All other groups: $500.
(3) Resubmissions, residential: $65.
(4) Resubmissions, all others: $200.
U. Plumbing. [Amended 6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-19]
(1) Fees shall be $35 for each fixture, appliance, appurtenance, vent or
stack, but may not be all inclusive: Water closets, urinals, bidets,
lavatories, sinks, garbage disposals, bathtubs, showers, floor
drains, washing machines, dishwashers, hose bibs, drinking
fountains, roof drains, leaders, nontestable backflow preventers,
air admittance valves, vents, stacks, water hammer arrestors water
filters, indirect connections, expansion tanks, trap primers, mixing
valves for lavatories, swimming pool piping. Gas pipe connections,
oil pipe connections, fuel oil connections, Air conditioning units,
condensate pumps and line sets.
§ 82-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-4
1:177
(2) Fees shall be $60 for each of the following items, but may not be all
inclusive: Water heater, water softener, swimming pool heaters,
chimney liners, air distribution systems, solar systems.
(3) Fees shall be $85 for each of the following items, but may not be all
inclusive: Hot air furnaces, hot water boiler, fuel oil equipment,
hydronic systems, solar heating systems, split systems.
(4) Fees shall be $100 for each of the following items, but may not be
all inclusive: Water service connections, sewer connections,
generators, permanent LPG tanks.
(5) Fees shall be $135 for each of the following items, but may not be
all inclusive: Sewer ejectors, grease interceptors, oil interceptors,
testable backflow device, pumps, commercial-industrial water
heaters, commercial rooftop air-conditioning units, commercial
refrigeration piping/systems, commercial solar system.
(6) Yearly backflow testing fee shall be $50.
(7) Notwithstanding the individual fee set forth above, the total
plumbing subcode fee for a single-family residences shall be $100
and the minimum total fee for all other structures shall be $165.
(8) All plumbing installation shall be installed by a New Jersey State
licensed master plumber; except in the case of single-family
residences, a homeowner shall be allowed to perform his/her own
plumbing work on their own dwelling unit.
V. Mechanical fees. [Amended 6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-19]
(1) Fees shall be as follows for R3 and R5 under the responsibility of
the Plumbing Subcode Official:
(a) The fee shall be $85 for each of the following items, but may
not be all inclusive; Hot air furnace, hot water boiler, fuel oil
equipment, steam boiler, oil tank, solar heating systems,
hydronic systems and split systems.
(b) The fee shall be $60 for each of the following items, but may
not be all inclusive: Water heater, chimney liner and air
distribution systems.
(c) The fee shall be $35 for each of the following items, but may
not be all inclusive; Each gas pipe connection, each temporary
LPG tank, each fuel oil connection, air-conditioning unit, coils,
condensate pumps, refrigerant lines, fireplace inserts, and
combustion air.
(2) All mechanical installations shall be installed by a New Jersey State
licensed master HVACR contractor, except in the case of a singlefamily
residence which is owned and occupied by the homeowner,
in which the homeowner shall be allowed to perform their own
§ 82-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 82-4
1:178
work on their own dwelling. Except for refrigeration piping and
chimney verification forms may not be done by the homeowner.
W. Technical section. The minimum fee for a technical section shall be as
follows:
(1) Group R-5 use: $100.
(2) All other groups: $165.
X. Plan review. The plan review fee shall be 5% of the total of the building,
electric, plumbing and fire fees.
Y. State of New Jersey training. In order to provide for the training and
certification and technical support programs required by the State
Uniform Construction Code Act, the enforcing agency, including the
Division of Code Enforcement when acting as the local agency, shall
collect a surcharge fee to be based upon the volume of new
construction within the municipality. The fee shall be in the amount of
$0.00371 per cubic foot volume of new construction and additions. The
fee for all other construction shall be $1.90 per $1,000 of cost. The
minimum permit surcharge shall be $1. (Elevators, lead and asbestos
per state fee schedule)
Z. Annual construction permit. The fee to be charged for an annual
construction permit shall be charged annually. This fee shall be a flat
fee based upon the number of maintenance workers who are employed
by the facility and who are primarily engaged in work that is governed
by a subcode. Managers, engineers and clericals shall not be
considered maintenance workers for the purpose of establishing the
annual construction permit fee. Annual permits may be issued for
building, fire protection, electrical and plumbing. Fees shall be as
follows: per state fee schedule.
AA. Contractor registration: The fee shall be $125 for a three-year term
(commercial contractor's license only).82 [Amended 6-24-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-19]
BB. Waiver of construction permit fees.
(1) No person shall be charged a construction permit surcharge fee or
enforcing agency fee for any construction, reconstruction,
alteration or improvement designed and undertaken solely to
promote accessibility by disabled persons to an existing private
structure or any of the facilities contained herein.
(2) A disabled person, or a parent or sibling of a disabled person, shall
not be required to pay any municipal fee or charge in order to
secure a construction permit for any construction, reconstruction,
82.Editor's Note: See Ch. 66, Contractors, Registration of. The registration form is available
from the Construction Official.
§ 82-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-4
1:179
alteration or improvement which promotes accessibility to his or
her own living unit.
(3) "Disabled person" means a person who has the total and permanent
inability to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of
any medically determinable physical or mental impairment,
including blindness, and shall include but not be limited to any
resident of this state who is disabled pursuant to the federal Social
Security Act (42 U.S.C. § 416), or the federal Railroad Retirement
Act of 1974 (45 U.S.C. § 231 et seq.) or is rated as having a 60%
disability or higher pursuant to any federal law administered by the
United States Veterans' Act. For purposes of this subsection,
"blindness" means central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the
better eye with the use of a correcting lens. An eye which is
accompanied by a limitation in the fields of vision such that the
widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater
than 20º shall be considered as having a central visual acuity of 20/
200 or less.
CC. Penalties. Penalties may be levied by an enforcing agency as follows:
(1) Up to $1,000 per violation for failure or refusal to comply with any
lawful order, unless the failure or refusal to comply is done with the
knowledge that it will endanger the life or safety of any person, in
which case the penalty shall be up to $2,000 per violation;
(2) Up to $2,000 per violation for failure to obtain a required permit
prior to commencing construction or for allowing a building to be
occupied without a certificate of occupancy;
(3) Up to $2,000 per violation for failure to comply with a stop
construction order;
(4) Up to $2,000 per violation for willfully making a false or misleading
written statement, or willfully omitting any required information or
statement in any application or request for approval;
(5) Up to $500 per violation for any violation not covered under
Subsection CC(1) through (4) above.
(6) For purposes of this subsection, in an occupied building, a code
violation involving fire safety, structural soundness or the
malfunctioning of mechanical equipment that would pose a life
safety hazard shall be deemed to endanger the life or safety of a
person. In an unoccupied building, a code violation of a
requirement intended to protect members of the public who are
walking by the property shall be deemed to endanger the life or
safety of a person.
(7) All monies collected shall be collected under penalty provisions of
the UCC. All penalties collected shall be retained by the
Department of Code Enforcement and shall be placed in a special
§ 82-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 82-4
1:180
§ 82-5. Electrical subcode fees.83 [Amended 3-22-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-08; 12-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-48; 3-27-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-09]
Electrical subcode fees shall be as follows:
trust fund to be applied to the cost to the department for training,
technical support programs, certification, new equipment and
transportation. An independent fund shall be set up and retained
by the Director of Finance to be the trustee of this account.
A. Electrical fixtures and devices. [Amended 6-24-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-20]
(1) Fees.
(a) From one to 40 receptacles, fixtures or switches: $90.
(b) Increments of 25 additional items: $65.
(c) Residential garbage disposals: $25.
(d) Residential heaters, boilers, etc.: $25.
(e) Floor heat: $25.
(f) Heated towel bars: $25.
(g) Residential sump pumps: $25.
(h) Residential dishwashers: $25.
(i) Sewer ejector pump: $25.
(j) Signs:
[1] First sign: $165.
[2] Each additional sign: $80.
(k) Closed-circuit TV and intercom:
[1] Up to five: $165.
[2] Five to 25 cameras or intercoms additional: $195.
[3] Twenty-six or more additional cameras or intercoms: $260.
B. Card reader mag locks:
(1) First door: $165.
(2) Each additional door: $30.
83.Editor's Note: See Ch. 63, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 82-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-5
1:181
C. Motors, variable frequency drives (VFD's) and control systems.
[Amended 6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-20]
(1) Greater than 1/2 hp or less than or equal to 10 hp: $25.
(2) Greater than 10 hp or less than or equal to 50 hp: $125.
(3) Greater than 50 hp or less than or equal to 100 hp: $200.
(4) Greater than 100 hp: $500.
D. Electrical devices: transformers and generators.
(1) Greater than 1 kw or less than or equal to 10 kw: $75.
(2) Greater than 10 kw or less than or equal to 45 kw: $100.
(3) Greater than 45 kw or less than or equal to 112.5 kw: $300.
(4) Greater than 112.5 kw: $500.
E. Service equipment. Term includes service panel, service entrance and
subpanels.
(1) Each equipment piece priced as follows:
(a) Greater than 0 amp, less than or equal to 200 amps: $80.
(b) Greater than 200 amps, less than or equal to 1,000 amps:
$350.
(c) Greater than 1,000 amps: $1,000.
(d) Service equipment: fees for transfer switches equal to service
as above.
F. Temporary pole/construction service: $125.
G. Pools.
(1) Residential: permanently installed pools, in-ground or
aboveground, including hot tub/spa, fountains (each): $125.
(2) Public: for fees, apply Subsections A, C and E.
(a) If applicable, underwater light (each): $30.
(b) If applicable, panel board (each): $80.
(c) Annual pool inspection: $130.
H. Light standards exceeding eight feet in height (each): $75.
I. Light standards less than eight feet in height: refer to item Subsection
A.
§ 82-5 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 82-5
1:182
J. Smoke detectors, heat detectors, fire and burglar alarm expansion
modules: [Amended 6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-20]
(1) Group R-5 flat rate: $55.
(2) All other groups:
(a) One to 20: $200 each.
(b) Each 25 additional: $100.
(3) Electrical operated fire dampers (each): $25.
K. Commercial alarm control unit: $150. [Amended 6-24-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-20]
(1) Note: price does not include devices; refer to item Subsection A.
(a) For smoke and heat detectors; refer to item Subsection J.
(2) Communications EF, MDF, IDF, TL: $125.
L. Commercial lighting control panels (each): $80. [Amended 6-24-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-20]
M. Commercial building automation systems and satellite systems (each)
$165. [Added 6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-20]
N. Penalties. Penalties may be levied by an enforcing agency as follows:
[Amended 6-24-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-20]
(1) Up to $1,000 per violation for failure or refusal to comply with any
lawful order, unless the failure or refusal to comply is done with the
knowledge that it will endanger the life or safety of any person, in
which case the penalty shall be up to $2,000 per violation;
(2) Up to $2,000 per violation for failure to obtain a required permit
prior to commencing construction or for allowing a building to be
occupied without a certificate of occupancy;
(3) Up to $2,000 per violation for failure to comply with a stop
construction order;
(4) Up to $2,000 per violation for willfully making a false or misleading
written statement, or willfully omitting any required information or
statement in any application or request for approval;
(5) Up to $500 per violation for any violation not covered under
Subsection N(1) through (4) above.
(6) For purposes of this subsection, in an occupied building, a code
violation involving fire safety, structural soundness or the
malfunctioning of mechanical equipment that would pose a life
safety hazard shall be deemed to endanger the life or safety of a
person. In an unoccupied building, a code violation of a
§ 82-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-5
1:183
§ 82-6. Fire prevention, fire safety and emergency services. 84
[Amended 4-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-07; 3-22-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-08; 12-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-48]
requirement intended to protect members of the public who are
walking by the property shall be deemed to endanger the life or
safety of a person.
(7) All monies collected shall be collected under penalty provisions of
the UCC. All penalties collected shall be retained by the
Department of Code Enforcement and shall be placed in a special
trust fund to be applied to the cost to the department for training,
technical support programs, certification, new equipment and
transportation. An independent fund shall be set up and retained by
the Director of Finance to be the Trustee of this account.
A. Registration and fees. All applications for certificates of approval shall
be accompanied by fees in accordance with the following: [Amended
12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-29]
(1) Buildings, structures or rental space up to 10,000 square feet:
$125.
(2) From 10,001 square feet to 50,000 square feet: $250.
(3) From 50,001 square feet to 200,000 square feet: $750.
(4) An additional $85 for each additional 50,000 square feet above
200,000 square feet.
(5) Residential properties of not more than two households: $100.
B. Smoke and carbon monoxide detector inspection certification fee: $75
per inspection. [Amended 12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-29]
(1) Any smoke and carbon monoxide detector inspection request that
is made five business days or less from the closing/change of
occupancy: a fee of $150 shall be paid.
C. Information requests. Requests for file information shall be
accompanied by a research and copy fee of $75. [Amended 12-6-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-29]
D. Reports of investigations: $75. [Added 12-6-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-2985]
E. Copies of photographs on CD: $75. [Added 12-6-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-29]
84.Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Fire Prevention.
85.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections D, E and F as
Subsections F, G and H, respectively.
§ 82-5 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 82-6
1:184
F. Emergency medical services. [Amended 4-6-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-06; 3-4-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06; 12-10-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-27]
(1) The Township of West Windsor shall contract with a professional
medical billing service for the collection of payment for services
rendered by the West Windsor Township Division of Fire and
Emergency Services. Said bill shall be issued to the insurance
company for the person served, if any, or directly to the person
serviced if insurance coverage is not available. West Windsor
residents who are recipients of emergency medical services will not
be responsible for co-payments, and those West Windsor residents
not having insurance will not be responsible for any costs.
(2) Fees to be charged for West Windsor Township EMS services shall
be as follows:
(a) For ambulance transportation: $800.
(b) Per loaded mile for basic life support (BLS) mileage: $17.
(c) Patient treat without transport: $250.
(d) For oxygen administration: $75.
(e) For automatic external defibrillator (AED) pads: $75.
(f) For disposable cervical collars: $45.
(g) Narcan administration: $95.
(h) EpiPen administration: $150.
(i) CPAP administration: $95.
(j) Aspirin administration: $3.
(k) For motor vehicle accident extrication: $1,000.
(l) For first responder fire apparatus response: $250.
(m) For fire responder response: $150.
(3) All organizations which conduct or sponsor public events within the
Township of West Windsor which require standby ambulances and/
or emergency medical technicians on site must utilize the EMS
services and equipment provided by the Township's Division of Fire
and Emergency Services and shall pay the Township, at least 10
days prior to a public event, the cost of such standby services in
amounts set by the Manager of Fire and Emergency Services. The
requirement for EMS on site standby is at the discretion of the
Township's Manager of Fire and Emergency Services with the final
approval of the Director of Public Safety.
§ 82-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-6
1:185
§ 82-7. Fire safety permit application fees. 86 [Amended 4-22-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-07; 3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-08; 12-8-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-48]
(4) A copy of this subsection shall be provided to all insurance
companies.
G. Hazardous materials. [Amended 12-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-27]
(1) Any person or entity who causes or permits the discharge of
hazardous materials, as defined by the New Jersey Spill Act, shall
be strictly liable, jointly and severally, without regard to fault, for
all control and cleanup costs incurred by the Division of Emergency
Services.
(2) Any person or entity liable for the control and cleanup costs for the
discharge of hazardous materials shall reimburse the Township the
entire cost of any contract or cleanup expenses incurred by the
Division, including personnel, material and equipment charges,
within 45 days after the receipt of the bill for such services, as
prepared by the Manager of Emergency Services.
(3) Any person or entity which fails to reimburse the Township the
entire amount of the control and cleanup costs within 45 days after
the receipt of the bill shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50
nor more than $1,000 per day for each day payment has not been
made.
H. Fire lane violation: $50. [Amended 12-10-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-27]
A. Fire safety permit program. The following fees and charges are hereby
established:
(1) Type 1: $65
(2) Type 2: $250.
(3) Type 3: $475.
(4) Type 4: $625.
(5) For any permit application that is received late, seven days prior to
the event, the permit fee will double. [Added 12-6-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-29]
86.Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Fire Prevention.
§ 82-6 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 82-8
1:186
§ 82-8. Excavation of sand, clay, gravel and other mineral
deposits.87 [Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-10; 12-8-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-48]
Excavation fees shall include the following:
§ 82-9. Street opening; permit fee. [Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-10; 12-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-48]
Street opening permit fees shall include the following:
Road Class
Type of Opening A B C
Near side $200 $100 $50
Far side $500 $250 $100
Longitudinal (minimum fee: $100) $10/lin.ft. $8/lin.ft. $5/lin.ft.
Unimproved road and unimproved
shoulders
$100
§ 82-10. Cats.88
§ 82-11. Dogs and kennels.89
Fees for dogs and kennels shall include the following:
A. Permit fee: $300.
B. Soil removal, application fee: $250.
A. License fee schedule. A license shall be issued after payment of a fee of
$10 for each nonneutered cat and $7 for each neutered cat. Persons
who fail to obtain a license as required within the time period specified
in § 40-15 will be subject to a delinquent fee of $2 for every month late.
[Amended 3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-08; 12-6-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-29]
B. Loss of license. If a license tag or sleeve has been misplaced or lost, the
licensing authority may issue a duplicate license and/or registration
sleeve for that particular cat at a fee of $1.
A. License for dogs.
(1) Annual license (due January 31): $8.80. [Amended 12-6-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-29]
(2) Registration: $1.20.
87.Editor's Note: See Ch. 143, Soil Removal and Excavations.
88.Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Animals, Art. II, Licensing of Cats.
89.Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Animals, Art. I, Dogs.
§ 82-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-11
1:187
§ 82-12. Health.
(3) Surcharge for dogs not spayed or neutered: $3.
(4) Surcharge for each month or fraction thereof after January 31 until
said license is obtained: $2. [Amended 12-6-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-29]
B. Kennels, pet shops and pounds.
(1) Ten dogs or less (annual): $25.
(2) More than 10 dogs (annual): $50.
(3) Pet shop (annual): $50.
(4) Animal shelter: no charge.
(5) Plan review application fees shall be $300 for new establishments
and $75 for renovations to existing facilities. [Added 12-6-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-29]
A. Individual subsurface sewage disposal systems.90 [Amended 5-6-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-10;3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-08; 12-19-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-16]
(1) The following fees and charges are hereby established:
(a) A fee of $750 per proposed system shall be charged for the
following services (This fee shall include 10 hours of inspection
time; work which exceeds 10 hours shall be billed at a rate of
$75 per hour.): [Amended 12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-29]
[1] For the review of an application and plans for a permit to
locate, construct and install an individual subsurface
sewage disposal system to include design review and
inspection.
[2] For the review of an application and plans for a permit to
alter an existing individual subsurface sewage disposal
system due to renovations or a malfunction to include
design review and inspection.
[3] For the processing of plans, communications and on-site
witnessing related to any preliminary, final or other soil or
percolation test for an individual subsurface sewage
disposal system or part thereof.
(b) For the issuance or renewal of a license to a person or
corporation to locate and construct or alter an individual
subsurface sewage disposal system (annual fee): $25.
90.Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Sewage Disposal Systems, Art. II, Individual Systems.
§ 82-11 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 82-12
1:188
(c) Repairs. [Amended 12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-29]
[1] Minor repair permit. A fee of $75 shall be charged for an
application for a minor repair to an individual subsurface
sewage disposal system. This fee covers up to one hour of
review and inspection time. Additional time will be billed
at a rate of $75 per hour.
[2] Repair permit. A fee of $375 shall be charged for an
application to repair an individual subsurface sewage
disposal system. This fee includes five hours of inspection
time. Additional work will be billed at a rate of $75 per
hour.
[3] Tank abandonment permit. A fee of $75 shall be charged
for an application to abandon a septic tank, cesspool or
seepage pit.
(2) All fees shall be paid at the Township municipal building to the
Health Officer by check or money order drawn to the order of West
Windsor Township.
(3) Payment of all fees hereunder shall be guaranteed by the applicant
and/or the owner of the property on which such inspections take
place.
B. Public bathing places.
(1) License. The following fees will be charged for issuance or renewal
of a license to operate a public bathing place.
(a) Seasonal (less than six months per year): $300. [Amended
5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-10]
(b) Year-round operation: $500.
(2) Plan review fees. A plan review fee will be charged for technical
review of all new applications for public bathing places. The fees
are established as follows:
(a) Plan review for a new facility consisting of one pool/spa: $500.
[Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-10; 3-4-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-06]
(b) Charge for each additional pool/spa for facilities with
multiples: $100.
(c) Plan review for renovations to existing public bathing place:
$300. [Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-10; 12-6-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-29]
C. Retail food establishment license fees.91
91.Editor's Note: See Ch. 96, Food Establishments, Retail.
§ 82-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-12
1:189
(1) License. All retail food establishments shall obtain licenses from
the West Windsor Township Division of Health, the cost of which
shall be $50. [Amended 12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-29]
(a) Delinquent fees.
[1] Delinquent annual renewal applications. An additional
administrative late fee of $100 will be charged for
applications received by the Township between the dates
of February 1 and December 31 for renewal of operational
retail food establishments for the current licensing year.
[2] Delinquent temporary retail food establishments. An
additional administrative late fee of $50 will be charged
for applications received by the Township within seven
calendar days of planned operation.
(2) Inspection fee for food establishments with food preparation areas.
(a) In addition to the annual license fee, an annual inspection fee
shall be charged for food establishments with food preparation
areas, based on the size of the food preparation area as
follows: [Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-10;
12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-29]
Square Feet Fee
Up to 200 $135
201 to 400 $210
401 to 600 $260
601 to 800 $310
801 to 1,000 $360
Over 1,000 $410
(b) If inspections must be made on Saturdays, Sundays, legal
holidays or after 5:00 p.m. because of the nature of the
establishment, the applicable inspection fee shall be multiplied
by a factor of 1.5.
(3) Inspection fee for retail food markets.
(a) In addition to the annual license fee, an annual inspection fee
shall be charged for retail food markets, based on the size of
the food marketing area as follows: [Amended 5-6-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-10; 12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-29]
Square Feet Fee
Up to 1,000 $135
1,000 to 2,000 $220
2,001 to 3,000 $280
§ 82-12 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 82-12
1:190
3,001 to 4,000 $340
4,001 to 5,000 $400
Over 5,000 $460
(b) If inspections must be made on Saturdays, Sundays, legal
holidays or after 5:00 p.m. because of the nature of the
establishment, the applicable inspection fee shall be multiplied
by a factor of 1.5.
(4) Inspection fees for itinerant retail food establishments shall be as
follows:
(a) Agricultural market: $10.
(b) Mobile unit: $30 per unit. [Amended 3-4-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-06]
(5) Exemption for nonprofit corporations. No corporation organized
under Title 15 of the New Jersey Statutes shall be required to pay
either the license or inspection fees set forth herein. [Amended
12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-29]
(6) Inspection fee for temporary retail food establishments. The fee for
a retail food establishment operating for less than two weeks,
Monday through Friday, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m., will be $15. The fee for establishments operating weekends,
evenings or holidays will be $30. [Amended 12-6-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-29]
(7) Plan review fees. Plan review fees shall be charged as follows:
[Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-10; 3-22-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-08; 3-4-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
Food establishments. A plan review fee shall be charged for the
filing of any application for a food establishment. The fee will be
based upon the total square footage of the proposed establishment
as follows:
Square Feet Fee
Up to 400 $175
401 to 800 $250
Over 800 $300
(8) Professional instruction: specialized food safety training sessions
will be held for individual establishments upon request. The
following fees are established:
(a) A base fee shall be charged for preparation and planning of
each program: $150.
§ 82-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-12
1:191
(b) A presentation fee shall be charged for each program: $60 per
hour.
(9) Low-hazard temporary food establishment registration. Temporary
establishments which restrict their menus to prepackaged, nonpotentially
hazardous foods may be exempted from licensing and
inspection fees by the Health Officer. A $25 registration fee will be
charged per event. [Added 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
D. License fees for food and beverage vending.92
(1) All license and permit fees for food and beverage vending machines
shall be paid to the Township of West Windsor on or before January
31 of each year.
(2) All such permits and licenses issued under the authority of this
section shall expire on January 30 of each year.
(3) No license fee shall be required for any food or beverage vending
machine owned by any public school, church or religious
organizations or any nonprofit corporation or association of the
State of New Jersey within the Township of West Windsor.
(4) New or additional coin-operated vending machines installed during
the year shall pay a license fee. There shall be no refund for a
portion of the license for any machine removed from the premises
during the year. [Amended 3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-08]
(5) The annual fee for licenses as required by § 183-1 for regulation
and inspection and control of all food and beverage vending
machines is set as follows:
(a) For each machine containing "potentially hazardous foods" as
defined by Chapter 12 of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code:
$35.
(b) For each machine containing any food and beverage not
considered potentially hazardous: $15.
E. Well permits.93 The following fees and charges are hereby established
as follows:
(1) For the filing of an application and plans for a well permit: $275.
(2) For the filing of an application and plans to alter an existing well or
to drill a replacement well: $225.
(3) For filing an application for well abandonment: $75. [Added
12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-29]
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. 183, Vending Machines, Art. I, Food and Beverage Vending
Machines.
93.Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Wells.
§ 82-12 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 82-12
1:192
F. Community sewage disposal systems.94 The following fees and charges
are established. [Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-10;
3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-08; 12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-29]
(1) The fee for review of a proposed community sewage disposal
system by the administrative authority shall be $2,000, to include a
maximum of 10 realty improvements, plus $200 for each additional
realty improvement, payable at the time application for the permit
to locate, construct or alter the community sewage disposal system
is made.
(2) The fee for witnessing a soil test by an approved professional shall
be $75 per hour.
(3) The fee for site inspections shall be $75 per hour.
G. Radon test. The fee for a radon test kit and consultation shall be $30.
[Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-10]
H. File search. The fee for a file search by any interested party regarding
environmentally sensitive areas or properties shall be $75. This fee
does not include the cost of providing copies of written documents.
I. Body art establishments. The following fees will be charged for
issuance or renewal of a license to operate a body art establishment. All
annual licenses shall expire December 31 in the year the license is
issued. Temporary licenses shall expire 24 hours from the date of issue.
[Added 12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-29]
(1) Licensing fees.
Type of Establishment Fee
Tattooing $500
Permanent cosmetics $500
Body piercing $500
Ear piercing only $100
Combination procedure $750
Temporary $1,000
(2) Plan review application fees. The following fees shall be charged
for an application for plan review for body art establishments.
(a) Fixed facilities. A plan review fee of $500 will be charged for
the first procedure proposed; a fee of $125 per additional
procedure. A fee of $125 per procedure will be charged for
applications to alter, expand or renovate an existing body art
establishment.
94.Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Sewage Disposal Systems, Art. I, Community Systems.
§ 82-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-12
1:193
§ 82-13. Vital statistics records; duplication fees. [Amended
3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-08; 12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-29;
3-4-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
§ 82-14. Affordable housing registration fee.
§ 82-15. Miscellaneous licenses, fees and permits.
(b) Temporary establishments. A plan review fee of $1,000 is
established for plan review of temporary establishments.
J. Retail electronic smoking devices establishment. The annual fee for an
electronic smoking device establishment license shall be $1,500.
[Added 2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01]
A. The duplication fee shall be $18 for each and every certified copy of
birth, death and/or marriage certificates.
B. The burial permit fee, as per state statute, shall be $5.
A. An escrow fund shall be established by the Township for the receipt of
registration fees to be used in assisting to finance the duties of the
Township's Affordable Housing Committee as follows:
(1) Initial sale/rental as well as resale of low and moderate income
units: $100 per low/moderate income dwelling unit.
(2) Re-rental of low/moderate income units: $50 per low/moderate
income dwelling unit.
B. The fee shall be payable as follows:
(1) Initial sale/rental: upon issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
(2) Resale: upon time of closing.
(3) Re-rental: upon execution of the lease agreement.
C. Failure to pay required fees shall be subject to penalties equal to 1 1/2%
interest per month on unpaid fees plus any legal and collection fees
involved in the repayment of the required fee.
A. Schedule of fees. The following fees are established for the various
services extended and material distributed by departments of the
Township: [Amended 2-8-1999 by Ord. No. 99-03; 5-6-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-10]
(1) Alarm systems:95 annual registration fee of $25 if registered
between January 1 and January 31; additional late fee of $10 per
month if registered thereafter. [Amended 1-22-2007 by Ord. No.
2006-22]
95.Editor's Note: See Ch. 34, Alarm Systems.
§ 82-12 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 82-15
1:194
(2) Assessment search: not to exceed $10 (pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:5-13). Continuation search (charged per each year subsequent
to original search): $2.
(3) Bingo license, for each date a game is to be considered: same as
fees set by state.96
(4) Codified ordinances: $350.
(5) Land Use ordinances, bound volume: $100. [Amended
12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
(a) Land Use supplements, yearly fee: $15.
(6) Duplicate tax sale certificate: not to exceed $100 (pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:5-52).
(7) Easement modification agreement: $100.
(8) Fence permit: $35. [Amended 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
(9) Filed decision by Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment or
Township Council: $25.
(10) Flood hazard area certification: $50.
(11)Home occupation permit: $50. [Amended 12-19-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-16]
(12) Maps:
(a) Election Map: $10. [Added 11-29-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-3497]
(b) Greenbelt Map: $12. [Amended 12-19-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-16]
(c) Master Plan: $75. [Amended 12-19-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-16]
(d) Sanitary Sewer Map: $12. [Amended 12-19-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-16]
(e) Site Location/Open Space Map (color): $25. [Amended
12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
(f) Street Map: $7. [Amended 12-19-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-16]
(g) Water Distribution Map: $12. [Amended 12-19-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-16]
96.Editor's Note: See Ch. 44, Bingo and Games of Chance.
97.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections
A(12)(a) through (h) as Subsections A(12)(b) through (i), respectively.
§ 82-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-15
1:195
(h) Zoning Maps: $12. [Amended 12-19-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-16]
(i) Tax Maps.
[1] Tax Maps (full set) (twenty-four inch by thirty-six inch
format): $375. [Amended 12-19-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-16]
[2] Tax Maps (full set) (twelve-inch by eighteen-inch format):
$175. [Amended 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
[3] Photocopy, for sizes up to 11 inches by 17 inches:
[a] First to tenth page: $0.75 each.
[b] Eleventh to twentieth page: $0.50 each.
[c] Over 20 pages: $0.25 each.
[4] Photocopy, for sizes over 11 inches by 17 inches: $0.75 per
square foot.
(13) Marriage and civil ceremonies. In addition to any fees that may be
established for the issuance of a marriage or civil union license, the
following fee schedule is established for weddings performed by
the Township Mayor as follows: [Added 5-5-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-0698]
(a) There shall be a $3 fee for issuance of a marriage or civil union
license. The fee shall be deposited into the Township's General
Fund.
(b) There shall be a $25 fee collected from all applicants for a
marriage or civil union license. This fee shall be remitted to the
New Jersey Department of Human Services.
(c) There shall be a $100 fee charged to any persons who have the
Township Mayor solemnize the marriage or civil union. The fee
shall be deposited into the Township's General Fund.
(14) Notarial service fee: $2 per signature. (Exempt from this fee shall
be vendors contracting to perform services or supply goods to the
Township.) [Added 3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-899]
(15) 100Private commuter parking lot permit: $350, renewable
beginning of each year. [Amended 12-19-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-16]
98.Editor's Note: Pursuant to this ordinance, former Subsections A(13) and (14) were
redesignated as Subsections A(14) and (15), respectively.
99.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections
A(13) through (33) as Subsections A(14) through (34), respectively.
100. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(15), Patio permit, was repealed 12-19-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-16.
§ 82-15 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 82-15
1:196
(16) Photocopies: [Amended 5-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-14]
(a) For standard black and white copies of sizes up to 11 inches by
17 inches:
[1] First to tenth page: $0.75 each.
[2] Eleventh to twentieth page: $0.50 each.
[3] All pages over 20: $0.25 each.
(b) For sizes over 11 inches by 17 inches: $0.75 per square foot.
(c) Colored ink copies for eight-and-one-half-inch by eleven-inch
page:
[1] First to tenth page: $2.
[2] Eleventh to twentieth page: $1.75.
[3] All pages over 20: $1.50.
(d) For all off-site photocopies:
[1] Handling fee of $5 will be charged in addition to the
photocopy fee.
(17) Planning Board agendas (yearly): $30.
(18)Raffle license: same as set by state.
(19) Service charge for checks returned due to insufficient funds: $20.
[Amended 11-29-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-34]
(20) Sewer ban exemption endorsement (single-family residence): $20.
(21) (Reserved)101
(22) (Reserved)102
(23) Subdivision certificate: $250. [Amended 12-19-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-16]
(24) Tape and CD duplication fee, per tape/CD: $7. [Amended
12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
(25) Tax and sewer rent payments: [Added 12-17-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-23103; amended 12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-29]
101. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(21), SPRAB agendas, was repealed 7-30-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-20.
102. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(22), Stream water quality report, was repealed
12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16.
103. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection
A(34) as Subsection A(27); former Subsection A(25) as Subsection A(26); and former
Subsection A(26) through (33) as Subsection A(28) through (35), respectively.
§ 82-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-15
1:197
(a) Processing fee for ACH payments: $2 per transaction.
(b) Processing fee for credit card payments: 2.9% of transaction
amount (effective January 1, 2011).
(26) Tax bill, duplicate: $1.
(27) Tax sale certificate, duplicate: not to exceed $100 (pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:5-52).
(28) Tax search: not to exceed $10 (pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-13).
(29) Township Council agenda: $50 annually. [Amended 12-19-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-16]
(30) Township Council minutes, yearly subscription fee: $200.
(31) Township Council special meeting notice: $25 annually. [Amended
12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
(32) Vendors' permit (peddlers, hawkers, solicitors): $50.
(a) SBI check for vendors: $18. [Amended 12-19-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-16]
(33) Zoning certificate: $100. [Amended 12-19-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-16]
(34) Zoning Board of Adjustment agendas (yearly): $15.
(35) Zoning permit: $35. [Amended 11-29-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-34; 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
(36) Grease control plan review fees. [Added 12-29-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-51]
(a) New establishments and existing establishments with
proposed renovations shall pay a plan review fee based on the
square footage of the establishment. Existing establishments
submitting an initial grease control plan to the Township shall
not be required to submit a fee. [Amended 3-4-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-06]
Size
(square feet) Fee
Up to 400 $175
401 to 800 $250
Over 800 $300
(b) New multi-use properties shall submit a plan review fee based
on the number of proposed retail food establishments
discharging into the Township Sanitary Sewer from the
§ 82-15 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 82-15
1:198
§ 82-16. Parks and recreation.104
Parks and recreation fees shall be as set annually by resolution of the Board
of Recreation Commissioners.
§ 82-17. Waivable fees for representation by Municipal Public
Defender. [Amended 7-29-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-13]
property: $50 per establishment. Existing multi-use properties
submitting an initial grease control plan shall not be required
to submit a fee.
(c) Alteration to an approved grease control plan: $100.
(37) Rental of Schenck Farmstead restrooms and use of property to
erect an event tent. Residents of West Windsor Township or
Township-based organizations only: [Added 3-31-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-02; amended 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-20]
(a) Social events: $100.
(b) Weddings: $100.
(c) Nonprofit events: $100.
(d) Corporate events: $100.
(e) Security fee (refundable): $150.
B. Exceptions. No fees shall be charged for any requested information,
reports, searches, etc., under this chapter if formally requested by any
federal, state, county or municipal agency or department or if
requested by any department, employee or appointee of the Township.
C. Interest on unpaid taxes. Interest on unpaid taxes or unpaid assessment
for local improvements shall be charged at a rate of 8% per annum on
the first $1,500 of the delinquency and 18% of any amount in excess of
$1,500. Interest on unpaid taxes or unpaid local improvements shall be
completed from the date taxes or local assessments become delinquent,
except that no interest shall be charged on any installment payment if
payment of said installment is made within 10 days after the date upon
which the same becomes payable.
A. Application fee. Any person making application for representation by a
Municipal Public Defender with regard to any matter before the West
Windsor Municipal Court shall pay an application fee of not more than
$200, payable to the Township of West Windsor, to the Municipal Court
Administrator, at the time of the application. [Amended 5-14-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-08]
104. Editor's Note: See Ch. 122, Parks and Recreation.
§ 82-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-17
1:199
B. Waiver of fee. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 2B:24-17 and with guidelines
promulgated by the New Jersey Supreme Court, the Municipal Court
may waive any required application fee. in whole or in part, only if the
court determines, in its discretion, upon a clear and convincing showing
by the applicant, that the application fee represents an unreasonable
burden on the person seeking representation. The Municipal Court may
permit a person to pay the application fee over a specific period of time
not to exceed four months.
C. Eligibility for services. Eligibility for services of the Township Public
Defender shall be determined by the Municipal Court on the basis of the
need of the defendant, except as provided in Subsection D below. Need
shall be measured as provided by law and in accordance with the
guidelines promulgated by the New Jersey Supreme Court. In the event
that a determination of eligibility cannot be made before the time when
the first services are to be rendered or if an initial determination is
found to be erroneous, the Municipal Court shall refer the defendant to
the Township Public Defender provisionally, and if subsequently it is
determined that the defendant is ineligible, the Municipal Court shall
inform the defendant. and the defendant shall be obliged to engage his
or her own counsel and to reimburse the Township for the cost of the
services rendered to that time.
D. Investigation of financial status. The Municipal Court shall undertake
an investigation of the financial status of each defendant seeking
representation and shall have the authority to require a defendant to
execute and deliver written requests or authorizations required under
applicable law to provide the Court with access to records of public or
private sources, otherwise confidential, as may be of aid in the
evaluation of eligibility. As provided by law, the court is authorized to
obtain information from any public record, office of the state, or any
subdivision or agency thereof on request and without payment of fees
ordinarily required by law.
E. Financial obligations of parents or guardians. As provided by N.J.S.A.
2B:24-11, whenever a person entitled to representation by a Township
Public Defender pursuant to this Act is under the age of 18 years. the
eligibility for services shall be determined on the basis of the financial
circumstances of the individual and the financial circumstances of the
individual's parents or legal guardians.
F. Reimbursement to the Township. As provided by N.J.S.A. 2B:24-12, if
the defendant has or reasonably expects to have means to meet some
part, though not all, of the costs of the services rendered, the defendant
shall be required to reimburse the Township and the Township shall
have a lien on any property to which the defendant shall have or acquire
an interest for the amount equal to the reasonable value of the services
rendered to a defendant pursuant to this act as calculated at the same
rate of the office of the Public Defender bills clients at that time.
§ 82-17 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 82-17
1:200
§ 82-18. Police.
G. Collection and settlement of claims. The Township Attorney may do all
things necessary to collect any money due to the Township by way of
reimbursement for services rendered by the Township Public Defender.
The Township Attorney may enter into arrangements with any state or
county agency to handle collections on a cost basis. The Township
Attorney shall have all of the remedies and proceedings available for
collection which are available for or upon the recovery of a judgment in
a civil action and shall also be permitted to collect counsel fees and
costs from the defendant. The Township Attorney is authorized to
compromise and settle any claims for services performed whenever the
financial circumstances of the person receiving the services are such
that, in the judgment of the township Attorney, the best interest of the
Township will be served by compromise and settlement.
H. Establishment of fund. Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be
deposited in a dedicated fund administered by the Chief Financial
Officer of the Township. The fund shall be used exclusively to meet the
costs incurred in providing the services of a Township Public Defender,
including, when required, expert and lay person investigation and
testimony.
A. Reports (other than Municipal Court discovery): [Amended 5-6-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-10; 11-29-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-34]
(1) In person (per page):
(a) First to 10th page: $0.75.
(b) Eleventh to 20th page: $0.50.
(c) All pages over 20: $0.25.
(2) Mailed accident reports:
(a) One to three pages: $5.
(b) Additional per page over three pages: $1.
B. Municipal Court discovery requests: [Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-10; 11-29-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-34; 3-4-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-06]
(1) Photocopy fee, letter size 8 1/2 by 11 or smaller: $0.05 per page.
(2) Photocopy fee, legal size 8 1/2 by 14 or larger: $0.07 per page.
(3) Actual postage for any discovery sent by mail.
(4) Photographs will be photocopied at the rates established herein. If
requests are made for duplicate photographs, the actual cost of
making the photographs shall be charged.
§ 82-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-18
1:201
§ 82-19. Sewer permit fees.105
Sewer permit fees shall be as follows:
(5) Duplication of video or audio tapes: $0.50 each.
(6) On any item that cannot be photocopied on the Township copy
machine or not otherwise provided for in this schedule, the actual
cost incurred in making the copy shall be charged.
C. Fingerprints (per card or application): $5.
D. Photos:
(1) Roll of film (24 exposures), developed exposures: $25.
(2) Polaroid photos: $5 per copy.
(3) Digital photos: [Added 5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-10]
(a) Two dollars for each photo produced; or [Amended 3-4-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-06]
(b) Twenty-five dollars per disk.
E. Videotape duplication: $0.50. [Amended 3-4-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-06]
F. Visa letters and character references: $10.
G. Audio tape duplication: $0.50. [Added 5-6-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-10; 3-4-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
A. Residential: $0.75 per square foot with a minimum fee of $1,000 per
dwelling unit, except for owners/occupants who are exempt senior
citizens. [Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-10]
(1) For residential projects containing low- and moderate-income
dwelling units, the sewer hookup fee for the low- and moderateincome
dwelling units shall be reduced to $600 per dwelling unit.
The fee for market-rate units will be as noted above.
B. Nonresidential: $0.75 per square foot with a minimum fee of $2,500.
[Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-10]
C. Exempt senior citizen106: $15.
D. Assunpink Basin sewer reimbursement.
(1) The owners of properties within the developments listed below, all
of which will be benefited by the sewer improvement within the
Assunpink Basin, shall pay the sum set forth in Subsection A(4)(b)
105. Editor's Note: See Ch. 133, Sewers.
106. Editor's Note: A resident qualified for tax purposes for the senior citizen exemption.
§ 82-18 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 82-19
1:202
§ 82-20. Sewer user charges.107
to Polekoff Farm, Inc., and Windsor Development Corporation, d/b/
a/ Winbrook, Inc., who paid for the construction of said sewer in
lieu of the fees set forth, as applicable, above. The developments
are as follows:
(a) Millbrook Farms (formerly Lanwin Lower Tract): 130 units.
(b) Windsor Hunt (formerly Dutch Neck Estates II): 149 units.
(c) Windsor-Princeton (formerly Wang Tract): 38 units.
(d) Windsor Park Estates (formerly Sharbell Tract): 132 units.
(e) Golden Estates (formerly Karis Tract): 46 units.
(f) Lower Portion of Le Parc II (formerly Bradgate and also
formerly Squire's Gate): 30 units.
(g) Portion of Hunter's Run (formerly Mesa): 27 units.
(2) The sum referred to in Subsection D(1) shall be $8,500 per lot for
Windsor Park Estates (formerly Sharbell Tract); the sum for all
others set forth in Subsection D(1) shall be $9,300 per lot. No
interest shall accrue on sold sums.
(3) The Construction Official shall maintain a list of the individual lots
contained in the above developments, and no certificate of
occupancy shall be issued unless a written receipt evidencing
payment of the aforesaid sums to Polekoff Farm, Inc., and Windsor
Development Corporation, d/b/a Winbrook, Inc., shall be filed with
the Construction Official.
E. Clarksville Road-Everett Drive extension sewer reimbursement.
[Added 3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-04]
(1) The owners of all properties abutting the Clarksville Road-Everett
Drive sewer extension who will be connected to the sewer
extension shall pay the pro rata share of the cost of the
construction of the aforesaid extension based upon their
proportionate flow as a percentage of the total estimated flow, as
calculated by the Township Engineer.
(2) The above sewer reimbursement shall be in addition to the sewer
permit fees imposed by Subsections A and B of § 82-19, as well as
any sewer user charges that may be imposed pursuant to § 82-20 of
the Code of West Windsor.
A. Sewerage user service charge. The reasonable and necessary costs of
operation and maintenance of the sanitary sewerage system(s) in and
107. Editor's Note: This section was originally adopted as Sec. 14-4 of the Revised General
Ordinances.
§ 82-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-20
1:203
for the Township shall be borne by the users of the system(s) through
payment of an annual user service charge.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COSTS —
SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM(S) — All sewerage systems which
have been or may hereafter be acquired or constructed or contracted
for by the Township.
SERVICE YEAR — The one-year period beginning January 1 and ending
December 31.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of West Windsor.
USER — The owner of a parcel of property containing a house or other
building or complex of buildings to which a sewer connection has been
or may be made or notification to hook up has been made, except for
those owners to whom specific variances have been granted by the
Township. (The users of the Jefferson Park Sewer System and Plant are
specifically excluded from this definition until January 1, 1980.)
WELL RATE — A nominal water usage of 75 gallons per day per
occupant, which equates to 900 cubic feet per person per quarter.
WINTER QUARTER — A period of at least three months ending in
January, February or March.
Operation and maintenance charges billed to the Township by the
Stony Brook Regional Sewerage Authority.
(1)
Costs of operation and maintenance of all sewage lines and mains,
pumping stations and disposal and treatment facilities operated by
the Township.
(2)
C. Determination of annual user service charge.
(1) The annual service charge rate per 100 cubic feet of sewage shall
be determined by the Township for each service year and shall be
based on budgeted costs and anticipated sewage flow, except that
there shall be a minimum quarterly flow of 1,500 cubic feet in
calculating the charge.
(2) The annual volume of sewage flow in hundreds of cubic feet
charged to each user shall be equal to:
(a) Metered sewage flow, when use of such metering has been
expressly required or permitted by the Township and the
necessary meter is installed and maintained by the user.
(b) Metered water flow allocated to such user, where the amount
so allocated shall be the lesser of:
§ 82-20 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 82-20
1:204
[1] The amount charged to the user during the most recent
four consecutive quarters, which shall be the spring,
summer and fall quarters of the previous year and the
winter quarter of the current service year.
[2] Four times the amount charged to the user during the
most recent winter quarter unless, as to nonresidential
users, the flow from said quarter is less than 50% of the
flow of the lowest of the preceding three quarters; in such
case, the charge as calculated in Subsection C(2)(a) shall
apply.
(3) Where there is insufficient data on metered sewage or water flow,
the amount charged to the user shall be calculated at the rate of
new users set forth in Subsection D.
D. Determination of initial user service charge. The initial user service
charges shall be determined by the Township on an estimated basis.
(1) New residential users. The initial user service charge shall be a flat
rate based on the annual service charge rate for 3,000 cubic feet of
sewage per quarter, until the following service year, when sufficient
billing information is available.
(2) New nonresidential users. The initial annual service charge shall
be a flat rate based on the annual service charge rate calculated by
multiplying the building floor area by .06, until the following
service year, when sufficient billing information is available.
E. Private water supply. In instances where neither sewage flow nor
allocated water flow is metered but the Township provides sewerage
service, then the annual user charge shall be determined by either of
the following procedures at the user's discretion:
(1) Calculated quarterly usage based upon the well rate multiplied by
the number of occupants.
(2) Winter quarter water usage based on readings of a water meter
installed on the private water supply. A suitable water meter will be
furnished by the Township and properly installed and maintained
by the user. The user shall permit access to such meter by
authorized Township representatives during reasonable hours of
the day. After a meter is installed, charges will be calculated in
accordance with Subsection D(1) hereof until the next service year.
F. User service charges contested. In the event that it is contested by the
Township or by the user that the annual service charge does not fairly
reflect the amount of sewage discharged into the sanitary sewer
system, the method of calculating the service charge may be adjusted
accordingly by the Township on written application of the aggrieved
party after hearing on notice to the other party.
§ 82-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-20
1:205
G. Surcharges. Users disposing of waste containing higher than normal
concentrations of certain constituents shall pay for this service. Such
surcharges will be imposed for sewage constituents that exceed those
specified by the Stony Brook Regional Sewerage Authority. The
surcharges will be determined by the Township and will be sufficient to
reimburse the Township for the additional costs of handling such
wastes.
H. Starting date for user charges. User service charges shall begin either
immediately upon issuance by the Township of a certificate of
occupancy or 60 days following the mailing to the user by the Township
of notification to hook up.
I. User service charges payable semiannually. Service charges shall be
due and payable on March 1 and September 1 and shall draw the same
interest from the time they become due as taxes upon real estate. Said
charges shall be a lien upon the premises connected until paid. In the
event that any such charge shall remain unpaid, such charge, with
interest and costs in the event that the same exceeds $5, shall be
collected by means of the same remedies as provided by law for
collection of taxes on real estate. In the event that senior citizen status
or financial hardship is shown by the user and is certified by the
Director of Senior and Social Services, the Township may permit
payments to be made quarterly (March 1, June 1, September 1 and
December 1).
J. One water meter serving more than one dwelling unit. In the case of
buildings for which there is one water meter for more than one dwelling
unit, the individual unit owners shall be billed based upon the method of
allocation of charges between the unit owners covered by the single
meter that is set forth in the documents of the condominium association
or homeowners' association for sewerage, if any, or, if not, for water
charges. The aggregate amount to be divided among the unit owners
shall be calculated in the manner set forth in Subsections C and D. The
Tax Collector shall collect any charges due pursuant to Subsection D
from individual owners billed prior to the effective date of this section,
and no individual unit owner who has paid such charge shall be entitled
to a refund therefor. Each applicant for development shall, in the public
offering statement or other document approved by the Planning Board
Attorney, notify purchasers of dwelling units in multi-unit buildings with
single water meters of the manner in which they will be billed for their
share of the sewer charges and shall notify the Tax Collector prior to
issuance of the first certificate of occupancy for a multi-unit building
with one water meter of the location of such building.
K. For owners of properties located within West Windsor Township but
having sewer service provided by an entity outside of West Windsor
Township, other than the Stony Brook Regional Sewerage Authority, the
fee shall be the charges imposed by the entity providing the service plus
an additional charge of 10% imposed by West Windsor Township.
[Added 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-05]
§ 82-20 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 82-21
1:206
§ 82-21. Taxicabs and vehicles for hire; license fees. [Amended
5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-10; 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16;
12-4-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-17; 11-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-22;
5-17-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-10; 12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-29;
8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-15]
License fees for applications and for vehicles for hire shall be as follows:
§ 82-22. WaterWorks at West Windsor Community Pool. [Amended
4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-05108; 11-29-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-34;
12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-20]
The following ranges of fees and charges are hereby established for the
Waterworks at West Windsor Community Pool.
A. For every automobile, taxicab or other vehicle for hire for a new
owner's license or transfer to another owner excluding a transfer in
writing (by deed or will) of an existing owner's license to a family
member of the owner: $1,000. For every automobile, taxicab or other
vehicle for hire for renewal or transfer to another vehicle (excluding
limousines) and renewal of an owner's license: $100 per year. "Family
member" means any living child, grandchild, spouse or domestic
partner, parents or grandparents that include relation by blood or
adoption.
B. For each limousine service company or livery service company license:
$50 per company per year plus an additional $10 per limousine per
year.
C. For each driver of a vehicle for hire: $100 per year.
D. For each replacement vehicle owner's placard or driver's license: $25
per year.
E. For each proof of insurance letter for motor vehicle registration: $25.
A. Membership fees:
(1) Family: $375 to $500 per year.
(2) Individual: $150 to $250 per year.
(3) Senior citizen (all residents over the age of 62): $110 to $175 per
year.
(4) Nonresident family: $500 to $700 per year.
(5) Nonresident individual: $215 to $340 per year.
(6) Nonresident senior (over the age of 62): $125 to $250 per year.
108. Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 4-30-1999; the veto was overridden
by the Council 5-3-1999.
§ 82-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-22
1:207
(7) There will be an additional seventy-five-dollar fee charged to each
of the above membership categories for registrations received after
the designated registration period. Registration period will be
determined on a yearly basis by the Manager of Recreation and
Parks. [Amended 12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-29]
B. Daily fees:
(1) Weekday, adult or child over eight: $12 to $20 per person.
(2) Weekday, child age two to eight (under 48 inches): $10 to $19 per
person.
(3) Weekday, senior citizen: $10 to $18 per person.
(4) Weekday, all ages, after 5:00 p.m.: $9 to $17 per person.
(5) Weekend, adult or child over eight: $14 to $22 per person.
(6) Weekend, child age two to eight (under 48 inches): $10 to $21 per
person.
(7) Weekend, senior citizen: $10 to $20 per person.
(8) Weekend, adult, or child over eight, after 5:00 p.m.: $12 to $20 per
person.
(9) Weekend, child age two to eight (under 48 inches) and senior
citizen, after 5:00 p.m.: $9 to $17 per person.
(10) Nonresident, weekday, adult or child over eight: $14 to $22 per
person.
(11) Nonresident, weekday, child age two to eight (under 48 inches),
$16 to $20 and senior citizen, $12 to $20 per person.
(12) Nonresident, weekends, adult or child over eight: $16 to $23 per
person.
(13) Nonresident, weekends, child age two to eight (under 48 inches),
$17 to $22, and senior citizen, $14 to $21 per person.
C. Swim lessons: [Amended 12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-29]
(1) Member of pool: $105 to $140.
(2) Nonmember, resident: $125 to $150.
(3) Nonmember, nonresident: $140 to $170.
D. Whalers Swim Team: [Amended 12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-29]
(1) Swimming only, member of pool: $150 to $200.
(2) Diving only, member of pool: $150 to $200.
§ 82-22 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 82-22
1:208
§ 82-23. Department of Public Works. [Amended 4-22-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-08]
(3) Swimming and diving, member of pool: $250 to $300.
(4) Swimming only, nonmember resident: $200 to $300.
(5) Diving only, nonmember resident: $200 to $300.
(6) Swimming and diving, nonmember resident: $330 to $375.
(7) Swimming only, nonmember, nonresident: $230 to $275.
(8) Diving only, nonmember, nonresident: $230 to $275.
(9) Swimming and diving, nonmember, nonresident: $375 to $425.
E. Discount guest passes (maximum of 20 guest passes available to
members):
(1) Ten-guest pass: resident, $75 to $150; nonresident, $145 to $175.
(2) Five-guest pass: resident, $40 to $95; nonresident, $75 to $95.
F. Prior withdrawal. Members who withdraw prior to the opening day of
the season may be issued a refund only if the West Windsor Division of
Recreation and Parks is notified in writing at least three weeks prior to
opening day of the given year. An administrative service fee of 20% will
be imposed for all refunds granted. Absolutely no refunds will be
granted after the season opens.
G. Return check policy. There will be a penalty fee of $25 for each check
returned by the bank for insufficient funds. To maintain membership,
payment must be made in cash or money order to the "West Windsor
Pool Utility" in the amount of the returned check plus the penalty fee of
$25.
A. Any person or entity who damages property of the Township of West
Windsor as a result of a motor vehicle accident, including, but not
limited to road signage, curbs or other improvements, or who
necessitates the Department of Public Works to clean a site of the motor
vehicle accident shall be required to reimburse the Township the entire
cost of any expenses incurred by the Department of Public Works
related to such accident, including personnel, material and equipment
charges, within 45 days after the receipt of the bill for such services, as
prepared by the Director of the Department of Public Works.
B. Any person or entity who fails to reimburse the Township for the entire
amount of the Department of Public Works' costs associated with a
motor vehicle accident which they cause, within 45 days after the
receipt of the bill for such services and costs, shall be subject to a fine of
not less than $50 nor more than $1,000 per day for each day payment
has not been made.
§ 82-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-24
1:209
§ 82-24. Massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishment
application fees. [Added 10-15-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
Chapter 86
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Discharge of weapons in parks — See Ch. 122,
§ 122-13.
§ 86-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREARM — Any pistol, revolver, rifle, shotgun, machine gun, automatic
and semiautomatic rifle or any gun, device or instrument in the nature of a
weapon from which may be fired or ejected any solid projectile, ball, slug,
pellet, missile or bullet or any gas, vapor or other noxious thing by means
of a cartridge or shell or by the action of an explosive or the igniting of
flammable or explosive substances. It shall also include, without limitation,
any firearm which is in the nature of any air gun, spring gun or pistol
or other weapon of a similar nature in which the propelling force is a
spring, elastic band, carbon dioxide, compressed or other gas or vapor, air
or compressed air, or is ignited by compressed air, and ejecting a bullet or
missile smaller than 3/8 of an inch in diameter, with sufficient force to injure
a person. It shall also include any other instrument or weapon in which a
loaded or blank cartridge, except as noted herein, is used or may be used.
It shall also, by definition, include any bow and arrow and slingshot.109
A. Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate or conduct a
massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishment shall file an
application with the Municipal Clerk upon a form provided by the Clerk
and pay a fee of $500, which shall be nonrefundable, unless the
applicant voluntarily withdraws the application within five days of filing
and can demonstrate that it has not operated the business for which the
application is pending during said five-day period; in which event, $150
shall not be refundable.
B. Fingerprinting. An additional fee for the amount set by the state (and
subject to change by the state) shall be submitted for processing of
fingerprints.
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 82-24 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 86-1
1:210
OCCUPIED BUILDING — Any building constructed or adapted for overnight
accommodation of a person or for operating a business or engaging in an
activity therein, whether or not a person is actually present.
PARK — Any existing public park or portion of a public park, whether
operated and/or under the control of the Township of West Windsor and/
or the West Windsor Plainsboro Board of Education, which is defined as
an open or enclosed tract of land adopted for, set apart, maintained at
public expense and/or devoted to the purposes of pleasure, recreation,
ornament and/or light and air for the general public. It shall also include
those lands established for park use pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:12-1 et seq. and/
or unimproved township land or township land left in its natural state.
PLAYGROUND — Any municipal or school facility (including day care)
where people gather for the purpose of engaging in recreation, sport,
athletic competition or physical activity including, but not limited to, hiking
and bicycling. It shall also include such a facility operated by an
organization formed in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43, unimproved
land or land left in its natural state that is maintained by an organization
formed in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43 and which surrounds such
a facility operated by an organization formed in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-43 but which is not actively devoted to the above purposes is not a
playground.
§ 86-2. Prohibited acts.
§ 86-3. Exceptions.
The prohibitions of § 86-2 and N.J.S.A. 2C:39-6 et seq. (as exist or may be
amended to exist) shall apply but not be solely limited to the following:
A. In order to alleviate the risk and danger posed by the carrying and
discharge of firearms within the Township of West Windsor, the
Township Council hereby determines and ordains that no person,
except as noted herein, shall fire or discharge any firearm or carry or
transport any loaded firearm, as defined herein in § 86-1, within 450
feet of any occupied building, church, barn or airport nor within 1,000
feet of any public or school playground or day-care facility or any
schoolhouse or school grounds or publicly owned open space or park, as
defined herein in § 86-1.
B. No person shall fire or discharge any firearm from or across any state,
county, municipal or publicly traveled road or highway.
A. Law enforcement officers of any governmental agency, federal, state,
county and/or municipal, at all times (N.J.S.A. 2C:39-6).
B. Members of any legally recognized military organization while in the
performance of their official duties (N.J.S.A. 2C:39-6).
§ 86-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-3
1:211
C. Privately employed security personnel who are authorized by law to
carry firearms while in the performance of their official duties (N.J.S.A.
2C:39-6).
D. Persons lawfully using firearms in the protection of their person or
property for self-defense (N.J.S.A. 2C:39-6).
E. Persons engaged in the discharge of firearms loaded only with blanks
for commemorative events or historic pageants; provided, however,
that such persons shall obtain a special permit from the Township
Police Division upon application prescribed by the Director of the
Department of Public Safety or designee (N.J.S.A. 2C:39-6).
F. Members of any full-time paid or part-time paid Fire Department or
force assigned full-time or part-time to a municipal or county arson
investigation unit (N.J.S.A. 2C:39-6).
G. Civilian employees of the state and federal government while in the
performance of their official duties (N.J.S.A. 2C:39-6).
H. Any representative of the Division of Fish, Game and Wildlife,
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), State of New Jersey, or
deputy state conservation officer or full-time employee of the State
Division of Parks and Forestry or a New Jersey transit police officer
while in the performance of their official duties (N.J.S.A. 2C:39-6).
I. A guard in the employ of any railway express company, banking or
building and loan or savings and loan institution of the State of New
Jersey while in the actual performance of official duties (N.J.S.A.
2C:39-6).
J. A campus police officer appointed pursuant to law at all times. (N.J.S.A.
2C:39-6).
K. An owner, tenant or lessee of a tract of land, including farmers, in
excess of five acres while hunting in and upon said tract. Said tract shall
not include any public lands owned and/or controlled by the Township
of West Windsor or other designated open spaces controlled by a
homeowners/condominium association (N.J.S.A. 2C:39-6).
L. Owner, tenant or lessee, the latter two having express written and
dated permission of the owner, on file with the Township Police Division,
when controlling woodchuck or other pests as legally defined,
authorized and allowed by the hunting regulations promulgated by the
Division of Fish, Game and Wildlife, Department of Environmental
Protection, State of Now Jersey. This subsection shall also apply to
farmers (N.J.S.A. 2C:39-6).
M. Persons lawfully participating in the New Jersey State Division of Fish,
Game and Wildlife special permit shotgun season and/or regularly
scheduled bow and firearm hunting season, either sex, provided that
said persons meet the following criteria:
§ 86-3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 86-3
1:212
§ 86-4. Exceptions for shotgun, rifle and pistol ranges/clubs.
Pursuant to the conditions set forth in this section, any shotgun, rifle
or pistol range (hereafter referred to as "club" or "range") that was in
existence as of January 1, 1979, shall continue to operate even if said
establishment is within the geographic boundaries established herein for
the prohibition of discharge of firearms. However, in order to operate indoor
and/or outdoor pursuant to this section, any such range shall be governed
by the following conditions:
(1) Have a valid firearm hunting license, a special shotgun deer permit
and/or other permit as required by law pertaining to those seasons
mentioned above.
(2) Have received written permission from a landowner or landowner's
agent to hunt said property and have said written permission in the
person's possession at the time of hunting.
(3) Said persons agree to hunt from a standing tree or structure as
permitted by the New Jersey State Game Code, if requested by a
landowner.
(4) Agree to hunt only within the deer management zone designated by
the New Jersey State Division of Fish, Game and Wildlife.
(5) Agree to park their motor vehicles in areas designated by the
landowner. (N.J.S.A. 2C:39-6).110
N. The discharge of firearms at indoor and outdoor ranges, as provided in
§ 86-4. [Amended 4-25-1994 by Ord. No. 94-10]
O. Any type of pistols capable of exploding only paper caps containing 35
grains or less explosive composition, including starter pistols used in
sporting or athletic events.
P. The firing of blanks from a firearm during the course of and as part of a
community parade or memorial service with the prior approval of the
Township Chief of Police by special permit upon application prescribed
by the Director of the Department Public Safety.
Q. In the event that the County of Mercer shall have a deer hunt within its
park within the township, then valid New Jersey hunters shall have the
right and opportunity to participate, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 23:4-16, as
may be amended, as well as rules and regulations established by the
County of Mercer.
R. The firing of bow and arrow (otherwise known as archery) under the
auspices of a physical education program conducted by and/or
supervised by the West Windsor - Plainsboro Board of Education.
110. Editor's Note: An unnumbered paragraph immediately following this section, which
pertained to discharge of a firearm within 450 feet of any occupied building, was deleted
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 86-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-4
1:213
A. The discharge of firearms at an indoor range which meets the following
standards shall be permitted under the following conditions:
[Amended 4-25-1994 by Ord. No. 94-10]
(1) The range(s) must be so constructed as to preclude a bullet fired in
accordance with the range rules incorporated by reference and on
file in the Clerk's office from departing the confines of the outdoor
range. The range shall be designed using the technical guidance
and applicable examples provided by the National Rifle Association
(NRA) Range Department in the Range Manual, 1989 Edition, as
amended and supplemented from time to time. Any changes in the
range rules must be approved by the West Windsor Township
Council.
(2) The range management must provide documentation, including
range safety rules and engineering sketches and schematics, in
sufficient detail, to permit the Township Division of Engineering
and/or township designee to review the range for conformance
with NRA design guidelines.
B. The discharge of firearms at an indoor range which meets the following
standards shall be permitted under the following conditions:
[Amended 4-25-1994 by Ord. No. 94-10]
(1) The range(s) shall be so constructed as to preclude a bullet or
shotgun pellet or other projectile fired in accordance with the
range rules incorporated by reference and on file in the Clerk's
office from departing the confines of the range property as
described herein. The range shall be designed in accordance with
the range design and operating guidelines provided by the National
Rifle Association (NRA) Range Department in the Range Manual,
1989 Edition, as amended and supplemented from time to time.
Any changes in the range rules must be approved by the West
Windsor Township Council.
(2) The pistol and small-bore/air rifle range must be designed so that
no shooter shall have open sky showing while at the firing line.
Berming and backstops shall be provided so that no projectile fired
from the firing line in accordance with the range rules can depart
from the confines of the range property (pistol and small-bore/air
rifle range). Sandbagging, horizontal wood berms and other
barriers to projectile escape shall be used to prevent ricochet.
(3) A shotgun (trap) range shall be designed so that shotgun pellets,
fired from the designated trap firing position in accordance with
the range rules cannot depart from the confines of the range
property.
(4) The high power rifle range shall be designed with an overhead
baffle system, backstops and side berms so as to preclude any
projectile from any rifle fired in accordance with the range rules,
§ 86-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 86-4
1:214
whether from a prone, kneeling, offhand or bench rest position,
from escaping the confines of the range property (high-power rifle
range).
(5) The range management shall provide documentation, including
range safety rules and engineering sketches and schematics, in
sufficient detail, to permit the Township Division of Engineering
and/or township designee to review the range for conformance
with NRA design guidelines.
(6) The range management shall arrange for inspection of the range
design on a three-year cycle. The range inspection shall be
conducted by the National Rifle Association Range Department,
and copies of the inspection reports shall be filed with the Division
of Engineering.
(7) All ranges are available for inspection by the township engineering,
firearm safety and/or law enforcement personnel at any time, with
reasonable notification provided by the township engineering and/
or firearm safety personnel, so as to arrange access and
documentation as requested.
(8) The officers of an approved range shall provide the names and
telephone numbers of at least two emergency contact persons to
the Township Police Division. That list shall be updated at least
annually.
C. Outdoor shooting at any range/club shall be permitted on those days
and/or hours set forth herein: [Amended 6-20-1994 by Ord. No.
94-18]
(1) Outdoor shooting at any pistol and rifle ranges shall not take place
during the months of December, January and February. A trap
range may operate year-round, but, during the months of
December, January and February, trapshooting may take place only
on Sundays during the hours between 12:00 noon and 6:00 p.m.
(2) Outdoor shooting may take place during the period of March 1
through November 30 each year, as follows:
(a) Sundays: 12:00 noon to 6:00 p.m.
(b) Mondays: No outdoor shooting permitted.
(c) Tuesdays: Outdoor shooting may take place between the hours
of 12:00 noon and 9:00 p.m. from April 1 through October 31;
between the hours of 12:00 noon and 8:00 p.m. from March 1
through March 31; and between the hours of 12:00 noon and
8:00 p.m. from November 1 through November 30.
(d) Wednesdays through Fridays: Outdoor shooting may take place
between the hours of 12:00 noon and 8:00 p.m.
§ 86-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 86-4
1:215
(e) Saturdays: Outdoor shooting may take place on alternate
Saturdays and, when permitted, may begin at 10:00 a.m. and
must be completed by 6:00 p.m.
(3) Special events. Any club having any outdoor shooting ranges may
file a schedule of special events, where applicable, with the
Township Clerk and Township Director of the Department of Public
Safety not later than the 15th of April of each year or not more than
one week before the first special event in a calendar year,
whichever is earlier. That schedule shall list all special events, such
as national, state and/or regional rifle and/or pistol matches,
community-based fund-raising events and other special events
which are sponsored by the club. No more than 12 hours per year
may be added to the weekend times and hours permitted in
Subsection B above. In no event, however, may any outdoor
shooting begin before 9:00 a.m. nor continue after 6:00 p.m. on any
weekend day. Furthermore, for every extra hour scheduled on a
weekend day(s) for a special event, the club must close its outdoor
ranges earlier by the same number of hours the following
Wednesday. (For example: The club opens one extra hour on
Saturday and one extra hour on Sunday; therefore, the club must
close two hours early the following Wednesday.)
D. Any members of such club(s) duly organized may be permitted to carry
their weapons going to or from the club. Only those firearms, which
must be carried unloaded, necessary for use at such facility as part of
such practice will be allowed, provided that a copy of the charter for the
range/club is filed with the Director of the Department of Public Safety
or designee.
E. The club(s) shall, prior to each year of operation but no later than
February 1 of each year, provide to the Director of the Department of
Public Safety or designee and the Township Clerk a certificate of
insurance from an insurance company authorized to do business in the
State of New Jersey evidencing that the club(s) is insured against
liability for personal injury and death and against liability for property
damage arising from the operation of the club(s) in an amount sufficient
to address possible liability for personal injury and/or death and/or
damage. [Amended 4-25-1994 by Ord. No. 94-10]
F. Any club(s) so covered by this section shall be required to maintain
fencing, with a minimum of four-foot-high fencing and with signs posted
no less than one sign per 100 feet, which signs shall conform to the
following: [Amended 4-25-1994 by Ord. No. 94-10]
(1) Signs shall be no less than 12 inches by 12 inches, of durable
material, containing the words:
WARNING: FIREARMS DISCHARGE AREA
DANGER: DO NOT ENTER!
§ 86-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 86-4
1:216
§ 86-5. Posting of signs; distributions of copies.
On or before January 1 of each year, the Township Administrator shall
arrange for the posting of appropriate signs on all major roads which
provide access to the township advising the general public that there are
zones within the Township of West Windsor where firearms shall not be
discharged. The signs shall also indicate that it shall be necessary for any
person(s) desiring to discharge firearms or to hunt in this township to obtain
a copy of this chapter at the West Windsor Township Police Headquarters. In
addition, the Township Administrator and Township Clerk shall prepare and
arrange for distribution of copies of this chapter in any appropriate manner
so that any person(s) desiring to discharge firearms or hunt in this township
shall be made aware of this chapter.
§ 86-6. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
Penalties for violations of this chapter shall be pursuant to Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3 and state law. The township
or other applicable governmental agencies and law enforcement personnel,
including the West Windsor Police Division, through their various
authorized agents, will be responsible for enforcement of this chapter.
Chapter 89
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Marshal — See Ch. 4, § 4-34D.
Fire Division — See Ch. 4, § 4-35.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 34.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 63.
Fees — See Ch. 82.
§ 89-1. Local enforcement.
Pursuant to Section 2 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383;
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 through 52:27D-213), the New Jersey Uniform Fire
Code shall be locally enforced in the Township of West Windsor.
(2) The lettering shall be of such size and coloring so as to be plainly
legible for a person possessing 2 0/20 vision from a distance of at
least 50 feet.
(3) Signage and fencing, including fence location and type, shall be
approved by the Division of Engineering prior to installation.
§ 86-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-2
1:217
§ 89-2. Agency designation.
The local enforcing agency shall be the West Windsor Township Fire
Marshal's office.
§ 89-3. Additional regulations.
In addition to the inspections and fees required pursuant to the Act and
the regulations of the Department of Community Affairs, the Fire Marshal's
office may require additional fire safety inspections, fire safety measures
and fire safety permits for other types of structures and/or operations as
listed, but not limited to those listed in Chapter 82, Fees, § 82-17.
A. Registration and fees.
(1) The owner(s) and/or agent of all businesses, professions,
occupancies, buildings, structures or premises regardless of use,
except one-family and two-family dwellings, shall apply annually
with the local enforcing agency for a certificate of approval, upon
forms provided by the Fire Marshal's office.
(2) It shall be a violation of this Code for an owner to fail to return such
forms and fees within 30 days. If the ownership is transferred,
whether by sale, assignment, gift, intestate succession, devise,
reorganization, receivership, foreclosure or execution process, the
new owner shall file with the Fire Marshal's office, within 30 days
of the transfer, an application for a certificate of approval pursuant
to this subsection.
(3) All applications shall be accompanied by fees as set forth in
Chapter 82, Fees, § 82-17.
B. Information requests. Requests for file information shall be
accompanied by a research and copy fee as set forth in Chapter 82,
Fees, § 82-17.
C. Waivers. The following users shall be exempt from the local permit fees
and registration fees; however, they shall be required to properly apply
for such permits and registrations and comply with all other code
requirements.
(1) Volunteer fire companies.
(2) Volunteer first aid squads.
(3) Nonprofit civic groups when applying for use of an occasional
waiver (once or twice a year.)
(4) Churches and other recognized religious organizations. (This shall
apply to uses where the actual religious service takes place, uses
for religious educational purposes or a use of an occasional nature.)
§ 89-2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 89-3
1:218
§ 89-4. Technical amendments.
The State Fire Prevention Code adopted by N.J.A.C. 5:70 shall be modified
by the addition of the following article:
Article 100
LOCAL PROVISIONS
Section F-10000.0 GENERAL
F-10000.1 Scope: This article shall apply to all buildings, structures
or premises located within West Windsor Township other than owneroccupied
one-family and two-family dwellings.
Section F-10001.0 PERMITS
F-10001.2 Type I permits: The following permits shall be classified as
Type I permits. Fee shall be the same as Type I Uniform Fire Code.
F-10001.2.1 Asphalt (tar) kettle: No person, firm or corporation shall
make use of or fire any asphalt (tar) kettle without first securing a permit
from the Fire Official.
F-10001.2.2 Training and education: No person, firm or corporation
engaged in the business of providing fire brigade or emergency response
team training shall conduct such activities without first securing a permit
from the Fire Marshal. Permits issued under this subsection shall be valid
for all such work conducted within the jurisdiction. The holder of the
permit shall furnish the Fire Marshal with a list of locations within the
jurisdiction where the service is provided as well as a course outline of any
training provided.
F-10001.2.3 Liquefied petroleum gas or liquefied natural gas: A
permit shall be obtained from the Fire Marshal for the storage or use of
liquefied petroleum gas or liquefied natural gas utilizing storage containers
with an aggregate water capacity exceeding 100 gallons and less than
4,000 gallons.
F-10001.2.4 Flammable or combustible liquids and hazardous
materials: A permit shall be obtained from the Fire Marshal to install,
remove, repair or alter in any way a stationary tank for the storage of
flammable or combustible liquids or hazardous materials, or to modify or
replace any line or dispensing device connected thereto if not required to
obtain a permit for such activity under the Uniform Construction Code,
N.J.A.C. 5:23.
(5) Contractors and construction firms when the activity is part of
work performed under a valid permit by the Building Department.
(6) Township of West Windsor.
(7) West Windsor - Plainsboro School District.
D. Fire Marshal's office; standard details. The Fire Marshal's office shall
issue standard details, as required, to aid in the enforcement of these
regulations.
§ 89-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-4
1:219
F-10001.2.5 Hazardous materials: A permit shall be obtained by the
Fire Marshal to store, handle or process hazardous materials or chemicals
which, because of their toxicity, flammability, liability to explosion or
decomposition, render firefighting abnormally dangerous or difficult. A
permit shall also be obtained from the Fire Marshal to store, handle
or process materials which are chemically unstable and which may
spontaneously form explosive compounds, or undergo spontaneous
reactions of explosive violence or with sufficient evolution of heat to be
a fire hazard. Hazardous chemicals or materials shall include but not be
limited to such materials as flammable solids, corrosive liquids, radioactive
materials, oxidizing materials, potentially explosive chemicals, toxic
materials, poisonous gases, pesticides, insecticides and fertilizers.
Exception: Materials or processes covered by a life hazard use or permit
under Uniform Fire Code Chapter 5:70.
F-10001.2.6 Storage containers/storage trailers/storage units: Each
steel, aluminum, or other material container and/or trailer, with or without
wheels, used for storage purposes, which has remained immobile for 30
days or longer must have a permit and meet the following conditions:
(a) No storage unit shall be connected to or with any other structures,
containers or trailers.
(b) All storage units must be separated from all other structures,
containers or trailers by a minimum of 10 feet.
(c) No storage unit shall be closer than 10 feet of any lot line.
(d) No storage unit will be connected by any means to any utility such as
electric, water, sewer, gas, etc.
(e) All applications for permit must be accompanied by a plot plan
showing building locations, lot lines and locations of all storage units
and all distances.
(f) Storage units shall not be used to store any material which is subject
to regulation by the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
F-10001.3 Type 2 permits: The following permits shall be classified as
Type 2 permits. Fee shall be the same as Type 2 — Uniform Fire Code.
F-10001.3.1 Process equipment: A permit shall be obtained from the
Fire Marshal's office to install, modify or alter process equipment not
required to have a permit under the Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70.
F-10001.3.2 Public gatherings: A permit shall be obtained from the Fire
Marshal for the establishment, erection or operation of any fairs, carnivals,
circuses or other public gatherings. Before a permit is issued the following
conditions must be met:
(a) Provide and maintain an access lane of at least 15 feet in width and
capable of supporting fire and rescue apparatus and so arranged as to
afford access to within 50 feet of all booths, tents, rides and other
equipment, buildings or structures used as part of or in conjunction
with the above use.
§ 89-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 89-4
1:220
(b) At each location utilizing or producing electric current, a 10 lb. ABC
type fire extinguisher shall be provided with proper inspection.
(c) Each location utilizing any fuel producing a flame for heating or
cooking shall be provided with a 10 lb. ABC type fire extinguisher with
proper inspection.
F-10002.1 General: In addition to those required under N.J.A.C. 5:70, fire
safety evacuation and emergency action plans shall be prepared as set
forth in this section where required by sections F-10002.1 - F-4002.1.5.
F-10002.1.1 Occupant loads of 50 or more: All buildings with an
occupant load greater than 50.
F-10002.1.2 Use Group H: All Use Group H buildings.
F-10002.1.3 Use Group F: All Use Group F buildings.
F-10002.1.4 Use Group S: All Use Group S buildings.
F-10002.1.5 Use Group E: All Use Group E buildings.
F-10002.2 Approval, distribution: The fire safety evacuation and
emergency action plans shall be approved by the Fire Official and shall be
distributed by the owner to all tenants and employees.
F-10002.3 Evacuation plan: The evacuation plan shall be conspicuously
posted on every floor and in each tenant space for the occupant's use.
F-10002.4 Maintenance: The fire safety evacuation and emergency
action plans shall be maintained to reflect changes in the use and physical
arrangement of the building.
F-10002.5 Training: If an emergency action plan assigns employees with
specific responsibilities in areas such as evacuation coordination,
firefighting or material leak and spill handling, the employer shall provide
a minimum of annual training sessions to prepare the employee for such
activities.
F-10003.0 FIRE ALARMS/REPORTING
F-10003.1 Fire alarms: The Fire Marshal shall investigate, or cause
to be investigated, the activation of any fire alarm, fire detector, or fire
protection system occurring within the jurisdiction to determine the cause
for such activation and to determine if the device and/or equipment has
been properly restored to full service.
F-10003.2 Failure to report: It shall be a violation of this Code for
any person or persons, having knowledge of same, to fail to report to
the Fire Department and/or the Fire Marshal the activation of any fire
protection system or device; or to fail to report the occurrence of any fire
or attempted arson; or to fail to report the spill or leakage of any flammable
or combustible liquid or gas or of any hazardous material immediately upon
gaining such knowledge.
F-10004.0 WATER SUPPLIES
§ 89-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-4
1:221
F-10004.1 Public water supply: The Fire Marshal shall recommend to
the Township Administrator the location or relocation of new or existing
fire hydrants and the placement or replacement of inadequate water mains
located upon public property and deemed necessary to provide adequate
fire flow and distribution pattern. A fire hydrant shall not be placed into or
removed from service until approved by the Fire Marshal.
F-10004.2 Fire hydrant local standard: Following are the minimum
standards for the installation and placement of public or private fire
hydrants:
(a) Hydrants in single-family residential zones shall be spaced with a
hydrant every 800 feet along the roadway(s) measured along the
roadway edge.
(b) Hydrants in residential townhouse, condominium, cluster and
multifamily zones shall be spaced with a hydrant every 600 feet along
the roadway edge.
(c) Hydrants in business, commercial and industrial zones shall be spaced
with a hydrant at each intersection and one every 500 feet along the
roadway(s) as a minimum requirement.
F-10004.3 Approval: The Fire Marshal shall approve the placement and
water supply piping of all fire hydrants prior to installation.
F-10004.4 Fire hydrant marking: All fire hydrants on public or private
property shall have the bonnet (top piece) painted reflective white.
Painting shall conform to Fire Marshal's Office, Standard Detail - Fire
Hydrant Marking.
F-10005.0 GENERAL PRECAUTIONS
F-10005.1 Equipment rooms: No storage of any kind shall be permitted
within any mechanical equipment, electrical, furnace or boiler room.
F-10005.2 Barbecue grills: No charcoal cooker, brazier, hibachi or grill,
or any gasoline or other flammable liquid or liquefied petroleum gas-fired
stove or similar device shall be ignited or used on the balconies of any
apartment building, condominium, townhouse, or similar occupancy. The
management of such occupancies which have balconies shall notify their
tenants in writing of this Code requirement at the time the tenant/owner
initially occupies and from time to time thereafter as directed by the Fire
Official to insure compliance.
Exception: One-family and two-family dwellings.
F-10005.3 Access: Temporary all-weather surface access roads, gravel
or equivalent, capable of supporting a 30-ton emergency vehicle, shall be
provided at all times for Fire Department vehicular access to all structures
under construction and to all structures used for the storage of
combustible construction materials. Access of 125 unobstructed feet shall
be provided to all such locations at all times.
Temporary all-weather access roads shall conform with the Fire Marshal's
Office, Standard Detail - Temporary All-Weather Surface Access Roads.
§ 89-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 89-4
1:222
Every dead-end roadway more than 300 feet in length shall be provided
at the closed end with a temporary turnaround acceptable to the Fire
Marshal.
Temporary all-weather surface access roads shall be approved by the Fire
Marshal's office prior to construction commencing.
F-10005.4 Water supply: The fire protection water supply system,
including fire hydrants shown on the approved site plan, shall be installed
and in service prior to placing combustible building materials on the
project site or utilizing them in the construction of building structures.
If phased construction is approved, coordinated phased installation of the
fire protection water system shall be permitted as approved by the Fire
Marshal.
F-10005.5 Emergency vehicle access: All structures, except one- and
two-family dwellings, shall be provided with emergency vehicle access.
"Emergency vehicle access" is defined as a paved or other surface 24
feet in width in its entire length, located not more than 30 feet from
the building, designed to support the weight of emergency vehicles. The
design shall be approved by the Township Engineer in conjunction with the
Township Fire Marshal.
Emergency vehicle access shall be provided for the following buildings:
(a) One- or two-story buildings with full automatic fire sprinkler
protection shall be provided with emergency vehicle access to 25% of
its entire perimeter.
(b) One- or two-story buildings without full automatic fire sprinkler
systems shall be provided with emergency vehicle access to 50% of its
entire perimeter.
(c) Buildings three stories or 35 feet in height or higher with full
automatic fire sprinkler protection shall be provided with emergency
vehicle access to 50% of its entire perimeter.
(d) Buildings three stories or 35 feet in height or higher without full
automatic fire sprinkler protection shall be provided with emergency
vehicle access around the entire perimeter.
(e) All high-hazard structures as defined by the New Jersey Uniform
Commercial Code regardless of built-in fire protection or height shall
be provided with emergency access around the entire perimeter.
(f) All mercantile structures as defined by the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code with three or more spaces, regardless of built-in
fire protection or height shall be provided with emergency vehicle
access its entire perimeter.
§ 89-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-4
1:223
F-10005.6 Exterior door identification: All exterior doors without
windows located on building or structures as identified in the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code as use groups A, B, E, F, H, L, M, R-1, R-2 and U
shall identify the owner of said door together with the use of said door (i.e.
employee entrance, sprinkler room, electrical room, etc.). Identification
shall be located in letters and/or numbers a minimum of 1 1/2 inches
in height located between 60 and 72 inches from the base of the door.
Identification shall be in contrasting color to the door.
F-10006 FIREWORKS
F-10006.1 In addition to the requirements of the State Fire Prevention
Code adopted by N.J.A.C. 5:70, Chapter 3 is hereby modified to require all
that fireworks displays must commence by 9:30 p.m. and conclude no later
than 10:00 p.m.
F-10006.2 Failure to comply with the conditions found in F-10006.1 as well
as all other conditions of the issued fire safety permit will subject the event
organized and fireworks display contractor to monetary penalties as well
as cancellation of the fireworks display.
Chapter 96
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 82. Grease control — See Ch. 133, Art. IV.
§ 96-1. License required.
No person shall operate a retail food establishment without a license from
the Township Division of Health. Such license shall be prominently
displayed in the place of business.
§ 96-2. Issuance of license.
A. Applications for licenses shall be submitted, together with the fee
required by Chapter 82, Fees, § 82-12C, as follows:
(1) Temporary food establishments: not less than 20 days prior to the
proposed date(s) of operation.
(2) All other retail food establishments: on or before December 1 of
each year preceding the year for which the application is made.
(3) New applications may be made at any time during the year upon
payment of the full annual fee.
B. All licenses issued under Subsections A(2) and A(3) of this section shall
expire on January 1 of the year following which they were issued or
§ 89-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 96-2
1:224
§ 96-3. Suspension and revocation of license.
§ 96-4. Food Service Employee's Educational Course.
upon transfer of ownership or operation of a licensed premises,
whichever comes first.
A. A license issued under the terms and provisions of this chapter may be
suspended or revoked by the Health Officer for a violation by the
licensee of any State Health Code which is by its terms applicable
thereto or in violation of any law of the United States, the State of New
Jersey or any ordinance of the Township.
B. A license issued under this chapter shall not be revoked, canceled or
suspended until a hearing is held by the Health Officer. Written notice
of the time and place of the hearing shall be served on the licensee at
least 10 days prior to the date set for the hearing. The notice shall
contain a brief statement of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking,
canceling or suspending the license. Service shall be deemed effected
either upon personal delivery to the person to be notified or upon
deposit in the United States Post Office in a sealed envelope, postage
prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified, at the business address
appearing on the license. At the hearing before the Health Officer, the
person aggrieved shall have an opportunity to answer and thereafter be
heard, and upon due consideration and deliberation by the Health
Officer, the complaint may be dismissed; or, if the Health Officer
concludes that the charges have been sustained and substantiated, the
Health Officer may revoke, cancel or suspend the license in question.
C. Appeal.
(1) Following such hearing by the Health Officer, the license holder
shall have the right of appeal to the Business Administrator. An
appeal shall be taken by filing written notice with the Health
Officer within five days after the receipt of a written order
following a hearing by the Health Officer.
(2) The Business Administrator shall hear such appeal de novo within
30 days from the date of filing the notice of appeal.
A. In the event that the Health Officer presents a food service employee's
educational course during the year preceding renewal of a license
issued under the terms and provisions of this chapter, then as a
condition of renewal of any such license, the licensee shall be required
to establish, by written certification to the Health Officer, that the
person in charge of the retail food establishment has attended the
course, when offered.
B. "Person in charge" is intended to mean the proprietor, manager,
assistant manager or other person with the authority and responsibility
for the daily operation of such retail food establishment.
§ 96-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-4
1:225
§ 96-5. Fees for licensing retail food establishments.
For information on fees, see Chapter 82, Fees, of this Code.
§ 96-6. Violations and penalties.
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-4.
Chapter 98
HOTEL USAGE TAX
§ 98-1. Legislative authority.
The Township does hereby impose a tax at a uniform percentage rate of 1%
on charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2003, but before
July 1, 2004, and 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy on or after
July 1, 2004, on a room or rooms in a hotel subject to taxation pursuant to
the New Jersey State Sales Tax, more specifically set forth in Subsection
(d) of Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c.30 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3). A tax imposed under
this section shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant to
statute or local ordinance or resolution by the Township.
§ 98-2. When effective.
This chapter or any amendment thereto shall take effect on the first day
of the first full month occurring 30 days after the date of transmittal to
the State Treasurer during calendar year 2003 and on the first day of
the first full month occurring 90 days after the date of transmittal to the
State Treasurer for any amendments adopted in calendar year 2004 and
thereafter.
§ 98-3. Administration of tax.
The hotel occupancy tax shall be administered in conformance with § 4 of
Chapter 114 of the Laws of 2003 as follows:
C. The licensee may also be required to attend such a course if in the
preceding year the establishment received two or more less than
satisfactory ratings as determined by sanitary inspection according to
Chapter XII of the State Sanitary Code, N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq.
D. The licensee may not be required to attend such an educational course,
provided that the person in charge of the establishment has at some
time attended the course and is certified as successfully completing the
course by the West Windsor Health Division.
E. The Health Officer shall advise all licensees, in writing, of all such
courses offered, and failure to attend such programs may result in the
refusal to renew said license.
§ 96-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 98-3
1:226
§ 98-4. Collection of tax.
§ 98-5. Returns; payments of tax liability.
A. All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the purchaser or
guest renting a hotel room;
B. A vendor or hotel establishment (hereinafter "vendor") shall not assume
or absorb any tax imposed by this chapter;
C. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
separately charged and stated to the customer or hotel guest, or that
the tax will be refunded to the customer.
D. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense arid each representation or advertisement by a vendor
for each day the representation or advertisement continues shall be
deemed a separate offense; and
E. Any violation of this section shall be subject to penalties imposed by the
Municipal court, not to exceed $1,250.
A. A tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be collected on behalf of
the Township by the person collecting the rent from the hotel customer.
B. Each vendor or person required to collect a tax imposed by this chapter
shall be personally liable for the tax imposed, collected or required to
be collected hereunder. Any such vendor or person shall have the same
right in respect to collecting the tax from a customer or hotel guest as if
the tax were a part of the rent and payable at the same time; provided,
however, that the Chief Fiscal Officer of the Township shall be joined as
a party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax.
A. A person required to collect a tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter shall, on or before the dates required pursuant to Section
17 of P.L. 1966, c.30 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-17), forward to the Director of the
Division of Taxation in the New Jersey Department of the Treasury
(hereinafter the "Director"), the tax collected in the preceding month
and make and file a return for the preceding month with the Director on
any form and containing any information as the Director shall prescribe
as necessary to determine liability for the tax in the preceding month
during which the person was required to collect the tax.
B. The Director may permit or require returns to be made covering other
periods and upon any dates as the Director may specify. In addition, the
Director may require payments of tax liability at any intervals and
based upon any classifications as the Director may designate. In
prescribing any other periods to be covered by the return or intervals or
classifications for payment of tax liability, the Director may take into
§ 98-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-5
1:227
§ 98-6. Director's powers and duties.
§ 98-7. Rules and regulations set by Director.
The provisions of this chapter shall be subject to any rules or regulations
that are adopted by the Director of the Division of Taxation, New Jersey
Department of the Treasury.
Chapter 100
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 89.
§ 100-1. Designation of enforcing officer; compensation.
The Health Officer of the township is hereby designated as the officer to
exercise the powers prescribed in this chapter, and the Health Officer shall
serve in such capacity without any additional salary.
§ 100-2. Powers of Health Officer. [Amended 6-8-1981 by Ord. No.
81-20]
account the dollar volume of tax involved as well as the need for
ensuring the prompt and orderly collection of the tax imposed.
C. The Director may require amended returns to be filed within 20 days
after notice and to contain the information specified in the notice.
A. The Director shall collect and administer any tax imposed pursuant to
the provisions of § 3 of Chapter 114 of the Laws of 2003. In carrying out
the provisions of this section, the Director shall have all the powers
granted in P.L. 1966, c.30 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-1 et seq.).
B. The Director shall determine and certify to the State Treasurer on a
quarterly or more frequent basis, as prescribed by the State Treasurer,
the amount of revenues collected for the Township pursuant to § 3 of
Chapter 114 of the Laws of 2003.
C. The State Treasurer, upon the certification of the Director and upon the
warrant of the State Comptroller, shall pay and distribute to the
Township on a quarterly or more frequent basis, as prescribed by the
State Treasurer, the amount of revenues determined and certified
under Subsection B of this section.
D. A tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
governed by the provisions of the State Uniform Tax Procedure Law,
N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq.
§ 98-5 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 100-2
1:228
§ 100-3. Unfit buildings; conditions constituting unfitness.
For the purpose of this chapter, the Health Officer may determine that a
building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use if the Health
Officer finds that conditions exist in such building which are dangerous
or injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of such building, the
occupants of neighboring buildings or other residents of the township. Such
conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the
foregoing):
A. The Health Officer is hereby authorized and empowered to exercise
such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and
effectuate the purposes and provisions of this chapter, including the
following, in addition to others herein granted:
(1) To investigate the building conditions in the township in order to
determine which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation
or occupancy or use.
(2) To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and
receive evidence.
(3) To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to
cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in
possession.
(4) To appoint and fix duties of such officers, agents and employees as
deemed necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
(5) To delegate any functions and powers under this chapter to such
officers and agents as the Health Officer may designate.
B. If an actual and immediate danger to life is posed by the threatened
collapse of any fire-damaged or other structurally unsafe building, the
public officer may, after taking such measures as may be necessary to
make such building temporarily safe, seek a judgment in summary
proceedings for the demolition thereof.111
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair or limit in any way
the power of the township to define and declare nuisances and to cause
their removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise. Any
owner or party in interest may, within 30 days from the date of the filing
of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the Superior
Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of
the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
A. Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other
calamities.
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 100-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-3
1:229
§ 100-4. Adoption of State Housing Code by reference.112
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1, the New Jersey State
Housing Code, except the part or parts thereof which are deleted and
amended on the copy annexed thereto, is hereby accepted, adopted and
established as a standard to be used as a guide in determining the fitness
of a building for human habitation or occupancy or use. A copy of the New
Jersey State Housing Code is on file in the Clerk's office.
§ 100-5. Petitions by residents; preliminary investigation.
[Amended 6-8-1981 by Ord. No. 81-20]
Whenever a petition is filed with the Health Officer by a public authority,
as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.4, or by at least five residents of the township
charging that any building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or
use as herein defined, or whenever it appears to the Health Officer (on the
Health Officer's own motion) that any building is unfit for human habitation
or occupancy or use as herein defined, the Health Officer shall, if said
Health Officer's preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charge,
issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in
such building a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing
a notice that a hearing will be held before the Health Officer (or the Health
Officer's designated agent) at a place therein fixed not less than seven
days nor more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint; that the
owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to
the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise and give testimony at
the time and place fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence
prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings
before the Health Officer.
§ 100-6. Statement of findings by Health Officer; service of order
upon owner.
If after such notice and hearing the Health Officer determines that the
building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or
use as herein defined, the Health Officer shall state, in writing, the findings
of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be
served upon the owner thereof and parties in interest an order:
B. Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities.
C. Dilapidation.
D. Disrepair, structural defects or uncleanliness.
A. Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of said building to be
made by the owner within a reasonable time, which time shall be set
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 100-3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 100-6
1:230
§ 100-7. Correction orders; noncompliance procedures; orders to
remove.
§ 100-8. Collection of costs incurred by township. [Amended
6-8-1981 by Ord. No. 81-20]
forth in the order, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate or to have
said building vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order.
B. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails
to repair, alter or improve the same building within the time specified in
the order, requiring that the owner remove or demolish the building
within a reasonable time as specified in the order of removal.
A. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the Health
Officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved or
to be vacated and closed, and the Health Officer may cause to be posted
on the main entrance of any building so closed a placard with the
following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this building is prohibited
and unlawful."
B. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the Health Officer may cause such building to be removed or
demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition thereof after
advertisement for and receipt of bids therefor.
A. The amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses'
fees, search fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this chapter determined in favor of the
township and the cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements or
vacating and closing or removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of
the balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any,
realized from the sale of materials derived from such building or from
any contract for removal or demolition thereof shall be a municipal lien
against the real property upon which such cost was incurred.
B. If the building is removed or demolished by the Health Officer, said
Health Officer shall sell the materials of such building. There shall be
credited against the cost of the removal or demolition thereof the
proceeds of any sale of such materials or any sum derived from any
contract for the removal or demolition of the building. If there are no
such credits or if the sum total of such costs exceeds the total of such
credits, a detailed statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so
due shall be filed with the township Tax Assessor or other custodian of
the records of tax liens, and a copy thereof shall be forthwith forwarded
to the owner by registered mail. If the total of the credits exceeds such
costs, the balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court
by the Health Officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be
§ 100-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-8
1:231
§ 100-9. Service of complaints and orders. [Amended 6-8-1981 by
Ord. No. 81-20]
Complaints or orders issued by the Health Officer pursuant to this chapter
shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered mail, but
if the whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the same cannot be
ascertained by the Health Officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence,
and the Health Officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving
of such complaint or order upon such persons may be made by publishing
the same once in a newspaper printed and published in the township or, in
the absence of such newspaper, in one printed and published in the county
and circulating in said township. A copy of such complaint or order shall
be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint
or order, and a copy of such complaint or order shall be duly recorded or
lodged for record with the county recording officer of the county in which
the building is located.
§ 100-10. Occupancy restrictions.
No person shall occupy or rent to another for occupancy any building or
part thereof for human habitation or use after having been served with an
order issued pursuant to § 100-6 relating to such building or part thereof
and after failure of compliance with such order, but this section shall not
apply to rental or occupancy under a temporary permit issued by the Health
Officer authorizing rental or occupancy for a specified period during the
making of repairs, alterations and improvements required by such order.
§ 100-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall fail to comply with any order of
the Health Officer made pursuant to § 100-6 or who shall violate § 100-10 or
who shall interfere in any way with the Health Officer or any other officer,
agent or employee engaged in carrying out the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3. Any penalty imposed pursuant
to this section and any action taken to enforce any such penalty shall be
in addition and supplemental to any other remedies, proceedings or actions
taken or authorized to be taken pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 100-12. Construal of provisions.
directed by such Court and shall be disbursed according to the order
or judgment of the Court to the persons found to be initiated thereto by
final order or judgment of such Court.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair or limit in any way
the power of the municipality to define and declare nuisances and to
cause their removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or
otherwise, nor is anything in this act intended to limit the authority of
the enforcing agency or Construction Official under the State Uniform
§ 100-8 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 100-12
1:232
Chapter 103
LANDSCAPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 48.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 55.
Nuisances — See Ch. 115.
Soil removal and excavations — See Ch. 143.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 162.
Trees — See Ch. 170.
Land use — See Ch. 200.
§ 103-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that all landscapers are cognizant
of the Township's leaf and brush ordinances. Nothing in this chapter shall
relieve any owner, lessee or tenant from his/her responsibility to comply
with the requirements of the Township's leaf and brush ordinances. The
Township makes no guarantee or representation regarding the fitness,
knowledge or qualification of any person that is registered with the
Township to engage in landscaping for hire.
§ 103-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings:
FOR HIRE — To demand and/or accept payment or compensation for
completion of landscaping services.
LANDSCAPE or LANDSCAPING — To be in the business, occupation or
trade of adorning or improving property or portions of property by trimming
or cutting grass or shrubs; by planting, installing or removing leaves,
branches, logs, grass, flowers, mulch, hedges, shrubs or trees. As used in
this chapter, the term "landscape" or "landscaping" shall also refer to the
solicitation of the above referenced services.
PERSON — Any individual or entity including, but not limited to, any
partnership, corporation (for-profit, nonprofit, or municipal and its
agencies), firm, association or any combination of the foregoing.
Construction Code Act, P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.)
or any rules or regulations adopted thereunder.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the
power of the township or any officer or department thereof to enforce
any provisions of its ordinances or regulations or to prevent or punish
violations thereof, and the powers conferred by this chapter shall be in
addition and supplemental to the powers conferred upon the township
by any other law or ordinance.
§ 100-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-3
1:233
§ 103-3. Applications for registration; registration fee.
§ 103-4. Exemptions.
§ 103-5. Violations and penalties.
A. No person shall engage in any landscaping for hire on any public or
private property within the Township unless he/she has first registered
with the Township.
B. At the time of registration, the applicant shall certify that he/she has
received a copy of and will comply with the provisions of the Township's
leaf and brush ordinances.
C. Every registration shall be issued and renewed on an annual basis,
upon payment of an annual fee to the Township in the amount of $10.
A. No registration shall be required of any owners, lessee or tenant of real
property who shall personally perform activities otherwise requiring
registration; except that all such work must otherwise comply with
Township ordinances.
B. Home improvement contractors registered pursuant to N.J.A.C.
13:45-17.1 et seq. on or after December 31, 2005, shall not be required
to register with the Township as required by this chapter.
C. Persons who are specifically exempt from the registration requirements
of N.J.A.C. 13:45-17.1 et seq. pursuant to N.J.A.C. 13:45-17.4 on or after
December 31, 2005, shall be required to register with the Township as
set forth in this chapter.
A. The Township Council may, upon recommendation of the Township
Engineer or designee, after notice and opportunity for hearing, suspend
or revoke any registration for violation of law or related Township
ordinances, or for good cause shown to be adverse to the public health,
safety or welfare.
B. When the Township Engineer or designee has reasonable cause to
believe that an emergency affecting the public health, safety or welfare
exists, said official may temporarily suspend any registration until the
Township Council can be convened to consider the suspension. Such
period shall not exceed 30 days, unless consented to by the landscaper
and the Township Engineer or designee.
C. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty stated in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Penalty,
§ 1-3.
§ 103-3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 103-5
1:234
Chapter 108
(RESERVED)
Chapter 109
MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC THERAPY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 82.
§ 109-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC THERAPIES — Any systems of
activity of structured touch which include, but are not limited to, holding,
applying pressure, positioning and mobilizing soft tissue of the body by
manual technique and use of visual, kinesthetic, auditory and palpating
skills to assess the body for purposes of applying therapeutic massage,
bodywork or somatic principles. Such applications may include, but are
not limited to, the use of therapies such as heliotherapy or hydrotherapy,
the use of moist hot and cold external applications, external application
of herbal or topical preparations not classified as prescription drugs,
movement and neuromyofacial education and education in self-care and
stress management. Massage, bodywork and somatic therapies do not
include the diagnosis or treatment of illness, disease, impairment or
disability.
MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC THERAPIST — Any person licensed
pursuant to the provisions of the Massage and Bodywork Therapist
Licensing Act, N.J.S.A. 45:11-53.
MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC THERAPY ESTABLISHMENT —
Any establishment wherein massage, bodywork and/or somatic therapies
are administered or are permitted to be administered, when such therapies
are administered for any form of consideration.
§ 109-2. Nonlicensed therapists prohibited.
The administering of massage, bodywork and/or somatic therapies for any
form of consideration by any person not licensed by the State of New Jersey
pursuant to the Massage and Bodywork Therapist Licensing Act, P.L. 1999,
c. 19, amended 2007, c. 337.113 shall be prohibited throughout the Township
of West Windsor.
113. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq.
§ 103-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-3
1:235
§ 109-3. License required.
Establishment: No person, firm or corporation shall operate any
establishment or utilize any premises in the Township of West Windsor
as or for a massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishment unless
or until such person, firm or corporation has obtained a license for such
establishment or premises from the Municipal Clerk in accordance with the
terms and provisions of this chapter.
§ 109-4. Renewals.
§ 109-5. Application for license.
Establishment: Any person desiring a massage, bodywork and somatic
therapy establishment license shall file a written application with the
Municipal Clerk upon a form provided by the Clerk. The application form
shall contain the following information:
A. All licenses shall be valid for a period of three years from the date of
issuance.
B. Licensees may renew their licenses prior to expiration by filing a new
application with the Municipal Clerk in the manner prescribed in this
chapter and accompanied by the requisite fee.
A. The type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether individual,
partnership, corporation or otherwise.
B. The name, style and designation under which the business is to be
conducted.
C. The business address and all telephone numbers, including facsimile,
where business is to be conducted.
D. A complete list of the names and residence addresses of all massage,
bodywork and somatic therapists and employees of the business and
the name and residence address of the manager or other person
principally in charge of the operation of the business.
E. A sworn statement indicating that all massage, bodywork and somatic
therapists employed or to be employed by the establishment or
otherwise permitted to work at the establishment have been licensed by
the State of New Jersey pursuant to the Massage and Bodywork
Therapist Licensing Act, P.L. 1999, c. 19, amended 2007, c. 337.
F. The following personal information concerning the applicant(s), if an
individual; concerning each stockholder holding more than 10% of the
stock of the corporation, each officer and each director, if the applicant
is a corporation; concerning the partners, including limited partners, if
the applicant is a partnership; and concerning the manager or other
person principally in charge of the operation of the business shall be
provided:
§ 109-3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 109-5
1:236
§ 109-6. Inspection requirements.
(1) The name, complete residence address and residence telephone
number.
(2) The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present
address of the applicant.
(3) Written proof of age.
(4) Height, weight, sex, color of hair and eyes.
(5) Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the
date of the application and at least two inches by two inches in size.
(6) Provide any massage therapy or similar business history and
experience, including, but not limited to, whether or not such
person has previously operated in this or another municipality or
state under a license or permit or has had such license or permit
denied, revoked or suspended and the reason therefor and the
business activities or occupations subsequent to such action or
denial, suspension or revocation.
(7) All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations,
fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted and the offense
for which convicted and circumstances thereof. The applicant shall
execute a waiver and consent to allow a criminal background check
by the Township Police Division. Failure to execute such a waiver
and consent shall result in a denial of a license.
(8) The names and addresses of three adult residents who will serve as
character references. These references must be persons other than
relatives and business associates.
(9) The fingerprints of the applicant(s).
G. At the time the application is filed, a fee as established in Chapter 82,
Fees, shall be paid to the Township Clerk to cover the cost of processing
the application and investigating the facts stated therein.
A. The Municipal Clerk, upon receiving an application for a massage,
bodywork and somatic therapy establishment license, shall refer the
application to the various municipal departments (Division of Code
Enforcement, Zoning, Health, Emergency Services) for review and
conformance with applicable state and Township Codes for such an
establishment.
B. No massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishment shall be
issued a license or be operated, established or maintained in the
Township unless inspections by the appropriate municipal departments
reveal that the establishment complies with the minimum requirements
of the Uniform Construction Code and Health Codes for businesses
operating in the Township of West Windsor. In addition, the
§ 109-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-6
1:237
§ 109-7. Investigation; issuance of license.
establishment must comply with each of the following minimum
requirements:
(1) All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, steam or bath areas
and floors shall be constructed of material with surfaces which are
smooth, nonabsorbent, and which may be readily disinfected.
(2) A public restroom shall be available to clients and employees
during all business hours.
(3) Water closets and lavatories shall be in conformance with the
regulations set forth in the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code,
N.J.A.C. 5:23.
(4) If bathing, dressing and locker facilities are provided for the
patrons and male and female patrons are served simultaneously,
separate bathing, dressing, locker and massage room facilities
shall be provided.
(5) The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting
nondisposable instruments and materials used in administering
massages. Such nondisposable instruments and materials shall be
disinfected after use on each patron.
(6) Adequate hand washing facilities shall be conveniently located to
each treatment area to maintain clean hands and arms of all
employees before, after and during treatments.
(7) Hand sinks shall be provided with hot and cold water capable of
delivering running water under pressure at a temperature of 90° to
110° F.
A. When said application is properly filled out, signed by the applicant and
has been filed with the Municipal Clerk with all accompanying
information, the application shall be referred by the Clerk to the
Township Police Division. The Chief of Police or his or her designee
shall investigate the information available as to the applicant's business
and good moral character of the applicant as deemed necessary for the
protections of the public health, welfare and safety.
B. If as a result of such investigation the applicant's character or business
responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory or that the issuance of a
license to the applicant would present a danger to the public health,
welfare or safety, the Chief of Police shall endorse on such application
his/her disapproval and reasons for same and return the application to
the Township Clerk, who shall notify the applicant that the application
is disapproved.
C. If as a result of such investigation the character and business
responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory and the
§ 109-6 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 109-7
1:238
§ 109-8. Revocation of license.
§ 109-9. Criteria for immediate closure.
The licenses issued under this chapter may be immediately suspended by
the Chief of Police for the following reasons:
issuance of the license to the applicant will present no danger to the
public health, safety and welfare, the Chief of Police shall indicate
his/her approval on the application and return the application to the
Township Clerk, who shall execute and deliver to the applicant the
license.
A. Licenses issued under this chapter may be revoked by the Chief of
Police, after notice and a hearing, for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in the application for
the license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the licensed business in the Township.
(3) If the Chief of Police, Health Officer or their designee is denied
access to the premises for the purpose of conducting an inspection.
(4) Any violation of this chapter.
(5) Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude, a felony, an offense
involving sexual misconduct, keeping or residing in a house of
prostitution, and any crime involving dishonesty.
(6) Conducting the licensed business in the Township in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a menace to the
health, safety or general welfare of the public.
B. Notice of the hearing for the revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the
time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be given personally or
mailed to the licensee at his/her last known address at least five days
prior to the date set for the hearing. (See § 109-17.)
C. Such license may, pending revocation proceedings, be suspended for
not more than 10 days by the Chief of Police if, in his/her opinion, the
conduct of the licensee is detrimental to the health, safety and general
welfare of the Township of West Windsor.
D. The Chief of Police shall serve as hearing officer for any hearing
pursuant to this subsection.
A. Massage, bodywork or somatic therapy is provided by an unlicensed
therapist.
§ 109-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-9
1:239
§ 109-10. Display of license.
The massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishment shall display
its license as well as the New Jersey license of each and every massage,
bodywork and somatic therapist employed in the establishment in an open
and conspicuous place on the premises of the establishment.
§ 109-11. Operating requirements.
Every massage, bodywork, and somatic therapy establishment shall comply
with the following:
B. Unsanitary or unsafe conditions which may adversely impact the health
and/or safety of the public.
A. Every portion of the massage, bodywork, and somatic therapy
establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean
and operated in a sanitary condition. A broad spectrum antimicrobial
disinfectant shall be used.
B. Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted (brochures or
price list) in the reception area in a location available to all prospective
customers.
C. All employees, including massage, bodywork, and somatic therapists,
shall be clean and wear clean, nontransparent outer garments.
Dressing rooms must be available on the premises. Doors to such
dressing rooms shall open inward, be self-closing, and be non-lockable.
D. The handwash sink shall be used solely for the washing of hands, arms
and other parts of the body.
E. Handsinks shall be supplied with liquid soap and disposable hand
towels at all times.
F. Every area of the establishment shall be provided with lighting capable
of providing a minimum of 50 footcandles of artificial light. Lighting
may be dimmed during treatment sessions.
G. Massage tables shall be maintained in good condition and free of rips or
tears.
H. Toilet paper, covered trash, liquid hand soap and disposable paper
towels or alternate means of hand drying shall be provided in
restrooms.
I. All massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishments shall be
provided with clean laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity
which shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary
manner.
J. Soiled linens and draping materials shall be either commercially
laundered or washed on site in a clothes-washing machine, in hot water
§ 109-9 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 109-11
1:240
§ 109-12. Inspections by Police Division or Health Department.
with detergent and at least one cup of bleach or an antibacterial agent,
and dried on the high-heat setting in a clothes dryer.
K. Linens used in a licensed establishment may not be laundered in a
private home.
L. Closed containers shall be provided for soiled linens.
M. The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by towels, cloths
or undergarments when in the presence of an employee or massage,
bodywork or somatic therapist.
N. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly, in a massage, bodywork,
and somatic therapy establishment, to place his or her hand upon or
touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle in any manner or to
massage a sexual or genital area of any other person. No massage,
bodywork and somatic therapist, employee or operator shall perform or
offer to perform any act which would require the touching of the
patron's sexual or genital area.
O. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steamrooms and all
other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat-rooms, steam or vapor
rooms or steam or vapor cabinets and shower compartments and toilet
rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in
operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each
use. When carpeting is used on the floors, it shall be kept dry.
P. Oils, creams, lotions and other preparations used in administering
massage, bodywork and somatic therapies shall be kept in clean closed
containers or cabinets.
Q. Animals, except for Seeing Eye dogs, shall not be permitted in the
massage work area.
R. Each massage, bodywork and somatic therapist shall wash his or her
hands in hot running water, using a proper soap or disinfectant before
administering a massage.
A. The Chief of Police and Health Officer and/or their designees are
authorized to conduct random inspections of massage, bodywork and
somatic therapy establishments granted a permit under the provisions
of this chapter for the purpose of determining whether the provisions of
this chapter are being complied with. Such inspections shall be
unannounced but shall be made at reasonable times and in a reasonable
manner. It shall be unlawful for any licensee or employee of the licensee
to fail to allow such inspection officer access to the premises or to
hinder such officer in any manner.
§ 109-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-12
1:241
§ 109-13. Sleeping quarters.
No part of any quarters of any massage, bodywork and somatic therapy
establishment shall be used for or connected with any bedroom or sleeping
quarters nor may any person sleep in such massage, bodywork and somatic
therapy establishment except for limited periods incidental to and directly
related to a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy treatment or bath. This
provision shall not preclude the location of massage, bodywork and somatic
therapy establishment in separate quarters of a building housing a hotel or
other separate businesses or clubs.
§ 109-14. Prohibited acts.
§ 109-15. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to massage, bodywork or
somatic therapies given:
B. The operator shall permit access to all parts of the establishment and
all pertinent records required for the inspection shall be made available
to the health authority representative for review.
A. No owner or manager of a massage, bodywork and somatic therapy
establishment shall tolerate in his or her establishment any activity or
behavior prohibited by the laws of the State of New Jersey, particularly,
but not limited to, laws proscribing prostitution, indecency and
obscenity, including the sale, uttering or exposing and public
communication of obscene material; laws which relate to the
commission of sodomy, adultery and proscribing fornication, nor shall
any owner or manager tolerate in his or her establishment any activity
or behavior which violates this chapter.
B. Any conviction of any employee of a massage, bodywork and somatic
therapy establishment of a violation of the aforementioned statutes and
codes may devolve upon the owner or manager of such establishment, it
being specifically declared that following such conviction of an
employee, the owner or manager of the establishment may be
prosecuted as an accessory to such violation and the licenses which
have been issued may be automatically revoked.
A. In the office of licensed physician, chiropractor or physical therapist; or
B. By a regularly established medical center, hospital or sanitarium having
a staff which includes licensed physicians, chiropractors and/or
physical therapists; or
C. By any licensed physician, chiropractor or physical therapist in the
residence of his or her patient; or
D. By a licensed barber or cosmetologist/hairstylist limited to the areas of
the face, neck, scalp or upper part of the body as set forth in the
Cosmetology and Hairstyling Act of 1984, N.J.S.A. 45:5B-1 et seq.
§ 109-12 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 109-16
1:242
§ 109-16. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the revocation or suspension of the license granted under this
chapter, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Penalty,
§ 1-3.
§ 109-17. Relicensing after revocation.
§ 109-18. Service of notices.
Whenever notice is required or permitted to be given by this chapter, such
notice may be effected by personal service upon the licensee if an individual
or any general partner, if a partnership, or upon any corporate officer, if a
corporation, or alternatively, to any of foregoing, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the last address listed in the Township Clerk's office
in conjunction with the license information. It shall be the duty of each
licensee to keep the Township advised of any subsequent change of address.
Upon failure of a licensee to comply with this requirement, any notice
returned with the notation "unknown," "moved," or "not claimed" shall be
deemed proper service of all notices required by this chapter.
Chapter 113
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 40.
Firearms — See Ch. 86.
Nuisances — See Ch. 115.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 122.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 126
Excavations — See Ch. 143, Art. II.
Land use — See Ch. 200.
§ 113-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms
not defined in this chapter have the same meaning as those defined in
N.J.A.C. 7:29.
A. Any person whose license has been revoked under the provisions of
§ 109-8 may apply to be relicensed upon filing of proof that all loss
caused by the actor or omissions for which the license was revoked had
been fully satisfied and that all conditions imposed by the decision of
the revocation have been complied with.
B. Payment of a registration fee as established in Chapter 82, Fees.
§ 109-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-1
1:243
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action of buildings or structures.
dBC — The sound level as measured using the "C" weighting network with
a sound level meter meeting the standards set forth in ANSI S1.4-1983 or
its successors. The unit of reporting is dB(C). The "C" weighting network is
more sensitive to low frequencies than is the "A" weighting network.
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, destruction or removal of buildings,
structures, or roadways.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work or action necessary at the site of an
emergency to restore or deliver essential services including, but not limited
to, repairing water, gas, electricity, telephone, sewer facilities, or public
transportation facilities, removing fallen trees on public rights-of-way,
dredging navigational waterways, or abating life-threatening conditions or
a state of emergency declared by a governing agency.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Either a single pressure peak or a single burst
(multiple pressure peaks) that has a duration of less than one second.
MINOR VIOLATION — A violation that is not the result of the purposeful,
reckless or criminally negligent conduct of the alleged violator; and/or the
activity or condition constituting the violation has not been the subject of
an enforcement action by any authorized local, county or state enforcement
agency against the violator within the immediately preceding 12 months for
the same or substantially similar violation.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is propelled other than by human or
animal power on land.
MUFFLER — A properly functioning sound dissipative device or system for
abating the sound on engines or equipment where such device is part of the
normal configuration of the equipment.
MULTI-DWELLING UNIT BUILDING — Any building comprising two or
more dwelling units, including, but not limited to, apartments,
condominiums, co-ops, multiple-family houses, townhouses, and attached
residences.
MULTI-USE PROPERTY — Any distinct parcel of land that is used for more
than one category of activity. Examples include, but are not limited to:
A commercial, residential, industrial or public service property having
boilers, incinerators, elevators, automatic garage doors, air
conditioners, laundry rooms, utility provisions, or health and
recreational facilities, or other similar devices or areas, either in the
interior or on the exterior of the building, which may be a source of
elevated sound levels at another category on the same distinct parcel
of land; or
A.
A building, which is both commercial (usually on the ground floor) and
residential property, located above, below or otherwise adjacent to.
B.
§ 113-1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 113-1
1:244
NOISE CONTROL INVESTIGATOR (NCI) — An employee of a municipality,
county or regional health commission that has a Department-approved
model noise control ordinance, and the employee has not received noise
enforcement training as specified by the Department in N.J.A.C. 7:29.
However, they are knowledgeable about their model noise ordinance and
enforcement procedures. A noise control investigator may only enforce
sections of the ordinance that do not require the use of a sound level meter.
The employee must be acting within his or her designated jurisdiction and
must be authorized to issue a summons.
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER (NCO) — An employee of a local, county or
regional health agency which is certified pursuant to the County
Environmental Health Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.) to perform noise
enforcement activities or an employee of a municipality with a Departmentapproved
model noise control ordinance. All NCOs must receive noise
enforcement training as specified by the Department in N.J.A.C. 7:29 and
is currently certified in noise enforcement. The employee must be acting
within his or her designated jurisdiction and must be authorized to issue a
summons.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound that can be detected by a NCO or an
NCI using his or her unaided hearing faculties of normal acuity. As an
example, if the sound source under investigation is a portable or vehicular
sound amplification or reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic
bass component of the music is sufficient to verify plainly audible sound.
The NCO or NCI need not determine the title, specific words, or the artist
performing the song.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a nongovernmental
entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are owned,
leased, or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE —
Either:
The vertical boundary that separates one parcel of property (i.e.,
lot and block) from another residential or commercial property;
(1)
The vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is
part of a multi-dwelling unit Building; or
(2)
On a multi-use property as defined herein, the vertical or horizontal
boundaries between the two portions of the property on which
different categories of activity are being performed (e.g., if the
multi-use property is a building which is residential upstairs and
commercial downstairs, then the real property line would be the
(3)
A.
§ 113-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-1
1:245
SOUND PRODUCTION DEVICE — Any device whose primary function is the
production of sound, including, but not limited to any, musical instrument,
loudspeaker, radio, television, digital or analog music player, public address
system or sound-amplifying equipment.
SOUND REDUCTION DEVICE — Any device, such as a muffler, baffle,
shroud, jacket, enclosure, isolator, or dampener provided by the
manufacturer with the equipment, or that is otherwise required, that
mitigates the sound emissions of the equipment.
WEEKDAY — Any day that is not a federal holiday, and beginning on Monday
at 7:00 a.m. and ending on the following Friday at 6:00 p.m.
WEEKEND — Beginning on Friday at 6:00 p.m. and ending on the following
Monday at 7:00 a.m.
§ 113-2. Applicability.
interface between the residential area and the commercial area, or
if there is an outdoor sound source such as an HVAC unit on the
same parcel of property, the boundary line is the exterior wall of
the receiving unit).
Note: This definition shall not apply to a commercial source and a
commercial receptor which are both located on the same parcel of
property (e.g., a strip mall).
B.
A. This chapter applies to sound from the following property categories:
(1) Industrial facilities;
(2) Commercial facilities;
(3) Public service facilities;
(4) Community service facilities;
(5) Residential properties;
(6) Multi-use properties;
(7) Public and private rights-of-way;
(8) Public spaces; and
(9) Multi-dwelling unit buildings.
B. This chapter applies to sound received at the following property
categories:
(1) Commercial facilities;
(2) Public service facilities;
(3) Community service facilities (i.e., nonprofits and/or religious
facilities);
§ 113-1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 113-2
1:246
§ 113-3. Exemptions.
§ 113-4. Enforcement officers.
§ 113-5. Measurement protocols.
(4) Residential properties;
(5) Multi-use properties;
(6) Multi-dwelling-unit buildings.
C. Sound from stationary emergency signaling devices shall be regulated
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.4, except that the testing of the
electromechanical functioning of a stationary emergency signaling
device shall not meet or exceed 10 seconds.
A. Except as provided in §§ 113-8 and 113-9 below, the provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to the exceptions listed at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.5.
B. Sound production devices required or sanctioned under the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA), FEMA or other government agencies to the
extent that they comply with the noise requirement of the enabling
legislation or regulation. Devices which are exempted under N.J.A.C.
7:29-1.5 shall continue to be exempted.
C. Construction and demolition activities are exempt from the sound level
limits set forth in Tables I, II and III114 except as provided for in § 113-9
below.
A. Noise control officers shall have the authority within their designated
jurisdiction to investigate suspected violations of any section of this
chapter and pursue enforcement activities.
B. Noise control investigators shall have the authority within their
designated jurisdiction to investigate suspected violations of any
section of this chapter that do not require the use of a sound level meter
(i.e., plainly audible, times of day and/or distance determinations) and
pursue enforcement activities.
C. Noise control officers and investigators may cooperate with NCOs and
NCIs of an adjacent municipality in enforcing one another's municipal
noise ordinances.
A. Sound measurements made by a noise control officer shall conform to
the procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-2, except that interior sound
level measurements shall also conform with the procedures set forth in
§ 113-5B of this chapter and with the definition of "real property line" as
contained herein.
114. Editor's Note: See § 113-6, Maximum permissible sound levels.
§ 113-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-5
1:247
§ 113-6. Maximum permissible sound levels.
B. When conducting indoor sound level measurements across a real
property line, the measurements shall be taken at least three feet from
any wall, floor or ceiling, and all exterior doors and windows may, at the
discretion of the investigator, be closed. The neighborhood residual
sound level shall be measured in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.9(b)2.
When measuring total sound level, the configuration of the windows
and doors shall be the same and all sound sources within the dwelling
unit must be shut off (e.g., television, stereo). Measurements shall not
be taken in areas which receive only casual use, such as hallways,
closets and bathrooms.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any
source of sound on any source property listed in § 113-2(A) above in
such a manner as to create a sound level that equals or exceeds the
sound level limits set forth in Tables I, II or III when measured at or
within the real property line of any of the receiving properties listed in
Tables I, II or III except as specified in § 113-5B.
B. Impulsive sound. Between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., impulsive sound
shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels. Between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., impulsive sound which occurs less than four times in any hour
shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels. Impulsive sound which repeats
four or more times in any hour shall be measured as continuous sound
and shall meet the requirements as shown in Tables I and II.
C. Maximum sound levels are as follows:
(1) Outdoors.
Table I
Maximum Permissible A-Weighted Sound Levels When
Measured Outdoors
Receiving
property
category
Residential property,
or residential portion
of a multi-use
property
Commercial
facility, public
service facility,
nonresidential
portion of a multiuse
property, or
community service
facility
Time
7:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
10:00 p.m.
to 7:00
a.m. 24 hours
Maximum Aweighted
sound
level standard, dB
65 50 65
§ 113-5 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 113-6
1:248
(2) Indoors.
Table II
Maximum Permissible A-Weighted Sound Levels When
Measured Indoors
Receiving
property
category
Residential property,
or residential portion
of a multi-use
property
Commercial
facility or
nonresidential
portion of a multiuse
property
Time
7:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
10:00 p.m.
to 7:00
a.m. 24 hours
Maximum Aweighted
sound
level standard, dB
55 40 55
NOTE: Table II shall only apply when the source and the receptor
are separated by a real property line and they also share a
common or abutting wall, floor or ceiling, or are on the same
parcel of property.
(3) Octave band.
§ 113-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-6
1:249
Table III
Maximum Permissible Octave Band Sound Pressure Levels in Decibels
Receiving
property
category
Residential property,
or residential portion
of a multi-use
property
OUTDOORS
Residential property,
or residential portion
of a multi-use property
INDOORS
Commercial
facility,
public
service
facility,
nonresidential
portion
of a
multi-use
property,
or
community
service
facility
OUTDOORS
Commercial
facility or
nonresidential
portion of
a multi-use
property
INDOORS
Octave
Band
Center
Frequency,
Hz
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level dB
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level, dB
Octave
Band
Sound
Pressure
Level dB
Octave
Band
Sound
Pressure
Level dB
Time 7:00 a.m.
to 10:00
p.m.
10:00 p.m.
to 7:00
a.m.
7:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
10:00 p.m.
to 7:00
a.m.
24 hours 24 hours
31.5 96 86 86 76 96 86
63 82 71 72 61 82 72
125 74 61 64 51 74 64
250 67 53 57 43 67 57
500 63 48 53 38 63 53
1,000 60 45 50 35 60 50
2,000 57 42 47 32 57 47
4,000 55 40 45 30 55 45
8,000 53 38 43 28 53 43
NOTE: When octave measurements are made, the sound from the
source must be constant in level and character. If octave band
sound pressure level variations exceed plus or minus 2 dB in the
bands containing the principal source frequencies, discontinue the
measurement.
§ 113-6 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 113-7
1:250
§ 113-7. Sound production devices.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any sound
production device in such a manner that the sound crosses a property line
and raises the total sound levels above the neighborhood residual sound
level by more than the permissible sound level limits set forth in Table
IV when measured within the residence of a complainant according to
the measurement protocol in § 113-5B of this chapter. These sound level
measurements shall be conducted with the sound level meter set for "C"
weighting, "fast" response.
Table IV
Maximum Permissible Increase in Total Sound Levels Within a
Residential Property
Weeknights 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
Weekend nights 11:00 p.m. to 9:00
a.m.
All other times
3 dB(C) 6 dB(C)
§ 113-8. Restricted uses and activities.
The following standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set
forth below:
A. Excluding emergency work, power tools, home maintenance tools,
landscaping and/or yard maintenance equipment used by a residential
property owner or tenant shall not be operated between the hours of
8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., unless such activities can meet the applicable
limits set forth in Tables I, II or III. At all other times, the limits set forth
in Tables I, II or III do not apply. All motorized equipment used in these
activities shall be operated with a muffler and/or sound reduction
device.
B. Excluding emergency work, power tools, landscaping and/or yard
maintenance equipment used by nonresidential operators (e.g.,
commercial operators, public employees) shall not be operated on a
residential, commercial, industrial or public (e.g., golf course, parks,
athletic fields) property between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
on weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
weekends or federal holidays, unless such activities can meet the limits
set forth in Tables I, II or III. At all other times the limits set forth in
Tables I, II or III do not apply. All motorized equipment used in these
activities shall be operated with a muffler and/or sound reduction
device.
C. All construction and demolition activity, excluding emergency work,
shall not be performed between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on
weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
weekends and federal holidays, unless such activities can meet the
limits set forth in Tables I, II or III. At all other times the limits set forth
§ 113-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-8
1:251
§ 113-9. Motor vehicles.
Violations of each subsection of this section shall be considered purposeful
and therefore non-minor violations.
in Tables I, II or III do not apply. All motorized equipment used in
construction and demolition activity shall be operated with a muffler
and/or sound reduction device.
D. Motorized snow removal equipment shall be operated with a muffler
and/or a sound reduction device when being used for snow removal. At
all other times the limits set forth in Tables I, II or III do not apply.
E. All interior and exterior burglar alarms of a building or motor vehicle
must be activated in such a manner that the burglar alarm terminates
its operation within five minutes for continuous airborne sound and 15
minutes for intermittent sound after it has been activated. At all other
times the limits set forth in Tables I, II or III do not apply.
F. Self-contained, portable, nonvehicular music or sound production
devices shall not be operated on a public space or public right-of-way in
such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet in any
direction from the operator between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., sound, operated on
a public space or public right-of-way, from such equipment shall not be
plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet in any direction from the
operator;
G. Animals.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any property owner or tenant to allow any
domesticated or caged animal to create a sound across a real
property line which unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the
peace, comfort, and repose of any resident, or to refuse or
intentionally fail to cease the unreasonable noise when ordered to
do so by a noise control officer or noise control investigator. Prima
facie evidence of a violation of this section shall include but not be
limited to:
(a) Vocalizing (howling, yelping, barking, squawking, etc.) for five
minutes without interruption, defined as an average of four or
more vocalizations per minute in that period; or,
(b) Vocalizing for 20 minutes intermittently, defined as an average
of two vocalizations or more per minute in that period.
(2) It is an affirmative defense under this subsection that the dog or
other animal was intentionally provoked to bark or make any other
noise.
A. No person shall remove or render inoperative, or cause to be removed
or rendered inoperative or less effective than originally equipped, other
§ 113-8 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 113-9
1:252
§ 113-10. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
than for the purposes of maintenance, repair, or replacement, any
device or element of design incorporated in any motor vehicle for the
purpose of noise control. No person shall operate a motor vehicle or
motorcycle which has been so modified. A vehicle not meeting these
requirements shall be deemed in violation of this provision if it is
operated stationary or in motion in any public space or public right-ofway.
B. No motorcycle shall be operated stationary or in motion unless it has a
muffler that complies with and is labeled in accordance with the federal
noise regulations under 40 CFR Part 205.
C. Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or reproduction
equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that it is plainly
audible at distance of 25 feet in any direction from the operator
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
D. Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or reproduction
equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that is plainly
audible at a distance of 50 feet in any direction from the operator
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
A. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be cause for a notice of
violation (NOV) or a notice of penalty assessment (NOPA) document to
be issued to the violator by the noise control officer or noise control
investigator.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a civil penalty for each offense of not more than the maximum penalty
allowed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, which is $2,000 as of December
2014. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it
occurs shall constitute an additional, separate, and distinct offense.
C. Upon identification of a violation of this chapter, the noise control
officer or noise control investigator shall issue an enforcement
document to the violator. The enforcement document shall identify the
condition or activity that constitutes the violation and the specific
provision of this chapter that has been violated. It shall also indicate
whether the violator has a period of time to correct the violation before
a penalty is sought.
D. If the violation is deemed by the noise control officer or noise control
investigator to be a minor violation (as defined in § 113-1 of this
chapter), an NOV shall be issued to the violator.
(1) The document shall indicate that the purpose of the NOV is
intended to serve as a notice to warn the responsible party/violator
of the violation conditions in order to provide them with an
opportunity to voluntarily investigate the matter and voluntarily
take corrective action to address the identified violation.
§ 113-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-10
1:253
§ 113-11. Severability; repealer; construal of provisions.
(2) The NOV shall identify the time period (up to 90 days), pursuant to
the Grace Period Law, N.J.S.A. 13:1D-125 et seq., where the
responsible party's/violator's voluntary action can prevent a formal
enforcement action with penalties issued by the Health
Department. It shall be noted that the NOV does not constitute a
formal enforcement action, a final agency action or a final legal
determination that a violation has occurred. Therefore, the NOV
may not be appealed or contested.
E. If the violation is deemed by the noise control officer or noise control
investigator to be a non-minor violation the violator shall be notified
that if the violation is not immediately corrected a NOPA with a civil
penalty of no more than the maximum penalty allowed pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, which is $2,000 as of December 2014. If a non-minor
violation is immediately corrected, an NOV without a civil penalty shall
still be issued to document the violation. If the violation occurs again
(within 12 months of the initial violation) a NOPA shall be issued
regardless of whether the violation is immediately corrected or not.
F. The violator may request from the noise control officer or noise control
investigator an extension of the compliance deadline in the
enforcement action. The noise control officer or noise control
investigator shall have the option to approve any reasonable request for
an extension (not to exceed 180 days) if the violator can demonstrate
that a good faith effort has been made to achieve compliance. If an
extension is not granted and the violation continues to exist after the
grace period ends, a NOPA shall be issued.
G. The recipient of a NOPA shall be entitled to a hearing in a municipal
court having jurisdiction to contest such action.
H. The noise control officer or noise control investigator may seek
injunctive relief if the responsible party does not remediate the
violation within the period of time specified in the NOPA issued.
I. Any claim for a civil penalty may be compromised and settled based on
the following factors:
(1) Mitigating or any other extenuating circumstances;
(2) The timely implementation by the violator of measures which lead
to compliance;
(3) The conduct of the violator; and
(4) The compliance history of the violator.
A. If any provision or portion of a provision of this chapter is held to be
unconstitutional, preempted by federal or state law, or otherwise
§ 113-10 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 113-11
1:254
Chapter 115
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 40.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 48.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 55.
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 96.
Noise — See Ch. 113.
Sewers — See Ch. 133.
Solid waste — See Ch. 148.
§ 115-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the public health
through the control, abatement and prevention of nuisances of public health
significance. Alleged infractions of the provisions and standards set forth
will be investigated by an enforcing official in each case presented.
Wherever there is a question as to the significance of an alleged infraction
or the factual existence of an alleged infraction, the prudent judgment of
the Health Officer will prevail in the determination of a violation.
§ 115-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDON — To desert, ignore, or fail to maintain a property in a safe,
habitable condition.[Added 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-21]
ACCUMULATION — The gathering together and increasing in amount of
items over a period of time.[Added 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-21]
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Township Council of the Township of West
Windsor.
DWELLING — Shall be defined as specified in the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 et seq.; Regulations for the Maintenance
of Hotels and Multiple Dwellings, N.J.A.C. 5:10-1 et seq.; Regulations
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions
of the chapter shall not be invalidated.
B. All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with any
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed as to the extent of such
inconsistencies.
C. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to impair any common
law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy there from, of any
person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or
from other law.
§ 113-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-2
1:255
Governing Rooming and Boarding Houses, N.J.A.C. 5:27-1 et seq.; or the
New Jersey State Housing Code, N.J.A.C. 5:28-1 et seq., as may be the
case.[Added 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-21]
ENFORCING OFFICIAL — The Health Officer or other official authorized by
the Township to enforce this chapter.
INSECTS — Insects that have public health significance for disease
transmission.[Added 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-21]
JUNK AND DEBRIS — Includes but is not limited any object which has
outlived its usefulness in its original form (notwithstanding the fact that
the object may have scrap value or could be reconditioned with substantial
repair) where such object, due to its present condition and/or visibility, may
reasonably be construed to be unsightly, dangerous, or creating a condition
that is detrimental or potentially detrimental to the health and/or safety of
the residents of West Windsor Township. As used herein the phrase "junk
and debris" does not include inoperable vehicles.[Added 9-12-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-21]
NOXIOUS WEEDS — Any plant designated by a federal, state, or county
government as injurious to public health, agriculture, recreation, wildlife
or property. A noxious weed may be native or nonnative, invasive or
noninvasive and may also be commonly defined as a plant that grows out of
place and is competitive, persistent, and pernicious.[Added 9-12-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-21]
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, association, society or
partnership and its agents or employees.
PUBLIC HEALTH CONCERN — Any matter, conditions, or things that cause
worry, solicitude, or anxiety for the health, safety and welfare of the public
due to their dangerous or unsanitary nature.[Added 9-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-21]
PUBLIC RESTROOM — A room equipped with toilet facilities unarguably
intended for public use in all public facilities and in establishments where
commercial activity takes place.[Added 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-21]
RODENTS — Rodents that have public health significance for disease
transmission.[Added 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-21]
TOWNSHIP — The Township of West Windsor, County of Mercer, State of
New Jersey.
TRACTOR TRAILER — A cab and/or trailer unit.
USABLE MATERIAL PROPERLY STORED — Nonperishable materials stored
for new construction or other items, which are used within 30 days, and are
not part of a continuing practice of accumulating items on a property, and
which are stored elevated off the ground and maintained in such a manner
that does not provide a potential habitat for insects or rodents. Usable
materials properly stored on commercial properties are nonperishable
materials stored in compliance with West Windsor Township Land Use
§ 115-2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 115-2
1:256
Regulations and in a manner that does not provide a potential habitat for
insects or rodents.[Added 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-21]
VERMIN — An animal or insect of public health significance for disease
transmission.[Added 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-21]
§ 115-3. Nuisances identified.
A. Matters, things, conditions or acts which after proper investigation by
the Health Officer or other enforcing official are deemed to be injurious,
detrimental or a menace to the public health or are deemed to be an
annoyance or interfere with the comfort or well-being of the inhabitants
of the Township are hereby declared to be nuisances and shall include
the following:
(1) Pollution or the existence of a condition or conditions which cause
or threaten pollution of any waters of the Township.
(2) The escape into the open air from any stack, vent, chimney or any
entrance to the open air of quantities of smoke, fly ash, dust, fumes,
vapors, mists or gases as to cause or threaten injury or detriment
or endanger the health or safety of the inhabitants of the Township.
(3) The open burning of any material, including but not limited to
brush, weeds, grass, leaves, vegetative cuttings, discarded building
materials, chemicals, agricultural waste products or any other
material except as otherwise permitted by ordinance or state law.
(4) The growth, existence or presence of ragweed of 12 inches in
height or greater, or in such a quantity so as to create a public
health concern, on any plot of land, lot, highway, street, sidewalk,
right-of-way or any other public or private place within 200 feet of
an occupied dwelling.
(5) The growth, existence or presence of poison ivy, poison oak or
poison sumac within 20 feet of any property line of a residential or
commercial property, highway, street, sidewalk, or right-of-way.
(6) The growth, existence or presence of any brush, weeds, or noxious
growth, 12 inches in height or greater, in such a quantity so as to
create a public health concern, dead and dying trees or limbs on
any land within 100 feet of a dwelling or within 50 feet of a
residential property line. Conservation easements, environmentally
constrained areas, established greenbelts and woodlands are
exempted from this provision. Property owners are responsible to
maintain the property and right-of-way abutting the property, up to
and including the gutter line, free from overgrown brush, weeds
and noxious growth. [Amended 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-21]
(7) The presence on any plot of land, highway, street, right-of-way or
any other public or private place of any refuse, rubbish, garbage,
trash, junk, filth or debris, or unused accumulated materials,
§ 115-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-3
1:257
whether putrescible or nonputrescible, and including but not
limited to paper, wood, glass, cloth, metal, liquid wastes, chemicals,
dead animals, manure, vegetative cuttings and building and
industrial wastes, animal waste, stone, concrete, plastic, ashes,
tires, appliances, furniture, equipment, and electronics, but
excluding usable materials properly stored. The practice of
composting shall not fall within the meaning of this subsection,
provided that such compost pile, mound or area is maintained
on one's own private property and is properly maintained so as
not to present offensive odors, the breeding of flies or any other
public health nuisance. Refuse disposed of in compliance with the
standards established in Chapter 148 of West Windsor Township
Code is exempt for this subsection. [Amended 9-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-21]
(8) Depositing, dumping, accumulating, maintaining or otherwise
allowing any matter or thing which serves as food for insects,
rodents, or other animals, or to which they may have access or
which serves or constitutes a breeding place or harborage for
insects, rodents or other animals of a public health significance in
or on any land, premises, building or other place.
(9) The existence or presence of any water or other liquid in which
mosquito eggs, larvae or pupae exist or of any condition which
allows water to lie, pond, stand or otherwise accumulate so as to
provide a breeding environment for mosquitoes. The meaning of
this subsection shall not apply to ponds where fish are adequately
maintained so as to preclude the breeding of mosquitoes.
(10) The keeping of any animal or animals in such a manner as to cause
or present a source of foulness, odors or breeding of insects,
rodents or other vermin.
(11) The existence or maintenance of any condition which may
reasonably constitute a safety hazard, an attractive nuisance or
otherwise present a threat to the safety and well-being of the
inhabitants of the Township or of the public at large, including the
following:
(a) Any vacant building which is not adequately sealed, boarded
up or otherwise secured so as to preclude the entry of
inquisitive minors.
(b) Any excavation, depression, hole, shaft, abandoned or unused
well or other abandoned subsurface structure or object which
is of such depth or dimension so as to present a hazard in terms
of one falling into or being entrapped therein. This includes but
is not limited to abandoned or dilapidated well pits, cisterns,
dry wells, septic tanks, pump tanks, seepage pits, cesspools, or
storage tanks. [Amended 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-21]
§ 115-3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 115-3
1:258
§ 115-4. Proper heating of rental buildings.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any rental building which is to be
occupied as a residence, business, commercial or industrial establishment
to fail to supply heat from the first day of October in each year to the first
day of May of the succeeding year.
(c) Any discarded refrigerator, cabinet, automobile or other piece
of equipment, machinery, device or material which may offer or
present an enclosure and a hazardous attraction to children.
(d) Any dead or dying trees or limbs in such proximity to a
dwelling, building, street, sidewalk, pathway, right-of-way,
thoroughfare, driveway, park, playground or other frequented
area where the falling of the tree or part thereof would
endanger life, threaten injury or damage property.
(e) Any trees, plants, bushes, vines, or other vegetation which
cover, lay upon or overhang any pedestrian or bicycle
passageway such as a sidewalk, street, alley, or other public
way or which grows in such a manner as to obstruct or impede
the full use of the passageway. This provision shall not apply to
materials which have been gathered for municipal yard waste
collection in accordance with the standards established by
Chapter 150, Article VI.
(f) Any open, uncovered or otherwise unsecured dumpster, trash
container, recycling container or similar receptacle which
contains waste materials that can be dispersed by wind or
other means or which may serve as an attractant to animals or
insects. [Amended 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-21]
(12) The willful abandonment of any domestic animal within the
boundaries of the Township.
(13) The maintenance of a public restroom in poor repair or unsanitary
condition. Toilet facilities provided for public use shall be
maintained in a clean condition and good repair. Restrooms shall be
provided with toilet tissue, trash receptacles, hot and cold running
water, hand soap, and paper towels or a hand-dryer device.
(14) The discharge or ponding of sewage on the surface of the ground or
into waterways of the Township or potable water wells.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to commit, maintain or
allow any nuisance as declared and described in this section.
A. In buildings occupied as a residence, heat shall be provided in such
manner that the temperature of all occupied rooms shall not be
permitted to fall below 68° F. at any time between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 11:00 p.m., and 65° F. between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00
§ 115-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-4
1:259
§ 115-5. Prohibition of certain noises.
a.m., unless the tenant by the tenant's own volition so chooses and is
able to adjust the heat to a lower desired temperature.
B. In buildings occupied as business, commercial or industrial
establishments, heat shall be provided as for residential buildings,
except:
(1) Where the New Jersey State Department of Labor and Industry or
the United States Occupational Safety and Health Act provides
otherwise.
(2) Where there is a legal contract between the operator of the
business and the owner of the building, provided that the contract
does not preclude the provision of heat in the minimum prescribed
degree above for office and clerical personnel.
(3) Where the regular working hours for all the employees of a
particular business in a particular building is a partial twenty-fourhour
day, heat shall be provided in such manner that the
temperature of all occupied rooms shall not be permitted to fall
below 68° F. at any time during regular working hours.
(4) Where in certain industries or occupations maintenance of
temperatures below the prescribed 68° F. is essential or inherent to
the particular industry or occupation.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to make, cause or suffer or
permit to be made or caused upon any premises owned, occupied or
controlled by said person or entity or upon any public street, alley or
thoroughfare in this Township any unnecessary noises or sounds by
means of the human voice or by any other means or methods which are
physically detrimental to persons or so harsh or so prolonged or
unnatural or unusual in their use, time and place as to occasion physical
discomfort or which are injurious to the lives, health, peace and comfort
of any or all of the inhabitants of this Township.
B. Idling during certain hours prohibited; loading and unloading. In all
business zone districts within the Township, no tractor trailers or
refrigeration units of any motor vehicle shall be left with engines or
refrigeration units running or idling between the hours of 9:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m. when located within 1,000 feet of any residential zoning
district within the Township, or at any other time, except while actively
loading or unloading at a designated unloading area. Nor shall any
tractor trailer or other commercial motor vehicle engage in any loading
or unloading activity between the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. when
such activity is within 1,000 feet of any residential zoning district within
the Township.
§ 115-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 115-6
1:260
§ 115-6. Prohibited lease or rental of certain buildings.
It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, lease or otherwise permit the
occupancy of any building as a residence which:
§ 115-7. Spitting prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to spit upon any public sidewalk or
upon any part of the interior or exterior of any public building or public
conveyance.
§ 115-8. Smoking restricted.
The smoking of cigarettes, pipes or cigars is hereby prohibited in the
following places and/or functions in the Township:
§ 115-9. Inspection for violations; denial of entry; warrant.
All places and premises in this Township shall be subject to inspection
by the Health Officer or the enforcing official if that official has reason
to believe that any section of this chapter is being violated. In the event
that entry to any place or premises is denied by any owner or tenant, the
enforcing official shall obtain the appropriate warrant for entry through the
local magistrate.
§ 115-10. Abatement of nuisances.
A. Is not adequately and properly ventilated. [Amended 9-12-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-21]
B. Is not provided with potable water at sufficient pressure (minimum 20
pounds per square inch) and quantity for each family unit from a public
supply approved by the State Department of Health or a private or
semipublic supply approved by the enforcing official.
C. Does not have fixtures consisting of a kitchen sink, bathtub or shower,
lavatory and flush toilet connected to the potable water supply.
D. Does not have facilities for the discharge of all household liquid wastes
into a public sewerage system approved by the State of New Jersey or
into a private sewerage system approved by the enforcing official.
E. Is not provided with hot water at a temperature of at least 100° F.
A. All public meetings sponsored by the Township or any of its official
boards, departments, commissions or committees.
B. All public theaters in the seating area.
C. All public transportation licensed by the Township for operation in the
Township and operated for the use of the public at large.
D. Smoking shall be restricted in all Township buildings.
§ 115-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-10
1:261
A. Whenever a nuisance as declared by § 115-3 of this chapter is found on
any plot of land, lot, right-of-way or any other private premises or place,
notice, in writing, shall be given to the owner to remove or abate the
same within such time as shall be specified therein, but not less than
five days from the date of service thereof. A duplicate of the notice shall
be left with one or more of the tenants or occupants of the premises or
place. If the owner cannot be notified speedily, the notices shall be left
at that place or premises with the tenant or occupant thereof or posted
on the premises, and such action shall be considered proper notification
to the owner, tenant or occupant. Notice to the owner of the violation
and the time to abate shall be deemed complete three days after the
date on the violation notice, if served by regular first-class mail.
[Amended 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-21]
B. Whenever a nuisance as declared by § 115-3 of this chapter is found on
any public property or on any highway or any other public premises or
place, notice, in writing, shall be given to the person in charge to
remove or abate the same within such time as shall be specified therein.
If such person fails to comply with the notice within the time specified
therein, the Health Officer or designee may remove or abate the
nuisance in the manner as hereinafter provided in the case of a like
condition existing on a private premises or place.
C. Whenever a nuisance exists on a vacant and abandoned property which
is in a foreclosure process, the foreclosing creditor shall be responsible
for the care, maintenance, security, and upkeep of the exterior of the
property, and if located out-of-state, shall be responsible for appointing
an in-state representative or agent to act for the foreclosing creditor.
The full name and contact information of the in-state representative or
agent shall be provided to the Township Clerk within 10 days of serving
the summons and complaint of foreclosure.
D. The Township Health Officer, or designee, shall have the right to issue
notices to any foreclosing creditor for a property found to be in violation
of § 115-3 of this chapter. Such notice shall require the person or entity
to correct the violation within 30 days of receipt of the notice, or within
10 days of the receipt of the notice if the violation presents an imminent
threat to the public's health and safety. Written notice of the violation
shall be provided to the foreclosing creditor or a designated agent. If
the foreclosing creditor or designated agent cannot be notified speedily,
the notices shall be posted on the premises, and such action shall be
considered proper notification. Notice to the foreclosing creditor of the
violation and the time to abate shall be deemed complete three days
after the date on the violation notice, if served by regular first-class
mail. [Amended 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-21]
E. If the owner, foreclosing creditor, tenant or occupant, upon being
notified as provided by this section, shall not comply with the notice
within the time specified and fails to remove or abate the nuisance, the
Health Officer or designee shall proceed to abate the nuisance or may
§ 115-10 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 115-10
1:262
§ 115-11. Recovery of costs.
The Township may institute an action at law to recover costs incurred by it
in the removal or abatement of any nuisance as declared by § 115-3 of this
chapter from any person who shall have caused or allowed such nuisance
to exist or from any owner, foreclosing creditor, tenant or occupant of a
premises who, after notice and notification as hereby provided, shall fail to
remove and abate the same within the time specified in the notice.
§ 115-12. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Health Officer or
other enforcing official as defined in § 115-2.
§ 115-13. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 118
PARKING LOTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking Authority — See Ch. 4, § 4-64.
Parking during public emergencies — See Ch.
9.
Fees — See Ch. 82.
Parking in parks and recreation areas — See
§ 122-14.
Traffic and parking regulations — See Ch.
168.
§ 118-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
cause it to be removed or abated in a summary manner by such means
as the Health Officer or designee shall deem proper.
A. Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-4. The following exceptions
apply:
(1) A foreclosing creditor found to be in violation of this chapter shall
be subject to a fine of up to $1,500 per day.
(2) An out-of-state creditor, in violation of the requirement to appoint
an in-state representative or agent as stipulated in § 115-10C of
this chapter, shall be subject to a fine of $2,500 per day.
B. Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation
of any provision of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
§ 115-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 118-1
1:263
PUBLIC PARKING LOT — Any lot, piece or parcel of land used for the
purpose of storing and parking motor vehicles where the owner or operator
of such lot charges a fee, and shall include such plots where shelters that
are not completely enclosed are erected and which are open to the general
public.
§ 118-2. License required.
No person, other than a municipal agency, shall maintain or conduct a
public parking lot within the limits of the Township of West Windsor without
first having obtained a license therefor from the township.
§ 118-3. Application information. [Amended 11-4-1991 by Ord. No.
91-28]
§ 118-4. License fee.115
A license fee shall be as set forth in Chapter 82, Fees.
A. Applications for licenses for public parking lots shall be made by the
persons intending to operate public parking lots, upon forms drawn and
furnished by the Township Zoning Officer, and shall set forth:
(1) The name under which and the place where the public parking lot
is to be operated.
(2) Whether the applicant is an individual, partnership or corporation;
if an individual, the name and business address and residence
address of the applicant; if a partnership, the name and business
and residence address of each partner; if a corporation, the name,
date and state under which such corporation was organized, the
amount and value of the capital stock issued by such corporation
and the names and business and residence addresses of the
officers, managers in charge and directors thereof.
(3) Whether the premises are owned or leased by the applicant, and, if
leased, the name and residence and business address of each
owner or part thereof.
(4) The number of motor vehicles which may at any one time be stored
upon the premises.
(5) The hours during which the motor vehicles may be stored.
(6) A complete schedule of the rates to be charged for storing motor
vehicles.
(7) Such other information as the Township Zoning Officer may deem
advisable.
B. Each application shall be signed and verified under oath by the
applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent, if a
partnership or corporation.
§ 118-1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 118-5
1:264
§ 118-5. License issuance; expiration date; records. [Amended
11-4-1991 by Ord. No. 91-28]
If after investigation and approval by the Township Zoning Officer it shall
appear that the applicant has complied with the regulations of this chapter
and that the statements set forth in the application are correct and if the
proper fee shall have been paid, the Township Zoning Officer shall issue to
the applicant a license for a public parking lot, which license shall continue
in full force and effect until the first day of January following the issuance of
the license or until revoked by the Township Zoning Officer. The Township
Zoning Officer shall keep a record of all applications and licenses issued,
indexed alphabetically and by location.
§ 118-6. Information to be posted on signs; approval of sign
required; posting of day and night rates.
§ 118-7. Conditions for rate increase.
No licensee shall make any charge for storing any motor vehicle in a public
parking lot in excess of that set forth in the licensee's application for license
unless and until the licensee has:
A. Each licensee shall maintain at each entrance to such public parking lot
a permanently affixed sign suitable to apprise persons using such public
parking lot of the name of the licensee, the local phone number of the
lot manager, the hours of the day and/or night during which such places
are open for storing motor vehicles, the rates charged and the closing
hour of such lot. Where more than one rate is charged for parking, the
figures for each rate shall be of the same size and dimensions and such
figures shall measure not less than six inches in height and the letters
and figures indicating the closing hour shall be not less than six inches
in height.
B. All such signs shall be subject to the approval of the Construction Code
Official.
C. When separate rates or charges are made for day parking and for night
parking, the change in rate and the effective hours shall be stated and
notice thereof shall be posted on the signs described in Subsection A.
A. Notified the township, in writing, of the change.116
B. Posted signs showing such increase in the same manner as set forth in
§ 118-6.
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 118-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 118-8
1:265
§ 118-8. Report of loss or theft.117
Each licensee shall immediately notify the Police Division of any claim made
by reason of any loss, theft or conversion occurring upon the licensee's
premises.
§ 118-9. Grounds for license revocation. [Amended 11-4-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-28118]
The Township Zoning Officer may revoke any license after a hearing before
the Division Director or designee if at any time:
§ 118-10. Surface of lots; parking stall lines.
The surface of each lot or plot of land to be occupied as a public parking lot
shall be composed as follows:
§ 118-11. Drainage.
The surface of each lot or plot of land to be occupied as a public parking
lot shall be so constructed as to provide sufficient drainage to prevent an
accumulation of water upon the surface of the lot.
§ 118-12. Parking close to residences.
No motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or located in any public parking lot
within 10 feet of any building occupied as a residence.
A. The licensee has knowingly made any false or materially incorrect
statement in the application.
B. The licensee knowingly violates or knowingly permits or countenances
the violation of any provision of this chapter.
C. The licensee knowingly violates or knowingly permits or countenances
the violation of any provision of any penal law or ordinance regarding
theft, larceny or conversion of a motor vehicle or the operation of a
motor vehicle without the owner's consent, whether such licensee or
other person is convicted of such offense or not.
A. The entire area of the parking lot, as set forth in the plot plan, shall be
surfaced with concrete or asphaltic mix.
B. All individual car parking stalls, as set forth in the plot plan, shall be
outlined with paint or other suitable marking.
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 118-8 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 118-13
1:266
§ 118-13. Manner of driving into or out of parking lots.
No licensee under this chapter shall permit any vehicle to be driven in such
a manner that its movement into or out of any designated parking lot shall
endanger pedestrians or other traffic on a public street or sidewalk, nor
shall any vehicle parked under any license issued under this chapter be
parked on any street, sidewalk or part thereof.
§ 118-14. Entrances and exits.
Entrances or exits to any public parking lot shall be made only within the
set limits of the entrances and exits provided. In all cases, these entrances
and exits shall be paved and, where operation is one-way only, they shall be
properly marked with suitable signs of a type approved by the Construction
Code Official of the township.
§ 118-15. Parking near street line.
No vehicle parked on any public parking lot shall be permitted to extend
nearer than one foot from the street line.
§ 118-16. Fencing or bumpers required.
Whenever the boundaries of the licensed area of a public parking lot do
not contain natural or artificial barriers, in order to prevent damage to
adjacent property, such boundaries shall be enclosed by a fence of durable
construction, permanently installed, but not less than 30 inches in height.
Where natural or artificial barriers exist on such boundaries, bumpers may
be installed in lieu of such fencing.
§ 118-17. Illumination.
§ 118-18. Cleanliness of premises.
Licensees under this chapter shall keep the licensed premises free from
filth, paper and rubbish.
§ 118-19. Snow removal.
Following a snowfall of two inches, licensees under this chapter shall clear
all areas within eight hours of daylight after snow or ice shall have fallen,
A. Any public parking lot open to the public later than one hour after
sunset or earlier than one hour before sunrise shall be sufficiently
lighted by the licensee while so opened and occupied so as to provide a
minimum of 2/10 lumen per square foot throughout the lot.
B. All lights shall be shaded in such a manner that no direct rays are
visible to adjacent property owners or motorists using the public
streets.
§ 118-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 118-19
1:267
provided that no snow, ice or other debris shall at any time be placed in a
township street.
§ 118-20. Repairing vehicles.
At no time other than in an emergency shall the repair of vehicles be
permitted within the area designated as a public parking lot.
§ 118-21. Violations and penalties.119
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3.
Chapter 122
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Division of Recreation and Parks — See Ch. 4,
§ 4-42.
Public consumption of alcoholic
beverages — See Ch. 36, Art. II.
Dogs — See Ch. 40, Art. I.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 55.
Fees — See Ch. 82.
Firearms — See Ch. 86.
Littering — See Ch. 108.
Municipal swimming pools — See Ch. 162.
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 118-19 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 118-21
1:268
ARTICLE I
Grover's Mill Pond
[Adopted 12-27-1979 by Ord. No. 79-39 as Sec. 3-4 of the Revised
General Ordinances]
§ 122-1. Certain motorboats prohibited.
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motorboat or
powerboat powered by a motor of more than 7 1/2 horsepower upon
Grover's Mill Pond in the township.
§ 122-2. Hours of motorboat operation.
No motorboat, powerboat or motor shall be operated upon the pond
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 122-3. Ice skating prohibited. [Added 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-07]
Ice skating on Grover's Mill Pond is not permitted.
§ 122-4. Waterskiing prohibited.
No waterskiing shall be permitted upon the pond at any time. The term
"waterskiing" shall be defined as anything with a rider being towed behind
a motorboat or powerboat by means of a towrope or line, except another
boat.
§ 122-5. Reckless operation of motorboats or motors.
No motorboat, powerboat or motor shall be operated in a reckless or
careless manner. Reckless or careless operation shall include operating a
motorboat, powerboat or motor in a manner which unnecessarily interferes
with the free and proper use of any waters or unnecessarily endangers
other craft therein or the life or limb of any person upon any craft or in the
water.
§ 122-6. Operating motorboats or motors while intoxicated.
No person shall operate a motorboat, powerboat or motor while under the
influence of intoxicating liquor or any narcotic or habit-forming drug or
permit any person who may be under the influence of intoxicating liquor or
any narcotic or habit-forming drug to operate any motorboat, powerboat or
motor owned by such person or in such person's custody.
§ 122-7. Hunting and gunning prohibited.
Hunting and gunning of any type is banned and prohibited within the area
known as Grover's Mill Pond and more specifically within 450 feet from the
banks of the pond.
§ 122-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-8
1:269
§ 122-8. Violations and penalties. [Added 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-07]
Penalties for violation of this article shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3.
§ 122-8 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 122-8
1:270
ARTICLE II
General Regulations
[Adopted 2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 93-03 (Sec. 3-17 of the Revised
General Ordinances)]
§ 122-9. Application.
The following regulations apply to all parks and recreation lands owned or
controlled by the Township of West Windsor, except as provided herein.
§ 122-10. Statutory authority.
These regulations are adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:12-6.
§ 122-11. Preservation of grounds.
§ 122-12. Animals and wildlife.
A. No person shall leave rubbish or other foreign matter within any park
or recreation land or in any body of water within such an area, except in
a receptacle provided and designated for that purpose by West Windsor
Township.
B. No person shall remove or in any way injure or mutilate any plant,
structure or other object or dig up or remove any dirt, stone or other
substance within a park or recreation land.
C. No person shall build, light or maintain a fire within a park or
recreation land except in a grill or fireplace provided and designated
for that purpose by West Windsor Township or in a portable camp stove.
[Amended 3-2-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-02]
D. No person shall discharge or set off any firecrackers, fireworks or
rockets within a park or recreation land, except pursuant to a permit
issued by West Windsor Township. [Added 3-2-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-02]
E. No person shall be permitted to play golf or hit golf balls within any
West Windsor Township park or recreation land. [Added 3-2-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-02]
A. No person shall permit a dog in his/her possession to run at large within
any park or recreation land in West Windsor Township except in
property designated "dog parks" located within West Windsor
Community Park. A dog must be in the custody or in the control of its
owner and, except in the aforementioned "dog parks," restricted by a
leash not exceeding 15 feet in length. The owner of a dog must adhere
to the Township ordinances regarding the proper cleanup of waste from
his/her dog while at a park or recreation land. At any program, activity
or event sponsored by West Windsor Township, dogs are not permitted,
§ 122-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-12
1:271
§ 122-13. Discharge of weapons.121
No person shall carry or possess firearms of any description; or air rifles,
spring guns, bows and arrows, slings or any other form of weapon
potentially harmful to wildlife and dangerous to human safety; or any
instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges; or any kind of
trapping device. Shooting into park areas from beyond park boundaries is
prohibited.
§ 122-14. Vehicles and parking.122
No person shall drive or park any motor vehicle or any motor-drawn vehicle
within a park or recreation land other than in such parking lots or access
drives thereto as may be established, except by permit issued by West
Windsor Township. As used in this article, "motor vehicle" means every
device in, upon or by which a person or property is or may be transported
that is equipped with a motor for propulsion.
§ 122-15. Bodies of water.
No person shall use private boats on any body of water within a park or
recreation land, with the exception of Grover's Mill Pond. No gasolinepowered
motors are permitted. No person shall bathe in any natural body
of water within a park or recreation land.
§ 122-16. Electronic amplification of sound.
No person shall use any loudspeaker, portable stereo, public address system
or amplifier within a park or recreation land, except pursuant to a permit
issued by West Windsor Township.
§ 122-17. Commercial uses.
No person shall sell or solicit the sale of any goods or services or distribute
commercial handbills or circulars or post a notice of any kind within a park
or recreation land, except pursuant to a permit issued by West Windsor
Township.
with the exception of a Seeing Eye dog or a hearing ear dog.120
[Amended 4-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-05]
B. No person shall molest, impair or kill any animal or disturb its habitat,
nor shall any person fish in any area at which signs are posted
prohibiting the same.
120. Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Animals, Art. I, Dogs.
121. Editor's Note: See Ch. 86, Firearms.
122. Editor's Note: See Ch. 118, Parking Lots, and Ch. 168, Traffic and Parking.
§ 122-12 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 122-18
1:272
§ 122-18. Group use; reserved use of township parks; picnic
pavilions. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
Groups may reserve the picnic pavilions at the Community Park and Van
Nest Park between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. No group of 20 or
more persons shall use the picnic pavilions at either the Community Park
or Van Nest park without such a reservation. Permits for group use of these
picnic pavilions must be applied for in advance at the Recreation and Parks
office. A permit fee shall be charged to each individual group. Said fee shall
be set annually by resolution of the Board of Recreation Commissioners.
The picnic pavilion at each park consists of the pavilion structure, picnic
tables and cooking grills. Groups with a properly issued permit will have
exclusive use of these facilities during their approved date and time. No
individual may be denied access to the parks because of a group's reserved
status, but may not utilize the picnic pavilion facilities while the approved
group is using them.
§ 122-19. Reservations for athletic fields. [Added 4-19-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-07]
All athletic fields located in any township-owned park must be reserved by
the individual sports organizations that provide recreational sports leagues
for township residents. Permits for field usage will be issued by the
Recreation Office. Athletic fields in any township owned park may only be
used by permit holders. The township reserves the right to charge a fee
for field usage. Said fee shall be set annually by resolution of the Board of
Recreation Commissioners.
§ 122-20. Hours.
All park and recreation land shall be open to the public from sunrise to
sunset, with the exception of group use. The hours for group use shall be
9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
§ 122-21. Alcoholic beverages.123
No alcoholic beverages of any kind are permitted in any park or recreation
land.
§ 122-22. Excessive noise.
No person shall cause or create or maintain any device causing or creating
any unnecessary noise in any park or recreation land.
§ 122-23. Community Park restrictions on use of lighted fields.
[Added 5-19-1997 by Ord. No. 97-13]
A. The lights illuminating the playing fields, parking lot, roadways and
other facilities located on the western side of the power lines in the
123. Editor's Note: See Ch. 36, Alcoholic Beverages, Art. I, Public Consumption.
§ 122-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-23
1:273
§ 122-24. Violations and penalties. [Added 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-07]
Penalties for violation of this article shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3.
Community Park shall be controlled by timers, which shall be located
in a secure, locked location inaccessible to the public. The hours of
operation of the lights shall be from dusk to 9:00 p.m. nightly except as
provided below. The lights will be shielded so that they shall not shine
directly onto any neighboring property or directly into any structures of
any neighboring property.
B. All lights deemed by the Township Police Division to be necessary for
security shall be exempt from these requirements. To the extent it is
consistent with security needs, those lights shall be shielded from the
view of surrounding properties and streets. [Amended 4-19-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-07]
C. The lights illuminating the soccer and baseball fields shall be turned on
only when those fields are in use; use of the lighted fields shall be
limited to local sports associations and shall be by permit only. Such
permit, to be issued by the Division of Parks and Recreation upon such
terms as it deems appropriate, shall provide that the permit holder is
responsible for ensuring that its members shall abide by township
parking, noise and littering ordinances124 and that all of its members
shall leave the park within 30 minutes subsequent to the conclusion of
the event authorized by the permit. The hours of operation of the lights
shall be as specified in the permit, but in no case shall the lights remain
on after 10:45 p.m. Use of the public address systems shall be upon
such terms as are specified in the permit. [Amended 4-19-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-07]
124. Editor's Note: See Ch. 118, Parking Lots; Ch. 113, Noise; and Ch. 108, Littering.
§ 122-23 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 122-24
1:274
Chapter 126
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 82.
§ 126-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MERCHANDISE — All goods, wares, food, meat, fish, ice cream, fruit,
vegetables, farm products, magazines, periodicals, printed matter, and all
kinds of articles of personal property for domestic use and orders or
contracts for a service, home improvement or alterations, and anything
that may be sold or distributed on a door-to-door basis shall be considered
merchandise within the terms of this chapter.[Amended 11-24-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-18]
MOBILE RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any movable restaurant,
truck, van, trailer, cart, bicycle, watercraft, or other movable unit, including
hand-carried, portable containers, in or on which food or beverage is
transported, stored, or prepared for retail sale or given away at temporary
locations.[Added 11-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-18]
NONPROFIT SOLICITOR — A bona-fide charitable organization, person,
or entity possessing a tax-exempt status, which shall be evidenced by
furnishing to the Township a tax exempt number provided by the State
of New Jersey and/or the government of the United States.[Added
11-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-18]
PEDDLER — Any person who goes from place to place by traveling on
the streets and roads or from house to house carrying, conveying or
transporting goods, wares or merchandise for the purpose of selling and
delivering them to customers. The word "peddler" shall include the words
"hawker" and "huckster."
PERSON — Includes the masculine and the feminine and the singular and
the plural and shall be construed to mean and include any individual, firm,
partnership, corporation, association, club or any other organization or any
principal or agent thereof.
SOLICITOR — Any person who goes from place to place by traveling on
the streets and roads or from house to house taking or attempting to take
orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise or personal property of
any nature whatsoever for future delivery or for services to be furnished or
performed in the future, whether or not such person has, carries or exposes
for sale a sample of the object to be sold and whether or not such person
is collecting advance payments on such sales. The word "solicitor" shall
§ 122-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-1
1:275
include the word "canvasser"; provided, however, that this definition shall
not include wholesale persons calling on retail merchants.
§ 126-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prevent fraud, crime and unethical and
dishonest business practices. The fees to be charged for the issuance of
licenses are not to be considered as revenue but are charged for the
purpose of covering the expense of investigation and regulating the conduct
of the licenses.
§ 126-3. License required. [Amended 3-21-1988 by Ord. No. 88-1;
11-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-18]
§ 126-4. Exceptions. [Amended 10-24-1983 by Ord. No. 83-30]
The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
A. Solicitor for profit.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in § 126-4, it shall be unlawful for any
solicitor, hawker or peddler to sell or dispose of or to offer to sell or
dispose of any goods, wares or merchandise or to solicit orders for
the performance of any service and for any person to go from door
to door for the purpose of soliciting financial assistance for said
person or for any other organization said person represents
(whether directly or indirectly through membership drives or the
like) and for any person polling residents on behalf of other than a
nonprofit enterprise within the corporate limits of the Township
without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. Such license shall not be transferable
from the person to whom issued to any other person. A separate
license shall be obtained by a licensed solicitor, hawker or peddler
for every agent or employee working for such licensed solicitor,
hawker or peddler.
(2) Any mobile retail food establishment shall not operate unless the
operator holds a solicitor permit from the West Windsor Township
Clerk's Department.
(3) Any mobile retail food establishment shall not operate at a
stationary location on private or public property without prior
written approval.
B. Nonprofit solicitor. Each nonprofit solicitor shall carry the license or a
copy of the license obtained from the West Windsor Township Clerk's
office during the solicitation period specified.
A. Nonprofit organizations.
(1) Any nonprofit, religious, charitable, school, political, civic or
veteran organization, service club or volunteer fire or ambulance
§ 126-1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 126-4
1:276
corps desiring to solicit or have solicited in its name by other than a
profit-making organization money, donations or financial assistance
of any kind or desiring to sell or distribute any item for which a fee
is charged, provided that there is filed an application, in writing,
with the Township Clerk, at least two weeks prior to the event,
containing the following information: [Amended 11-24-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-18]
(a) The name, address, and phone number of the organization.
(b) The purpose for which the special permit is requested.
(c) The names and address of the officers and directors of the
organization.
(d) The period during which solicitation is to be carried out, not to
exceed one month or 30 days.
(e) The name, address, phone number and date of birth, or copy of
driver's license, or proof of identification for the responsible
individual in charge of the solicitation locally.
(f) A list of each individual solicitor to include their name, address
and date of birth, or copy of driver's license or proof of
identification. If the list of solicitors changes within the time
frame for which the soliciting has been permitted, the Police
Division must be notified immediately and a new list of
solicitors shall be provided with the required information.
(g) A list of vehicles to be used which include description and
license plate number for each.
(2) The person responsible for any action in the township shall advise
the Chief of Police with whatever details said Chief of Police may
require prior to such action.
(3) The application shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police, who shall
endorse the application and return the application to the Township
Clerk, who shall issue a special permit without charge for a
specified period.
(4) The period during which solicitation by the entities set forth in this
Subsection A may be carried out shall terminate at 8:00 p.m.
[Amended 9-9-1985 by Ord. No. 85-18; 3-21-1988 by Ord. No.
88-1; 11-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-18]
(5) Persons soliciting on behalf of the entities set forth in this
Subsection A may do so only upon receipt of the special permit,
which shall be carried by each individual, set forth in said
subsection. [Added 3-21-1988 by Ord. No. 88-1; amended
11-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-18]
§ 126-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-4
1:277
B. Children enrolled in public and private elementary and secondary
schools, including children peddling or soliciting for schools, school
clubs and organizations. Cub Scouts, Boy Scouts, Brownies, Girl Scouts,
and similar youth groups. [Added 11-24-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-18125]
C. Any person honorably discharged from the military services of the
United States possessing a peddler's license issued in conformity with
N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and 45:24-10. These individuals are licensed by the
County Clerk and shall provide a copy of such license with the
application. [Amended 11-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-18]
D. Any person who is an exempt fire fighter of a volunteer fire department
as defined by N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and 45:24-10 possessing a license in
conformity with said law. These individuals are licensed by the County
Clerk and shall provide a copy of such license with the application.
[Amended 11-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-18]
E. Any public utility or its employees, which said public utility is subject to
regulation by the State Board of Public Utility Commissioners;
provided, however, that such employees shall display the identification
badge or card issued by their employer.
F. Any person selling fruits and farm products grown by such person, with
or without the help of others.
G. Any person engaged in the delivery of goods, wares or merchandise or
other articles or things in the regular course of business to the premises
of persons who had previously ordered the same or were entitled to
receive the same by reason of a prior agreement.
H. Newspaper vendors. [Added 7-27-1992 by Ord. No. 92-21]
I. Any temporary retail food establishment which has a valid license
issued by the West Windsor Township Health Department and which
operates for a period of no more than 14 consecutive days in
conjunction with a single event or celebration. [Added 11-24-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-18]
J. Community park: In accordance with § 122-17, Commercial uses. No
person shall sell or solicit the sale of any goods or services, or distribute
commercial handbills or circulars, or post a notice of any kind within a
park or recreation land, except pursuant to a permit issued by West
Windsor Township Recreation Division. [Added 11-24-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-18]
125. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections B
through G as Subsections C through H, respectively.
§ 126-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 126-5
1:278
§ 126-5. Application for license. [Amended 11-24-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-18]
Solicitor for profit: Every applicant for a license under this chapter shall
file with the Township Clerk a sworn written application on a form to be
furnished by the Clerk, which shall give the following information:
A. The name and description of the applicant.
B. The permanent home address and full local address of the applicant.
C. A brief statement of the nature of the business and a description of the
merchandise or service to be sold.
D. If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship.
E. If a vehicle is to be used, a description of such vehicle and its license
number.
F. The place where the goods or property to be sold or offered for sale are
manufactured or produced, where such goods or property are located
at the time such application is filed and the proposed method of
delivery.
G. Two photographs of the applicant taken within 60 days immediately
prior to the date of the application, which photographs shall clearly
show the head and shoulders of the applicant and shall measure 1 1/2
inches by 1 1/2 inches.
H. Two business references located in the County of Mercer, State of New
Jersey, or, in lieu thereof, such other available evidence of the character
and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an
investigator to properly evaluate such character and responsibility.
I. A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature
of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
J. Fingerprints required. New applicants shall provide their fingerprints
for new licenses on such form as may be prescribed by the Township. If
deemed necessary by the Director of Public Safety, an SBI form may be
required for new licenses. Renewal licenses will be required to file an
SBI form yearly. Fees associated with this are authorized in Chapter 82,
Fees. The results of the fingerprinting shall be sent by the prescribed
entity or contractor directly to the West Windsor Township Police
Division.
K. The names of at least two reliable property owners of the County of
Mercer and State of New Jersey who will certify as to the applicant's
good character and business respectability or, in lieu of the names of
references, such other available evidence as to the good character and
§ 126-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-5
1:279
§ 126-6. Registration fee.
At the time the application is filed, a fee as established in Chapter 82, Fees,
shall be paid to the Township Clerk to cover the cost of processing the
application and investigating the facts stated therein.
§ 126-7. Investigation and issuance of license.
§ 126-8. Separate license for agents and employees. [Amended
11-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-18]
business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to
properly evaluate such character and business responsibility.
A. Upon receipt of such application, the original shall be referred to the
Chief of Police, who shall cause to be made such investigation of the
applicant's business and moral character as deemed necessary for the
protection of the public health, welfare and safety.
B. If as a result of such investigation the applicant's character or business
responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory or that the issuance of a
license to the applicant would present a danger to the public health,
welfare or safety, the Chief of Police shall endorse on such application
his or her disapproval and reasons for the same and return the
application to the Township Clerk, who shall notify the applicant that
the application is disapproved.
C. If as a result of such investigation the character and business
responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory and the
issuance of a license to the applicant will present no danger to the
public health, welfare and safety, the Chief of Police shall endorse his or
her approval on the application and return the application to the
Township Clerk, who shall execute and deliver to the applicant the
license. [Amended 11-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-18]
(1) Solicitor for profit. Such license shall contain the signature[s] of
the Township Clerk, the applicant's photograph, and shall show the
name, address, description of the applicant, the name of the
company solicitor works for and the expiration date of the license.
The Township Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued and of
all complaints received, if any, concerning such licensee.
(2) Nonprofit solicitor. Such license shall contain the signature of the
Township Clerk, the name of the organization, the dates the
soliciting will take place, and the purpose of the solicitation. The
Township Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued and of all
complaints received, if any, concerning such licensee.
A. Solicitor for profit. A separate license must be obtained for every agent
or employee working for any person. Such license shall not be
transferable from the person to whom issued to any other person.
§ 126-5 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 126-8
1:280
§ 126-9. Duties of licensee. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07;
11-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-18]
§ 126-10. Prohibited practices. [Amended 11-24-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-18]
B. Nonprofit solicitor. A copy of the license obtained from the Township
Clerk shall be carried with each person while soliciting in the event said
license is asked to be provided.
A. Solicitor for profit. Every holder of a peddler's or solicitor's license
issued by the Township Clerk under the authority of this chapter or by
the Clerk of the County of Mercer under the authority of N.J.S.A.
45:24-9 et seq. shall be required to carry such license with licensee
while engaged in the business or activity licensed within the corporate
limits of the Township. The licensee shall produce the license at the
request of any official of the Township or of any resident of said
Township with whom the licensee wishes to conduct business or
activity. Every such licensee shall restrict selling activity within the
Township to the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. prevailing time
on Mondays through Saturdays with the exception of mobile food
vendors.
B. Nonprofit solicitor. Every holder of a peddler's or solicitor's license
issued by the Township Clerk under the authority of this chapter or by
the Clerk of the County of Mercer under the authority of N.J.S.A.
45:24-9 et seq. shall be required to carry such license with licensee
while engaged in the business or activity licensed within the corporate
limits of the Township. The licensee shall produce a copy of the license
at the request of any official of the Township or of any resident of said
Township with whom the licensee wishes to conduct business or
activity. Every such licensee shall restrict selling activity within the
Township to the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. prevailing time
on Mondays through Saturdays. The licensee shall notify the police
officer on duty at least once in every week in which said licensee plans
to conduct this activity and before commencing selling or soliciting
activity. Such notification shall include a statement of the general area
of the Township in which the licensee intends to conduct this activity, a
schedule of dates and times when the activity shall be conducted,
description of vehicle being used with plate number and list of solicitors
at least once in every week in which said licensee plans to conduct this
activity and before commencing soliciting activity. The licensee shall
notify the police officer on duty of any change in area or time of
solicitation, should such changes be made during the week.
A. Soliciting is prohibited at all intersections and on public thoroughfares.
B. No solicitor shall operate vehicular music amplification or reproduction
equipment in such a manner that creates a public nuisance or noise
disturbance that violates the Township Noise Ordinance.126 (ice cream
§ 126-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-10
1:281
§ 126-11. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the township to enforce the
provisions of this chapter and require any person seen peddling or soliciting
who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed to produce such
person's peddler's or solicitor's license.
§ 126-12. Revocation of license.
§ 126-13. Appeals. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or of the Township
Clerk in the denial of a license, as provided in § 126-7, shall have the right
truck music and similar functions is played at a reasonable level shall
be allowed.) No peddler or solicitor shall call attention to his or her
business or merchandise by crying out, blowing a horn, ringing a bell,
other than the doorbell of a building, or by any other loud or unusual
noise.
C. No peddler or solicitor shall conduct or attempt to conduct business at
any residence on the list of residences not to be solicited, at any
development with a homeowner's association, or on any residence or
property on which is posted a sign expressly prohibiting such activity.
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the township, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:
[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement by the licensee in the
course of conducting the business licensed.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
(4) Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude.
(5) Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in such
a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or a menace to the
health, safety or general welfare of the public.
B. Notice of hearing for revocation of license shall be given, in writing.
Such notice shall set forth the specific grounds of complaint and the
time and place of the hearing and shall be sent by registered mail to the
licensee at the last known address at least five days prior to the date set
for the hearing.
C. Hearings under this section shall be before the Business Administrator.
[Added 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
126. Editor's Note: See Ch. 113, Noise.
§ 126-10 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 126-13
1:282
of appeal to the Business Administrator. Such appeal shall be taken by filing
with the township, within 14 days after the notice of the action complained
of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement
setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Business Administrator
shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such
hearing shall be given to the applicant in the same manner as provided in
§ 126-12 for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision of the Business
Administrator on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.
§ 126-14. Expiration and renewal of license. [Amended 11-24-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-18]
§ 126-15. Prohibition against solicitation at certain residences.
[Added 3-21-1988 by Ord. No. 88-1]
No peddlers or solicitors or persons soliciting on behalf of the entities
set forth in § 126-4A shall solicit at any residence upon which a "No
Solicitation" sign is affixed at or near the front door or which is contained
on a list maintained by the township of residences not to be solicited. The
Township Clerk shall provide each person securing a license or special
permit with such list and shall take suitable steps to inform the residents of
the township that they may be included on such list if they so choose.
§ 126-16. Violations and penalties. [Added 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-07]
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3.
Chapter 131
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 82.
Sewerage Authority — See Ch. 133, Art. I.
Sewer use — See Ch. 133, Art. II.
Solid waste — See Ch. 148.
Land use — See Ch. 200.
A. Solicitor for profit. All licenses issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall expire December 31 of the calendar year in which they are
issued. Any such license may be renewed, with payment of an additional
registration fee, upon submission by the licensee of a new application in
conformity with the requirements of § 126-5. Such new application shall
be subject to the provisions and standards set forth in § 126-5.
B. Nonprofit solicitor. All nonprofit solicitor licenses are valid only for the
dates listed on the license.
§ 126-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-16
1:283

ARTICLE I
Community Systems
[Adopted by the Board of Health 3-15-1983 (Ch. BH:VI of the
Revised General Ordinances); readopted by the Township Council
4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
§ 131-1. Construction.
§ 131-2. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this article, shall have the
following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ABSORPTION AREA — The wetted horizontal area of the disposal bed or
trench where treatment occurs in a disposal field.
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — The Health Officer of the Township of
West Windsor.
AEROBIC UNIT — A pretreatment tank in which air is injected into raw
sewage, providing an oxygen-rich environment for the digestion of sewage.
The design of an aerobic unit is similar to that of a septic tank.
ALTER — To replace or repair any portion of the community sewage
disposal system.
APPROVED — Accepted or acceptable under applicable specifications
stated or cited in this article or accepted as suitable for the proposed use
under procedures and powers of administration delegated in this article.
APPROVED PROFESSIONAL — A person certified by the Department to
perform site evaluation and/or design of subsurface sewage disposal
systems.
ARTESIAN — Groundwater under sufficient hydrostatic pressure to rise
above the top elevation of the aquifer containing it.
AUTHORIZED AGENT — A licensed health officer, professional engineer,
sanitary inspector, plumbing inspector or any other qualified and licensed
A. Unless otherwise provided by rule, statute or ordinance, the following
shall govern the design and installation of community subsurface
sewage disposal systems.
B. This article shall be liberally construed to permit the Health Officer or
designee to discharge its statutory functions.
C. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prevent the
Health Officer or designee from requiring compliance with higher
requirements than those contained herein where such higher
requirements are essential to maintain safe and sanitary conditions.
D. Practice where article does not govern. The Division of Health or its
agents shall exercise discretion in respect to any other matters not
governed by this article.
§ 131-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-2
1:285
person first grade who is delegated to function within specified limits as the
agent of the administrative authority.
BEDROCK — In-place geologic formations which cannot be removed with
conventional excavating equipment or which upon excavation include more
than 60% formation fragments (by weight) that are retained on a onequarter-
inch mesh screen.
BEDROOM — A room used for sleeping, whether or not that is meant to be
its primary purpose. Rooms to be considered as bedrooms shall include but
not be limited to expansion attics and all rooms except living rooms, dining
rooms, laundries, bathrooms, kitchens and other rooms which could not be
expected to become a sleeping place for individuals.
BUILDING SEWER — The pipe extending from the outer wall of the building
or, as defined in the State Uniform Construction Code, to the septic tank or
approved place of disposal other than a public sewer.
CERTIFICATION — A written statement by the administrative authority
certifying that the proposed sewerage facilities for the proposed reality
improvements are in compliance with the provisions of L. 1954, c. 199, as
revised (N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq.), and this article, as well as the terms of
the permit issued for such installation.
CHROMA — The relative purity, strength or saturation of a color in soil,
directly related to the dominance of the determining wavelength of light
and inversely related to grayness, as described by the Munsell color system
for determining hue and value of color found in soils.
CLASS A SOIL — Soil with a seasonally high-water table greater than or
equal to seven feet below natural grade.
CLASS B SOIL — Soil with a seasonally high-water table greater than or
equal to four feet but less than seven feet below natural grade. Class B soil
will require a pressure distribution mound system.
CLASS C SOIL — Soil with a seasonally high water table less than four feet
below natural grade.
CLASS A SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A septic tank,
distribution box or siphon system and disposal area which have no
mechanical parts and in which flow distribution is accomplished by gravity.
CLASS B SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — All subsurface
sewage disposal systems other than Class A subsurface disposal systems
hereinabove defined, including the use of curtain drains.
CLAY — A soil separate consisting of particles less than 0.002 millimeters
in equivalent diameter or soil material that contains 40% or more clay, 45%
or less sand and 40% or less silt.
CLAY LOAM — Soil material that contains 27% to 40% clay and 20% to 45%
sand.
§ 131-2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 131-2
1:286
COMMUNITY SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A subsurface sewage
disposal system into which more than one realty improvement discharges
sanitary sewage.
CONDUIT — Any enclosed means, except wood, through which fluid is
conveyed.
CONNECTING PIPE — A closed watertight pipe connecting the septic tank
to the disposal area.
CONSTRUCT — To build or install a new community sewage disposal
system or replace, alter or expand an existing community subsurface
sewage disposal system.
CRITICAL AREAS — All those areas as defined in N.J.A.C. 7:9-10.1 et seq.
CURTAIN DRAIN — A trench excavation filled with gravel which contains
perforated drainage pipe. Curtain drains are placed around the upslope
perimeter of the soil absorption area to intercept perched groundwater
moving into the area. Under no conditions shall the curtain drain be placed
on the downslope side of the disposal area or surround the system on
more than three sides. In the case of a curtain drain, the invert is the
lowest portion of the internal cross section of a perforated conduit or gravel
envelope, whichever is lower.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey State Department of Environmental
Protection.
DISPOSAL AREA — The entire area used for underground dispersion of the
liquid portion of sewage, which may consist of a disposal trench, disposal
field or a combination thereof.
DISPOSAL BED — That part of a disposal field for dispersion of the liquid
portion of sanitary sewage comprising a shallow area from which the entire
earth contents have been removed, the excavation filled at least 12 inches
with a satisfactory aggregate in which distribution lines have been laid and
the entire area covered with topsoil and suitable vegetative growth.
DISPOSAL FIELD — An area consisting of disposal trenches, a disposal bed
or a combination thereof, including buffer area. The buffer area is measured
to the toe of the slope. The disposal field is used for dispersion of the liquid
portion of sanitary sewage into the ground as close to the surface as is
feasible. The limits of the disposal field shall be defined as the boundary
created by the monitoring wells.
DISPOSAL TRENCH — A shallow ditch with vertical sides and a flat bottom
filled at least 12 inches with a satisfactory aggregate material in which a
single distribution line has been laid and covered with topsoil and suitable
vegetative growth.
DISTRIBUTION BOX — A round or rectangular watertight chamber with
a single inlet and an outlet for each distribution lateral. The purpose of
the distribution box is to divide the incoming wastewater of an individual
sewage disposal system equally between each lateral.
§ 131-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-2
1:287
DISTRIBUTION LINES — A series of perforated pipes used for the
dispersion of sewage into disposal trenches or disposal beds.
DITCH — Any channelized structure that can affect the movement or
occurrence of surface water or groundwater, including, but not limited to,
open trenches and underdrains with or without pipes.
DOSING — The pumping or siphoning of a specified volume of wastewater
to a disposal area.
DOSING TANK — A watertight receptacle located between a septic tank and
a disposal area equipped with an automatic siphon device or pump system
designed to discharge the liquid portion of the sewage intermittently in the
distribution lines in amounts proportionate to the capacity of such lines and
to provide adequate rest periods between such discharges.
DOUBLE RING INFILTROMETER — A device consisting of two concentric
metal rings which are inserted into the soil horizon to measure vertical
hydraulic conductivity.
DRY WELL — A covered pit with an open-jointed lining through which
drainage from roofs, basement floors or areaways may seep or leach into
the surrounding soil. If permanently filled with water, the pit is a well and
subject to the applicable distance requirements of this article.
EXPANSION ATTIC — That part of a house left unfinished but designed
to be finished as a bedroom or bedrooms by subsequent improvement and
accessible by permanent stairways or designed so that stairways may be
installed.
FAILURE — See "malfunction."
FLOODPLAIN — Land area subject to the probability of flooding as defined
in the Department of Housing and Urban Development's Flood Hazard
Boundary Maps.
FOG — Floatable oil and grease; scum.
GPD — The abbreviated form for gallons per day (24 hours).
GRADE — The pitch or fall of a pipeline or the ground surface, which may
be expressed as fall or drop per foot, per 100 feet, or in percentages.
GREASE TRAP — A device in which the grease present in sewage is
intercepted, congealed by cooling and from which it may be skimmed from
the surface of the liquid waste prior to disposal.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any chemical substance or material, gas, solid
or liquid designated as hazardous by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency pursuant to the United States Resource Recovery and
Conservation Act, Public Law 94-580, latest revision.
HOLDING TANK — A round or rectangular watertight receptacle, with
visual and auditory alarms, used to receive and hold sanitary sewage. A
holding tank has an inflow pipe and a manhole used for periodic pumping
of sewage by a licensed hauler to a location permitted by the Department.
There shall be no discharge from a holding tank.
§ 131-2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 131-2
1:288
HORIZON — See "soil horizon."
HOUSE SEWER — See "building sewer."
HUE — One of the three variables of color used in the Munsell color
system. Hue is caused by light of specific wavelengths and changes with
wavelength.
HYDRAULIC CONDUCTIVITY (K) — The rate at which water can move
through a soil layer.
IMPERVIOUS FORMATIONS — Formations of soil material having a
hydraulic conductivity of less than two centimeters per day.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Liquid or solid wastes free from fecal matter
resulting from processes employed in industrial establishments, including
treatment storage or runoff from processed or untreated wastewater or
raw materials and wastes from floor drains emanating from treatment,
storage or manufacturing areas of an establishment. A list of generators of
industrial waste is found in N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1 et seq., Appendix E.
INVERT — The floor, bottom or lowest portion of the internal cross section
of a closed conduit (pipes or fittings) conveying sewage. In the case of a
curtain drain, the invert is the lowest portion of the internal cross section of
a perforated conduit.
KEY MAP — A USGS topographic map 7.5 minute quadrangle series
locating the property and extending 1,000 feet beyond the property
boundaries.
LATERAL — The four-inch pipe which connects an individual residence with
the sewer main.
LOAM — Soil material that contains 7% to 27% clay, 28% to 50% silt and
less than 52% sand.
LOAMY SAND — Soil material that contains at the upper limit 85% to 90%
sand and in which the percentage of silt plus 1 1/2 times the percentage of
clay is not less than 15; at the lower limit it contains not less than 70% to
85% sand and the percentage of silt plus twice the percentage of clay does
not exceed 30.
LOCATE — The designation of the site or place of an individual sewage
disposal system, and the term "location" shall be construed accordingly.
LYSIMETER — A device for measuring percolating and leaching losses from
a column of soil and a device for collecting soil water in the field.
MAIN STACK — See "vent stack."
MALFUNCTION — Deemed by the authorized agent to have occurred in the
event of, but not limited to, the following:
Evidence of sewage or the flow of sewage on the ground surface or in
storm drains or basements.
A.
B. Need of the system to be pumped three times in a twelve-month period.
§ 131-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-2
1:289
MANIFOLD — That portion of piping leading from the pumps in the pump
chamber to the distribution lines.
MONITORING WELLS — Inspection pipes located in the subsurface soil
absorption system which provide limited access for observing the depth
of ponding, a measure of the performance of the system and a means of
locating the subsurface field.
MOTTLES and MOTTLING — Spots or blotches of different colors or shades
of color interspersed with the dominant soil color. Oxidation (bright colors)
and reduction (dull colors) are caused by alternating aerobic and anaerobic
conditions, which conditions are caused by a seasonally fluctuating
groundwater table or the presence of a perched water table. The zone of
mottling is that area consisting of more than 2% mottles.
MULTIPLE COMPARTMENT TANKS — Septic tanks containing more than
one settling compartment or chamber in series.
OBSERVATION HOLE — An excavation, test pit or auger boring used to
determine the soil profile and conditions.
PERCHED WATER TABLE — The upper surface of a zone of saturation
which exists at some level above the static water table because of a
relatively impermeable layer of varying lateral extent and is isolated from
the static water table by an unsaturated zone. A water table may be inferred
to be perched by the administrative authority or Department on the basis
of general knowledge of water levels of an area, the landscape position and
the permeability of soil layers.
PERCOLATING AREA — That portion of soil utilized in a disposal area as
the effective disposal media for sewage; the furthermost limit of the gravel
layer in which disposal field laterals are placed.
PERMEABILITY — As applied to soils, the ability of the soil to transmit
water in a liquid form through pores.
PERMEABILITY TEST — A method of in situ soil testing used to determine
the capacity of a soil to accept and transmit water under saturated
conditions and to define the percolating area for a community subsurface
sewage disposal system.
PERSON — Corporations, companies, associations, societies, firms,
partnerships and joint stock companies, as well as individuals.
PRESSURIZED DISTRIBUTION — A network of piping with small diameter
orifices designed to evenly distribute wastewater under pressure
throughout the entire disposal field.
PRIMARY SATURATED PERMEABILITY — The rate at which water moves
through the pores of a saturated soil material, but not meant to be a
measure of the rate at which water moves through fractures, joints, faults,
solution cavities or other features which are the result of secondary
permeability.
Failure of the system to accept effluent, including, for example, the
failure of toilets to flush or sinks to drain.
C.
§ 131-2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 131-2
1:290
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — A person licensed to practice professional
engineering in this state.
PUMP CHAMBER — The structure which encloses the pumps for the
pressure distribution system.
REALTY IMPROVEMENT — Any proposed new residence or other building
(including condominiums, garden apartments, townhouses, mobile homes,
etc.) not serviced by an approved water supply and approved sewerage
system, the useful occupancy of which will require the installation,
replacement, alteration, repair or erection of a water supply system or
sewerage facilities. Each family unit in a proposed multiple-family dwelling
shall be construed to be a separate realty improvement.
REPAIR — To replace or rehabilitate any portion of an existing individual
subsurface disposal system such that the system will conform to the
previously approved engineering plans.
RESTRICTIVE LAYER — A soil layer which resists the downward movement
of water and has a permeability of less than two centimeters per day (4.6 x
10-5 ft/min).
SAND — A soil particle between 0.05 and 2.0 millimeters in diameter or soil
separate that contains 85% or more sand and in which the percentage of
silt plus 1 1/2 times the percentage of clay does not exceed 15.
SANDY CLAY — Soil material that contains 35% or more clay and 45% or
more sand.
SANDY CLAY LOAM — Soil material that contains 20% to 35% clay, less
than 28% silt and 45% or more sand.
SANDY LOAM — Soil material that contains 20% clay or less and 52% or
more sand and in which the percentage of silt plus twice the percentage of
clay exceeds 30; or which contains less than 7% clay, less than 50% silt and
between 43% and 52% sand.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable
matter in suspension or solution or the water-carried wastes resulting from
the discharge of water closets, laundry tubs, washing machines, sinks,
dishwashers or any other source of water-carried waste of human origin
or containing putrescible material. Sanitary sewage shall not contain
industrial waste.
SANITARY SEWER — A pipe which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
SCUM — A mass of sewage solids floating at the surface of sewage and
buoyed up by entrained gas, grease or other substances.
SEASONAL HIGH WATER TABLE — A zone of saturation of the highest
elevation during the wettest season, which shall be estimated at the highest
level of soil mottling as determined by an approved professional.
SEEPAGE PIT — A covered pit with an open-jointed or perforated lining
through which septic tank effluent and/or laundry waste may seep or leach
§ 131-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-2
1:291
into the surrounding soil. No new seepage pits shall be allowed in the
Township.
SELECT FILL — Any soil material with the following textural (granulometric
or gradation) analysis:
SEPTIC SOLIDS RETAINER — A tee baffle or gas deflector used at the
outlet of a septic tank which has less than 80% submergence, such that the
sludge and scum are retained in the septic tank.
SEPTIC TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives the discharge
of sewage from a building sewer or part thereof and is designed and
constructed to permit settling of settleable solids from the liquid, retention
of scum, digestion of the organic matter by detention and discharge of the
liquid portion into a disposal area.
SILT — A soil separate consisting of particles between 0.005 and 0.002
millimeters in equivalent diameter, or soil material that contains 80% or
more silt and less than 12% clay.
SILT LOAM — Soil material that contains 50% or more silt and 12% to 27%
clay, 50% to 80% silt and less than 12% clay.
SILTY CLAY — Soil material that contains 40% or more clay and 40% or
more silt.
SILTY CLAY LOAM — Soil material that contains 27% to 40% clay and less
than 20% sand.
SIPHON — A hydraulically operated device designed to rapidly discharge
the entire contents of a dosing tank between predetermined hydraulic
levels.
SOIL — That portion of the earth's surficial material which was formed as a
result of physical, chemical and biological weathering of a parent material
where at least 50% of the material has a diameter of two millimeters or less.
SOIL HORIZON — A layer of soil, approximately parallel to the soil surface,
with distinct characteristics produced by soil-forming processes.
SOILS LOG — The detailed soils information required for completion of the
administrative authority's soils log form.
SOILS MAP — A map prepared by the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA)/Soil Conservation Service (SCS) entitled "Soil Survey of
Mercer County, New Jersey."
SOIL SATURATION LEVEL — The highest elevation of saturated soil based
on the highest elevation of soil mottles, as determined by an approved
professional.
Sandy soil material with a silt or clay content not less than 10 weight
percent nor more than 20 weight percent of that portion of the material
finer than two millimeters.
A.
Coarse fragments 1/4 inch or larger in diameter shall not exceed 15%
by weight of the material.
B.
§ 131-2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 131-2
1:292
SOIL TEXTURE — The relative proportions of the various soil separates
(sand, silt and clay) in a soil, as defined by the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA).
STATIC LIQUID LEVEL — The maximum height of the surface of liquid in a
septic tank.
STATIC WATER TABLE — The surface of an unconfined aquifer or perched
water table at which the pore water pressure is atmospheric.
SUBDIVISION AMENDMENT — An amendment to the Realty Improvement
Sewerage and Facilities Act,127 which requires state certification for all
subdivisions which are to be served by subsurface sewage disposal systems
and/or private wells and consist of 50 or more realty improvements prior to
the granting of preliminary subdivision approval.
SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — An approved system for
the disposal of sanitary sewage into the ground which is designed and
constructed to treat sewage to retain most of the settleable solids in a septic
tank and to discharge the liquid portion to an adequate disposal field. A
subsurface sewage disposal system shall not treat or discharge wastewater
which is in whole or in part hazardous, nor shall it treat nor discharge
industrial waste.
TOPOGRAPHIC MAP — A contour map having a contour interval of one foot
or less.
TRAP — A fitting or device so designed and constructed as to provide, when
properly vented, a liquid seal which will prevent the back passage of air
without materially affecting the flow of sewage or wastewater through it.
UNCONFINED AQUIFER — An aquifer where there is no restrictive
material at the top of the groundwater, so that the groundwater level is free
to rise or fall. See also "static water table."
UNIFIED SOIL CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM — A system classifying soils
according to particle size, distribution, plasticity, liquid limit and organic
matter content.
UNSATURATED NATURAL (IN SITU) SOIL — Soil which is above both the
groundwater table and the zone of capillary saturation.
VALUE — The relative lightness or intensity of color and approximately a
function of the square root of the total amount of light. One of the three
variables of color used in the Munsell color system.
VENT STACK — A vertical vent pipe installed within a building for the
purpose of providing circulation of air to and from any part of a building
plumbing system.
WATERCOURSE — Any topographic feature, whether natural or man-made,
which collects or transmits surface or subsurface water, including but not
limited to streams (perennial or intermittent), ditches, drains, storm sewers,
lakes and stormwater recharge basins. Shallow swales upslope of a sewage
127. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq.
§ 131-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-2
1:293
disposal system created by landscaping and conveying only rainwater from
a limited surface shall not be considered a watercourse.
WATER TABLE — The upper surface of groundwater or that level below soil
which is seasonally saturated with water.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries and all springs,
streams and bodies of surface or groundwater, whether natural or artificial.
WELL — Any well, including any dug hole, that is deeper than its largest
surface dimension, where the principal function of the well is the
withdrawal or emplacement of fluids.
WET WELL AND PUMPING EQUIPMENT — A watertight receptacle that
receives the liquid portion of sewage and, by means of appropriate
equipment, forces the sewage to the distribution box of a disposal system at
a higher elevation.
ZONE OF CAPILLARY SATURATION — The partially saturated soils
immediately above the groundwater table.
ZONE OF SATURATION — The totally saturated soils contained within the
groundwater table.
§ 131-3. Community sewage disposal systems generally prohibited.
The use of community subsurface sewage disposal systems is prohibited
unless the properties, dwellings, commercial units or other premises to be
served by sewage disposal systems are constructed, designed and located in
such a manner that the construction of individual sewage disposal systems
in accordance with Article II of this chapter would be most impractical
or impossible. Percolation tests must be performed on each proposed lot
in the development before a community system may be considered. If a
community system is proposed, double ring infiltrometer tests must be
performed in the disposal area. In no event, however, shall construction of
a community sewage disposal system be permitted in Class C soil or in a
floodplain.
§ 131-4. Permission to locate, construct or alter community sewage
disposal system required.
Permission to locate, construct or alter a community sewage disposal
system must be sought from the administrative authority and may only be
granted if facts are established to its satisfaction and assurances given that
only one legal entity will be responsible for the maintenance, operation,
repair and replacement of the system and that the system will meet the
construction and design standards contained herein.
§ 131-5. Minimum construction requirements for community
sewage disposal systems.
Required components of all community sewage disposal systems are as
follows:
§ 131-2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 131-5
1:294
A. Community septic tanks. In addition to individual septic tanks located
on the premises of each realty improvement, there shall be at least one
large community septic tank for each alternating disposal field. The
community septic tank shall be of shallow depth dual compartment
regular reinforced concrete design and the size shall be the larger of
either 5,000 gallons minimum or 1/3 the total estimated volume
expected based on the table found in § 131-7. Said tanks shall be
preceded by a selective diversion valve and interconnected with a
gravity overflow device and equipped with auditory and visual level
alarms in the event of malfunction of the active tank.
B. Sewage collection system. The conduit system which conveys the liquid
portion of the sanitary sewage from the individual septic tank to the
community septic tank.
C. Wet well with duplex pumping stations and pressure distribution
system. The effluent of the community septic tanks will accumulate in a
wet well, which will provide the volume necessary to dose the
associated disposal field. The disposal field will receive the dose of
effluent via a watertight force main manifold connected to a perforated
distribution pipe. Auditory and visual alarms detectable on site and
relayed to a central alarm company will be activated in the event of
malfunction.
D. Alternating disposal fields. Each community septic tank shall have an
associated alternating disposal field. Use of the alternating disposal
fields shall be changed annually or as otherwise required by the
administrative authority to permit one field to rest while the other is in
use. (See Figure 1.128)
E. Reserved disposal field area. In addition to the alternating disposal
fields, each community sewage disposal system shall have an
associated reserve area. This area shall have been tested in the same
manner as the primary disposal fields. The reserve area shall have the
capacity to accept as a minimum the same quantity of effluent as the
disposal area for which it is in reserve.
F. No disposal field may be constructed unless the bottom of the disposal
bed is at least four feet above the highest seasonal water table
elevation, as determined by the approved professional and verified by
the authorized agent. In no event will a disposal field be permitted to be
constructed in a floodplain.
G. Monitoring wells. Monitoring wells shall be installed and shall extend
from the bottom infiltrative surface of the system up to or above final
grade. The bottom should be open and the top capped. The portion of
the pipe within the gravel should be perforated to permit a free flow of
water. Spacing and location of monitoring wells shall be at the
discretion of the authorized agent.
128. Editor's Note: Figure 1 is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 131-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-5
1:295
§ 131-6. Design.
The design of a community sewage disposal system shall take into
consideration the location of the wells or other sources of water supply,
topography, existing individual or community sewage disposal systems on
adjacent properties, water tables, soil characteristics, available area and
expected volume of sewage and shall comply with these and other
provisions of this article regarding design. All engineering data submitted
must bear a professional engineer's seal and signature. The engineer
responsible for design shall also inspect construction and certify that the
work has been constructed in accordance with the minimum requirements
of the design. Alterations to community sewage disposal systems shall
be certified by the authorized agent and be subject to approval by the
administrative authority.
§ 131-7. Volume.
Each unit of the disposal system shall be designed to adequately treat the
estimated volume of sanitary sewage to be discharged from the community
to be served. The volume of sewage flow shall be based on the estimated
contributory population and the resultant expected daily quantities of
sewage, as determined from the following table:
Source1 Gallons Per Person Per Day
Cottages; seasonal occupancy 100
Single-family dwellings (minimum of 400
or gallons per dwelling)
100
Multiple-family dwellings (apartments) 100
Rooming house 50
Boardinghouses2 75
For each nonresident boarder 15
Hotels2 50-75
Motels and tourist cabins 50-75
Mobile home parks 100
Restaurants
H. Each realty improvement to be connected to a community sewage
disposal system shall have its own septic tank, which shall be sized and
constructed in accordance with Chapter BH:III, Subsections BH:3-4.22,
BH:3-4.24 and BH:3-4.25 of the Individual Sewage Disposal System
Code of West Windsor129 and located between the realty improvement
and public right-of-way.
I. Flow restrictors and low-volume flush toilets are required.
129. Editor's Note: See Art. II, Individual Systems, of this chapter.
§ 131-5 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 131-7
1:296
Source1 Gallons Per Person Per Day
Sanitary waste only, per patron 5
Kitchen waste only, per patron 5
Kitchen and sanitary wastes 10
Camps2 50
Day schools
No cafeteria or showers 10
With cafeteria and no showers 15
With cafeteria and showers 20
Cafeteria, showers and laboratories 25
Boarding schools2 100
Day workers: office, industries, etc. (eighthour
shift)
25
Institutions other than hospitals 75-125
Picnic grounds and comfort stations
Toilet only 10
Toilet and showers 15
Swimming pools and bathhouses 10
Club houses2
With resident members 60
For each nonresident member 25
Campgrounds where individual sewer per
site hookups are available (laundry extra,
increase by 50%)
100
Stores, office buildings 0.125 gallons per square foot
Self-service laundries 50 gallons per wash
NOTES:
1 When more than one use will occur, the multiple use shall be considered
determining the total flow. Other uses than those listed above shall be
considered in relation to established flows from known or similar
installations.
2Includes kitchen waste at 10 gallons per person per day. If laundry wastes
are anticipated, estimated flows shall be increased by 50%.
§ 131-8. Garbage grinder units prohibited.
The use of garbage grinder units by any realty improvement serviced by a
community sewage disposal system is prohibited.
§ 131-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-9
1:297
§ 131-9. Minimum setback and separation distances.
The minimum distances for location of the various component parts of a
community sewage disposal system shall comply with the following table:
MINIMUM DISTANCE
Component
Well or
Suction Line
(feet)1
Water Service
Line
(Pressure)
(feet) Watercourse1
Dwelling
(feet)
Property
Line
(feet)
Disposal
Field
(feet)
Building
sewer
50 52 25 — — —
Septic tank 50 10 25 10 10 —
Diversion
valve
50 10 25 10 10 —
Box
Disposal
field
1004 10 50 25 25 503
Seepage pit 150 10 100 25 25 50
Dry well 50 10 — 10 10 50
NOTES:
1 Exempting curtain drains which shall be constructed as defined in this article.
2 Under no circumstances shall a building sewer be placed less than five feet from a water service
line.
3 This distance applies to systems on adjacent lots and Class A and Class B primary and reserve areas.
4 This distance shall be increased to 150 feet from all Class B systems.
§ 131-10. Use of disposal fields.
The disposal fields shall be posted and trespassing thereon prohibited.
Access to disposal fields shall be strictly limited and trees shall be planted
thereabout in a manner approved by the administrative authority to prevent
vehicular traffic.
§ 131-11. Lots adjacent to lots with unsuitable soils.
In subdivisions comprised of both lots on which individual sewage disposal
systems (Article II) are to be constructed and lots which will be served by
a community sewage disposal system, the disposal fields for a community
sewage disposal system shall be sized to include the flow from any lot to
be served by an individual system which is adjacent to or across the street
from any lot to be served by the community system. In no event, however,
shall any lot served by an individual system be connected to the community
§ 131-9 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 131-11
1:298
system until it has been demonstrated to the administrative authority that
all steps to rebuild or rehabilitate the individual system have been taken
and have failed.
§ 131-12. Maintenance, operation, repair and replacement of
system by one legal entity.
A. Until title to all of the realty improvements to be serviced by the system
has been transferred from the developer, including the developer's
successors and assigns, to the respective owners who will be occupying
the realty improvements, a community sewage disposal system shall be
maintained, operated, repaired and replaced by the developer.
Thereafter, a homeowners' association comprised of the owners of each
realty improvement serviced by the system shall maintain, operate,
repair and replace the system. A separate homeowners' association
need not be formed for the sole purpose of maintaining, operating,
repairing and replacing the system in the event that the owners of each
realty improvement serviced by the systems are members of an open
space organization formed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43 or a
homeowners' association charged with other responsibilities. In the
event that said homeowners' association is comprised of owners whose
property is not serviced by the system, those owners whose property is
not so serviced shall not be responsible for maintenance, operation,
repairs and replacement of a community sewage disposal system. Said
association shall not be dissolved or dispose of the system by sale or
otherwise without the approval of the administrative authority.
B. The bylaws, membership assessments and dues and methods of
enforcement and collection of delinquent assessments and dues of the
homeowners' association insofar as they pertain to maintenance,
operation, repair and replacement of a community sewage disposal
system shall be submitted to and approved by the administrative
authority at such time as application is made for a permit to locate,
construct or alter a community sewage disposal system.
C. Declaration of covenants, conditions, restrictions and bylaws shall be
recorded in the Mercer County Clerk's Office in the book for the
recording of deeds, which recording shall be prior to the first
conveyance of any realty improvement to be serviced by a community
sewage disposal system.
D. The Township shall not be responsible for any dry sewer lines installed
as part of major subdivision approval and used for the transfer or
pumping of sewage to any community sewage disposal system. During
the period of such use, the legal entity responsible for maintenance,
operation, repair and replacement of the system under this section shall
remain fully responsible for the system.
§ 131-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-13
1:299
§ 131-13. Pressure distribution systems required.
Pressure distribution systems are required for all community sewage
disposal systems. Designs of these systems shall be in accordance with
the EPA Design Manual for On Site Wastewater Treatment and Disposal
Systems, Chapter 199, of N.J.A.C. 7:0.2.1 et seq., and Figure 1.130 In
addition, the systems shall comply with the following standards:
A. Absorption area. The total absorption area required shall be computed
from the daily wastewater flow and design loading rate. The required
absorption area equals the wastewater flow divided by the design
loading rate as below.
B. Design loading rate. The design loading rate for a site is based on the
permeability, as determined by hydraulic conductivity tests, and the soil
texture for the site of the pressure distribution system as follows:
Permeability
(cm/day) Soil Texture-USDA
Design Loading Rate
(gallons per square
foot per day)
Less than 2,000 No disposal
1,000 - 2,000 Grave, coarse to medium
sand
1.2
700 - 1,000 Fine sand, loamy sand 0.8
300 - 700 Sandy loam, loam 0.6
50 - 300 Loam, porous silt loam 0.45
2 - 50 Silty clay loams, clay
loams
0.20
2 Other textures No disposal
C. Soil horizon. Pressure distribution systems will not be permitted in
impervious formations unless the design calls for that horizon to be
removed and replaced by specified material with a permeability more
rapid than two centimeters per day and it is clearly demonstrated by
permeability testing that the removal of such a layer would allow
adequate hydraulic functioning.
D. Distance between filter stone and impervious formation. A minimum of
four feet must be maintained between the bottom of the filter stone in
the disposal bed and impervious formation or the highest seasonal high
water table.
E. Discharge of effluent into trenches, beds, disposal fields or mounds.
Pressure distribution systems shall discharge effluent into trenches,
beds or disposal fields unless the level of the water table is such that
trenches, beds or disposal fields may not be installed in accordance
130. Editor's Note: Figure 1 is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 131-13 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 131-13
1:300
with these provisions, and, in that event, effluent may be discharged
into mounds in accordance with section § 131-15. In no event, however,
shall installation of a mound be permitted in Class C soils or a floodplain
over a failing subsurface sewage disposal system or in a filled area
(removal of the fill material does not cause the site to become suitable).
F. Distribution pipes. Each pipe that is connected to an outlet of a
manifold shall be considered a separate distribution line. All
distribution lines shall be installed at the same elevation or the plans
and specifications shall provide for a design that ensures equal flow
throughout the system. Distribution lines shall be connected to the
manifold by tee's or 90 ells. The ends of distribution lines shall be
capped.
G. Specifications.
(1) Pressure distribution systems shall be constructed in accordance
with the following provisions:
(a) Minimum depth to top of distribution lines from finished grade:
nine inches.
(b) Minimum thickness for distribution lines: Sch 40 PVC.
(c) Minimum lines per field: two.
(d) Maximum slope of natural ground surface: 12%.
(e) Orifice diameter: 1/4 inch to 1/2 inch.
(f) Orifice spacing: 30 inches to 72 inches.
(g) Diameter of distribution line: Up to four inches.
(h) Horizontal spacing of distribution lines: 30 inches to 72 inches.
(2) The diameter of the distribution line may vary, depending upon the
length of the trenches or mound.
H. Manifold and manifold line. The size of the manifold shall be based upon
the number, length and discharge rate of the distribution lines. The
manifold pipe delivers effluent from the pump to the distribution
network. The manifold pipe shall be two inches to six inches in diameter
and unperforated. The manifold shall be sloped toward the pump
chamber to drain effluent back after dosing.
I. Dosing volume. The dosing volume shall be a minimum of 10 times the
volume of the laterals, but shall not exceed the daily disposal capacity
of the trenches or beds.
J. Dosing frequency. The dosing frequency shall be established by the
administrative authority on the basis of soil conductivity, but in no event
shall be less than two times per day or greater than four times per day.
§ 131-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-13
1:301
K. Pressure to be maintained in distribution lines. Two feet of head shall
be maintained in the pressure distribution system.
L. Friction loss. Friction loss for schedule 40 plastic pipe shall be
computed on the basis of C = 150.
M. Total head loss through the distribution system. Total design head loss
shall include an additional two feet of head. A system's head curve shall
be included as part of the design calculations.
N. Pump manufacturer's model number, size and pump performance curve
required. The pump manufacturer's model number, size and pump
performance curve shall be supplied to the administrative authority.
O. High water alarm system and pump chamber control system.
(1) The control system for the pump chamber shall consist of controls
for operating the pumps and an alarm system to detect
malfunctioning of a pump. Pump controls shall be capable of
alternating operation of the pumps. Pump controls shall allow
flexibility in adjusting the on/off depth.
(2) The size of the pump chamber shall be determined by the number
of realty improvements served and dosing frequency, but in no
event shall it be less than 1,000 gallons. A standard septic tank may
be used as a pump chamber. The pump chamber shall be
watertight.
(3) The use of pressure diaphragm switches in the pump chamber
control system is prohibited and mercury level control switches are
required. Adjustable weight switches consisting of a control
located above the water level and two weights attached to a single
cable which extends into the liquids are required.
(4) The alarm system shall consist of a bell and light, which shall be
located so that the same may immediately be seen or heard by the
legal entity responsible under § 131-12 for maintenance, operation,
repair and replacement of the system. The high water warning
switch shall be installed two inches above the depth set for the
"On" pump control. Alarm systems shall be installed on a separate
circuit from the electrical service with battery-powered standby,
which battery-powered standby shall be recharged by a battery
charger connected to commercial power or the emergency
generator referred to in Subsection P. Remote alarms are also
required and shall terminate at a central alarm company via
telephone lines maintained by the legal entity responsible under
§ 131-12 for maintenance, operation, repair and replacement of the
system.
P. Electrical connections and emergency generators. Electrical
connections shall be located outside the pump chamber. All wiring to
the pump chamber shall be installed in conduit. All electrical work shall
§ 131-13 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 131-13
1:302
§ 131-14. Pressure distribution systems which discharge effluent
into trenches, beds or disposal fields.
In addition to the requirements of § 131-13, the following standards shall
apply to pressure distribution systems which discharge effluent into
trenches, beds or disposal fields:
§ 131-15. Pressure distribution systems which discharge effluent
into mounds.
In addition to the requirements of § 131-13, the following standards shall
apply to pressure distribution systems which discharge effluent into
mounds:
be completed in accordance with the National Electrical Code. All
electrical components shall be Underwriters Laboratory labeled. An
emergency generator having an automatic transfer switch and sized
to handle peak power demands shall be provided. Buried full storage
capacity for the emergency generator shall be sufficient to provide
12 hours of pump operation. The generator, electrical panel/electrical
system, starting batteries and other generator controls shall be housed
in a weatherproof enclosure.
Q. Wash down water system. A nonpotable well shall be installed to
provide a guaranteed continuous safe yield of 15 gallons per minute.
The submersible well pump shall have a minimum capacity of 12 gallons
per minute 25 psi with a single phase 11 5/230 motor. All water service
piping shall be self-draining and freeze protected.
A. Aggregate. Aggregate shall be placed to a minimum depth of 18 inches
beneath the distribution pipe and to the level of four inches above the
pipe, spread evenly.
B. Inspection by authorized agent. The authorized agent shall inspect
pressure distributions which discharge effluent into trenches, beds or
disposal fields at commencement of the placing of the aggregate and
while the distribution piping is being installed. A pressure test of the
nonperforated sections of the system shall be performed in the
presence of the authorized agent at the time of inspection.
A. Depth to restrictive layers or bedrock. There shall be at least four feet
of unsaturated natural soil over restrictive layers or bedrock. Mounds
shall be constructed such that there is a minimum of four feet of
unsaturated soil between the gravel envelope and impervious
formations.
B. Depth to seasonally high groundwater. There shall be at least four feet
of unsaturated natural soil over seasonally high groundwater as
indicated by soil mottling. There shall be four feet of unsaturated soil
beneath the gravel envelope of the mound system.
C. Slope of existing terrain.
§ 131-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-15
1:303
(1) A mound shall not be installed on a slope which is greater than
12%. (See Table 1 of § 131-15E.)
(2) Location of mound on sloping sites. The mound shall be located so
that the longest dimension of the mound and the distribution lines
are perpendicular to the slope. The mound shall be placed upslope
and not at the base of a slope. If there is a complex slope (two
directions), the mound shall be situated so that the effluent is not
concentrated in one direction. Surface water runoff shall be
diverted around the mound.
D. Side slope for mounded systems. Side slopes for mounded systems must
be no greater than a three-to-one slope (horizontal to vertical).
E. Design. Mound systems shall be designed in accordance with the EPA
Design Manual for On Site Wastewater Treatment and Disposal
Systems. The disposal area shall be designed using the following
method for sizing:
(1) Determine soil texture using USDA Classification.
(2) Determine loading rate (GPD/feet).
(3) Determine vertical hydraulic conductivity (centimeters/day) (feet
below existing grade).
(4) Determine depth to seasonally high water table.
(5) Determine depth to bedrock or impermeable layers (feet).
(6) Determine existing grade (% slope).
(7) Determine design flow (GPD).
(8) Determine size absorption area (feet2).
(9) Calculate absorption area dimensions.
(a) Determine bed length (B).
(b) Bed width
(A)
= Absorption
Area
Bed
Length
(10) Calculate mound dimensions. (See Figure 2.)131
(a) Mound height:
[1] Fill depth (D) = 1 foot (minimum).
[2] Fill depth (E) = D + (slope x A).
131. Editor's Note: Figure 2 is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 131-15 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 131-15
1:304
[3] Bed depth (F)= 9 inches (minimum, as long as there are 2
inches above and 6 feet below lateral).
[4] Cap at edge of bed (G) = 1 foot (minimum).
[5] Cap at center of bed (H) = 1.5 feet (minimum).
(b) Mound perimeter:
[1] Downslope setback (I) = (E+F+G) x (slope) (slope
correction). (See Table 1.)
[2] Upslope setback (J) =(D+F+G) x (slope) (slope correction).
(See Table 1.)
[3] Sideslope setback (K)= (D+E) + F + H x (slope). 2
[4] Basal area required = (B) x (I + A).
TABLE 1
Downslope and Upslope Width Corrections for
Mounds on Sloping Sites
Slope Percent
Downslope
Correction
Factor
Upslope
Correction Factor
0 1.0 1.0
1 1.03 .97
2 1.06 .94
3 1.10 .915
4 1.14 .89
5 1.18 .875
6 1.22 .86
7 1.27 .83
8 1.32 .80
9 1.38 .785
10 1.44 .77
11 1.51 .75
12 1.57 .73
F. Mound materials.
(1) Fill material. The following types of fill material are required for
construction of a mounded system:
(a) Aggregate shall be 1 1/2 inches to two inches crushed stone or
washed gravel. Limestone or dolomite shall not be utilized. The
minimum thickness of the aggregate shall be four inches above
§ 131-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-15
1:305
§ 131-16. Alternate design.
and 18 inches below the laterals. The aggregate must not
extend more than three feet outward beyond the limit of the
laterals.
(b) Filler sand shall meet the specifications for select fill and shall
be emplaced below the aggregate.
(2) Clay cap/barrier. A minimum of six inches of clay shall be employed
for the entire clay cap of all mound systems. The administrative
authority shall determine the appropriate thickness of the clay cap/
barrier based upon the slope and particular edge of the mound on
which it is being installed.
(3) Topsoil. Topsoil shall be used to cover the mound to a depth not less
than six inches, and this shall be planted with a variety of grasses.
G. Construction.
(1) To avoid smearing of native soils and the possibility of settlement
after construction, site preparation must not be undertaken when
the ground is wet or frozen.
(2) The soil horizon upon which the select fill will be placed must be
plowed or disced perpendicular to the slope to achieve a good
transition zone between the filter material and the native soil and
to discourage lateral migration of the percolating effluent at this
interface.
(3) Plowing shall be to a depth exceeding six inches, but not exceeding
nine inches. Rototilling is prohibited.
H. Operation and maintenance. The pump chamber or siphon shall be kept
free of excess solids. Vegetal cover shall be maintained intact on the
mound and erosion prevented.
A. Where a system design other than that described in this article is
proposed, the applicant must submit the design to the administrative
authority and the Department concurrently. This proposal must be
accompanied by a written statement justifying such a design,
containing, as a minimum, the following information:
(1) The reasons for proposing the alternate design.
(2) Information regarding the proposed system's reliability and
capability to treat sewage wastes.
(3) Other such information relied upon by the applicant in proposing
the particular alternate design.
B. The Department of Environmental Protection and administration
authority request additional information relative to the above. The
§ 131-15 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 131-16
1:306
§ 131-17. Determination of soil characteristics.
Department and administrative authority shall approve or disapprove
with regard to the technical adequacy of the proposal and its impact
upon groundwaters and surface waters and shall notify the applicant.
A. Double ring infiltrometer test. Vertical hydraulic conductivity shall be
determined by the double ring infiltrometer test as performed by an
approved professional. When there are sufficient number of cobbles,
stones, gravel, etc., in the soil so that the infiltrometer rings cannot be
properly inserted, it will be necessary to perform other specific tests to
determine the soil suitability. The use of such tests shall first be
approved by the administrative authority or its authorized agent.
B. Required depth of permeability testing.
(1) Slowly permeable soils with or without high groundwater.
Permeability tests shall be conducted at a depth of 20 inches to 24
inches from existing grade. If a more slowly permeable horizon
exists at less than 20 inches to 24 inches, permeability tests shall
be conducted within that horizon which is the more or most
restrictive.
(2) Shallow permeable soils over creviced bedrock. Permeability tests
shall be conducted at a depth of 12 inches to 18 inches from
existing grade. If a more restrictive horizon exists within four feet,
permeability tests shall be conducted within that horizon.
(3) Permeable soils with high groundwater. Permeability tests shall be
conducted at a depth of 20 inches to 24 inches from existing grade.
If a more slowly permeable horizon exists at less than 20 inches to
24 inches, permeability tests shall be conducted within that
horizon.
C. Determination of seasonably high water table and test pit
requirements.
(1) The level of seasonally high water table shall be determined by the
highest level of soil mottles. This visual determination shall be
made by an approved professional in accordance with the following
requirements:
(a) A minimum of four test pits shall be made for each proposed
disposal area. All pits shall be at least 10 feet deep and one
such pit shall be on each side but immediately outside the
limits of the proposed disposal bed area. The face of each test
pit shall be exposed to direct sunlight during the visual
examination. The pits shall be dug within 72 hours of visual
examination by the approved professional.
(b) Identifying location.
§ 131-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-17
1:307
[1] The approximate seasonal high water table location may
be initially identified by inspection pipes or existing ponds
or pits around the perimeter of the proposed disposal area
or field examined during the wettest period of the year.
Final determination of the seasonal high water table shall
be made by an approved professional's visual and textural
examinations of the full depth of the test pits. Specific
attention shall be paid to the observation of low chroma
mottles. The presence of gray mottles with a chroma of
two or less is considered sufficient evidence of a seasonal
high water table in most soils. In certain soils, three
chroma mottles with values of six or seven are indicators
of wetness. Relic mottles which do not represent wetness
under current climate shall be identified, but will not be
used to determine the level of the seasonal high water
table.
[2] Soils that are wet but do not have low chroma mottles shall
be identified and are to be used in determination of the
seasonal high water table.
(c) All information shall be provided to the administrative
authority as a detailed soil log for each test pit on forms
supplied by the administrative authority.
(2) Color shall be referenced to the code system of the Munsell Color
Chart. Soils texture of all horizons within the ten-foot face shall be
referenced in accordance with the USDA Guide for Soil Textural
Classification (Figure 3).132
(3) If the soil logs differ significantly from each other, the authorized
agent reviewing the results may require additional test pits.
(4) The soils profile or sequence of horizons shall extend from the
natural ground surface down at least four feet below the bottom of
the proposed disposal bed, even if to a greater extent than the
above-stated ten-foot depth.
(5) The soil log shall classify the soil types as A, B and C and define the
natural drainage characteristics of each horizon using the
following terms:
(a) Very poorly drained.
(b) Poorly drained.
(c) Moderately well drained.
(d) Well drained.
(e) Somewhat excessively drained.
132. Editor's Note: Figure 3 is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 131-17 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 131-17
1:308
§ 131-18. Operation, cleaning and maintenance of the community
sewer disposal system.
(f) Excessively drained.
(6) The permeability tests of the soils within the proposed disposal bed
area shall be performed in the most restrictive layer below the
proposed depth of the disposal bed.
A. Operation and Maintenance Manual.
(1) Prior to initial operation of a community sewage disposal system,
the holder of the permit to locate, construct or alter shall prepare
an Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Manual, which shall be
acceptable to and approved by the administrative authority, its
authorized agent and the Township Engineer. The following
elements must be included therein:
(a) Subdivision site plan showing the collecting system.
(b) As-built construction drawings of the system.
(c) Flow diagrams and schematics.
(d) Wiring diagrams and schematics.
(e) Manufacturers' data on all components.
(f) Parts list.
(g) Description of start/stop, testing and operating procedures.
(h) Troubleshooting guide.
(i) Routine maintenance check list.
(j) Emergency telephone list.
(2) The holder shall file one copy of the manual with the authorized
agent and the Township Engineer. One copy shall be stored in the
weatherproof generator enclosure as provided in § 131-13P.
B. Management of operations.
(1) The person engaged to maintain, operate, repair and replace a
community sewage disposal system or designated operator, as
described in § 131-19E, shall be a licensed treatment plant
operator, Grade S-3 or higher.
(2) The name of the designated operator as described in § 131-19E
shall be provided to the administrative authority, Township
Engineer and Police Department. This information shall be kept
current, and changes in the operator shall be made by contract
amendment. The operator shall be on-call 24 hours per day.
Alternate or backup operators who are familiar with the system
§ 131-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-18
1:309
shall be designated so that emergency service will always be
available.
(3) The designated operator shall be responsible for the following:
(a) Operation of the system.
(b) Compilation of accurate operational and maintenance records.
(c) Communication with and education of the holder of the permit
to operate regarding potential problems with operation and
maintenance.
(d) Assistance with budget preparation.
(e) Awareness of safety hazards connected with wastewater.
(4) The operator shall be available to discuss system operation with the
holder of the permit, Township officials or other authorized
persons. The operator shall also keep informed of new and
improved operating and maintenance practices, including
participation in adult school or extension courses when available.
Such attendance shall be reported to the administrative authority.
C. Emptying and cleaning of subsurface sewage disposal system.
(1) General. Only equipment approved for this purpose shall be used in
cleaning facilities used for the reception or storage of sanitary
wastes.
(a) Mobile tanks shall be securely mounted on trucks and shall be
watertight and provided with a leakproof cover.
(b) Mobile tank venting shall be provided with a vent constructed
in a manner that will permit the escape of gases but not liquid
contained therein.
(c) Pumps shall be maintained in a condition that will prevent
leakage of sewage.
(d) Hose. Only suction or pressure hose in good repair shall be
used.
(2) Operation. The operation shall be so conducted that no waste
material will be deposited on the ground adjacent to the structure
being cleaned. If any spillage occurs, it shall be removed and the
affected area shall be treated with lime.
(3) Disposal.
(a) Contents resulting from the emptying and cleaning of various
elements of the subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be
conveyed in appropriate mobile tanks and disposed of only in a
manner approved by the administrative authority.
§ 131-18 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 131-18
1:310
(b) One of the following methods of disposal shall be used by the
collector:
[1] A sewage treatment plant having adequate capacity to
treat such wastes as approved by the Department.
[2] A landfill operating in compliance with state regulations
and approved for sewage disposal.
[3] Any other method of disposal approved by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
D. Operation of the pump station, collection system and trench or mound
disposal system.
(1) Pumping station. The pumping system is automatic, but its
operation is dependent upon the surveillance and other manual
action of the designated operator. The operator shall perform the
following duties at the indicated intervals and record the data on a
log as described in Subsection F:
(a) On a weekly basis. Inspect wet well, clean pump screens,
record electric meter readings, check operation of the controls
of the pumps and alarms and wash down as required, throw
main switch and start generator motor, check controls and
operation for approximately 30 minutes - periodic exercise
under load for 15 minutes is mandatory and inspect valves in
the pump station and the disposal fields. In season, mow grass
and trim shrubbery.
(b) On a monthly basis. As part of preventative maintenance, parts
shall be inspected and replaced if necessary.
(c) On a quarterly basis. Test a water sample from each
monitoring well for water level, fecal coliform, nitrates and
chlorides. The results shall be recorded in the log. Any sample
which exceeds the limits indicated in the State of New Jersey's
Surface and Ground Water Standards shall be immediately
reported to the Township.
(d) On an annual basis. Check the capability of each pump
(discharge capacity under 150% of operating pressure).
(2) Emergency operations and malfunctions.
(a) In the event of an operational failure at the pump station, an
alarm, visible and audible at the station, will be transmitted to
a central alarm company, who in turn will notify by telephone
the designated operator and the authorized agent, if during
regular business hours, otherwise no later than the next
business day. The operator shall then visit the site, take
corrective action and record such action in the log book.
§ 131-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-18
1:311
(b) In case of a power failure, an alarm will be activated as
described above and the motor generator will start
automatically if required. The operator shall thereafter visit
the site and check the engine gauges to make sure they are
within the limits identified in the manufacturer's manual.
E. Maintenance of the pumping system. The wet well shall be periodically
cleaned and the solids removed regularly and placed into the
community septic tank for scheduled removal by a licensed septage
hauler.
(1) Community septic tanks. The solids shall be measured, recorded
and reported monthly and removed when the depth equals 1/6 of
the depth of the community septic tank.
(2) Individual lot septic tanks. These tanks shall be examined,
measured, recorded and reported yearly. They shall be cleaned
when the solids or scum is equal to 1/3 the depth of the septic tank.
(3) Trench disposal system. The systems shall be alternated on a yearly
basis by means of a diversion valve. If necessary and when
approved by the administrative authority, the application of
oxidizing agents may be used. Handling of such agents is limited to
trained individuals.
(4) Valves. Valves shall be inspected periodically for proper position
(open or closed), leaks and damage. All valves should be exercised
at least twice a year to detect inoperability.
F. Records.
(1) Inventory. A data card shall be maintained for each piece of
equipment, which card shall include the following:
(a) Date of purchase.
(b) Date when placed in service.
(c) Date when taken from service, repaired or discarded.
(d) Manufacturer's name, address and telephone number.
(e) Shop drawings, manufacturer's literature and, if existing,
where filed.
(f) Operational data. The designated operator shall maintain
operational records, to be filed with and in a form acceptable to
the administrative authority on a quarterly basis.
(g) Maintenance records. The maintenance and monthly
inspection log shall be kept by the operator and submitted
each year to the administrative authority.
§ 131-18 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 131-18
1:312
§ 131-19. Administration.
(h) Financial records. Documentation of the systems' finances
shall be kept in a form acceptable to the administrative
authority and homeowners' association.
(i) Records of accidents, injuries or other emergencies. In the
event of an accident involving personnel, serious pollution
resulting from an accident or malfunction of the system and
any other emergency situations, a detailed written report
explaining the nature and results of such occurrence shall be
submitted to the administrative authority. A follow-up report
demonstrating that corrective and/or preventative measures
and/or equipment have been initiated or installed shall be
submitted within 30 days thereafter.
A. Permit to locate, construct or alter community sewage disposal system.
Community sewage disposal systems shall not be located, constructed
or altered until the administrative authority has reviewed the proposed
system and caused the authorized agent to issue a permit to locate,
construct or alter a community sewage disposal system, which permit
shall precede the issuance of a building permit. The application for a
permit to locate, construct or alter a community sewage disposal
system shall be filed with the authorized agent, made on forms supplied
by the administrative authority or authorized agent, and shall, as a
minimum, include the following:
(1) A key map locating the property to be served, a sketch map
showing the property to be served, the location of the sewerage
facilities proposed, the location of any source of potable water
supply and any areas designed to provide drainage as defined in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, on the same or adjoining premises.
(2) The number of bedrooms, including expansion attics for singlefamily
dwellings and the estimated sewage flow for buildings other
than a single-family dwelling.
(3) A description of the type of sewerage facilities proposed.
(4) Results of the soil hydraulic conductivity tests performed in
accordance with this article and the soil logs.
(5) Depth to seasonally high groundwater table at the proposed
disposal field.
(6) Lot corners, proposed disposal field sites and subsoil location,
staked and so identified.
(7) The bylaws, membership assessments and dues and methods of
enforcement and collection of delinquent assessments and dues of
the homeowners' association responsible for maintenance,
operation, repair and replacement of the system.
§ 131-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-19
1:313
(a) The bylaws shall include the following management
responsibilities:
[1] Efficient system operation.
[2] Operational and management records.
[3] Staff requirements, job descriptions and organizational
charts.
[4] Safety equipment and proper operating tools.
[5] Operator training program.
[6] Inspection of the system.
[7] Budgets and reports.
[8] Public relations.
(b) The bylaws shall also contain the amount and method of
payment for the individual homeowners' share of maintenance
and operation of the system, including the community septic
tank as well as the individual's own septic tank. In addition, the
bylaws shall delineate acceptable uses of the disposal fields,
including reserved fields, which uses expressly exclude any
active recreation such as ball fields or any other permanent
recreational purpose.
B. Consideration of application to locate, construct or alter community
sewage disposal system. The application for a permit to locate,
construct or alter a community sewage disposal system shall first be
reviewed by the authorized agent and thereafter considered by the
administrative authority. At least seven days' notice of the date on
which the administrative authority will consider the application shall be
afforded the applicant. If after review of the application the
administrative authority determines to approve the application, the
authorized agent shall issue a permit to locate, construct or alter a
community sewage disposal system to the applicant, at which time
location, construction or alteration of the system may begin.
C. Applications filed with Department. Copies of all applications for
permits to locate, construct or alter community sewage disposal
systems and accompanying data shall be filed with or mailed to the
Department on the date they are filed with the administrative authority.
D. Site inspections. Following issuance of the permit to locate, construct
or alter a community sewage disposal system, the administrative
authority or its authorized agent shall make sufficient inspections
during installation of any community sewage disposal system to
determine soil characteristics and that the system has been installed in
accordance with the provisions of this article. Inspections must be
requested at least 24 hours in advance. Community sewage disposal
§ 131-19 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 131-19
1:314
systems shall not be covered until inspected by the administrative
authority or its agent. Any part of the disposal system which is covered
without permission shall be uncovered upon the order of the
administrative authority or its authorized agent. A site inspection shall
be made:
(1) Upon completion of excavation(s) and prior to placement of
filtering material in each disposal trench or bed.
(2) After the filter material has been placed and the distribution line(s)
has been set, but not covered.
(3) During the connection of the building sewer, distribution line(s)
and other pipe to the distribution box(es).
(4) Upon completion of installation.
E. Permit to operate.
(1) No community sewage disposal system shall be operated until a
permit to operate or renewal thereof has been issued by the
authorized agent to the developer and/or homeowners' association,
as the case may be. The homeowners' association which is to
become responsible for maintenance, operation repair and
replacement of the system shall not become responsible for
maintenance, operation, repair or replacement until 100% of the
realty improvements to be serviced by the community system have
been conveyed, at which time the homeowners' association shall
apply for a permit to operate.
(2) Application on forms supplied by the authorized agent for a permit
to operate shall be made following completion of installation of the
system as approved by the administrative authority and the
required site inspections. The term of a permit to operate shall be
one year. A permit to operate shall not be issued until the developer
has posted a two-year maintenance bond, the form and amount of
which shall be approved by the administrative authority, with the
Township, and the developer has contracted with a person duly
qualified under this article to maintain, operate, repair and replace
community sewage disposal systems (the designated operator) for
the one-year term the permit to operate is sought. A true copy of
said contract shall be supplied to the authorized agent.
(3) At such time as the homeowners' association makes application for
a permit to operate, it shall post a two-year maintenance bond, the
form and amount of which shall be approved by the administrative
authority, with the Township, and shall contract with a person duly
qualified under this article to maintain, operate, repair and replace
community sewage disposal systems (the designated operator) for
the one-year term the permit to operate is sought. A true copy of
the contract shall be supplied to the authorized agent. The holder
of a permit to operate shall also maintain general liability insurance
§ 131-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-19
1:315
for damages resulting from bodily injury, including death, and
property damage which may arise out of operation and/or
maintenance of the system.
F. Renewal of permit to operate. The permit to operate shall be renewed
on an annual basis by the authorized agent upon payment of the
renewal fee by the entity responsible for maintenance under Subsection
E above, filing of a maintenance bond and maintenance contract as set
forth in Subsection E above, and provided that the system is not
malfunctioning or otherwise being operated in violation of this article.
G. Denial of permit to operate or renewal thereof. In the event that a
permit to operate or renewal thereof is denied by the authorized agent,
a hearing shall be held thereon before the administrative authority
within 30 days after request therefor is made by the applicant. At the
conclusion of said hearing, the administrative authority shall affirm,
alter or reverse the decision of the authorized agent.
H. Revised plans and bylaws.
(1) Revision of plans of proposed community sewage disposal systems
shall be approved only with the written consent of the
administrative authority or its authorized agent. Such revision may
be deemed necessary if conditions found prior to or during
installation warrant such change in order to obtain compliance
with the provisions of this article.
(2) The bylaws, membership assessments and dues and methods of
enforcement and collection of delinquent assessments and dues of
the homeowners' association insofar as they pertain to
maintenance, operation, repair and replacement of the system shall
not be amended or revised without approval of the administrative
authority.
I. Existing community sewage disposal systems. The provisions of this
article shall not be applied to community sewage disposal systems in
existence at the time of its adoption or prior to subsequent amendment
or revision of its sections. However, any replacement, repair, extension
or alteration of any portion of any unit or units of such system shall be
made in compliance with the provisions of this article.
J. Stop-work orders. The administrative authority or its authorized agent
may order all further work in or about any community sewage disposal
system which is being installed in violation of this article to be stopped
forthwith, except such work as shall be necessary to correct such
violation and, thereafter, the work continued without any violation of
any of the provisions of the article, and after issuance of any such order
and the service of a copy thereof upon any person connected with or
working in and about the installation of any such disposal system or any
part thereof, no further work shall be done thereon except as aforesaid.
§ 131-19 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 131-19
1:316
§ 131-20. Fees and charges.
See Chapter 82, Fees, § 82-12F.
§ 131-21. Malfunctions; violations and penalties.
K. Interpretation of provisions. These rules, regulations and standards
shall be considered the minimum requirements for the protection of the
public health, safety and welfare of the residents of West Windsor
Township. Any action taken by the Division of Health or its agents under
the terms of this article shall give primary consideration to the abovementioned
matters.
L. Variances to article provisions. Any request for deviation from the rules,
regulations and standards of this article must be made at least 14 days
prior to consideration by the administrative authority. Such variances
must be heard at a regular public meeting attended by at least five
administrative authority members. The administrative authority must
state its reasons for approval or denial of said variance request in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
A. If a community sewage disposal system is not maintained, operated,
emptied, inspected or cleaned in accordance with this article or a
malfunction should occur, the authorized agent shall give written notice
to the holder of the permit to operate describing the deficiencies and
ordering it to perform the necessary repairs, maintenance,
modification, replacement, cleaning, emptying, pumping or draining
within seven days, except in the event of an emergency or imminent
health hazard, in which event the authorized agent shall order the
holder of the permit to operate to perform the necessary work
immediately. The notice shall also contain a provision that failure to
correct the deficiencies may result in revocation of the permit to
operate and/or a correction of the deficiencies by the administrative
authority or authorized agent, the cost of which shall be assessed pro
rata against each realty improvement serviced by the system and
become a lien and tax on said properties, to be collected and enforced
in the same manner as real property taxes. A copy of said notice shall
also be mailed to the record owner of each realty improvement serviced
by the system.
B. If the deficiencies are of an emergent nature or represent an imminent
health hazard and the holder of the permit to operate fails to
immediately perform the necessary work, the administrative authority
or authorized agent may, without further notice, revoke the permit to
operate and/or cause the deficiencies to be corrected, the entire cost of
which, including administration expenses, as certified by the authorized
agent to Township Council, shall be paid by the holder of the permit to
operate within seven days of submission of a bill to the holder of the
permit to operate by the Township Council and, if not so paid,
thereafter assessed pro rata against each realty improvement serviced
§ 131-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-21
1:317
by the system as a lien and tax on those properties, to be collected and
enforced in the same manner as real property taxes.
C. If deficiencies of a nonemergent nature are not corrected within seven
days or any permitted extension thereof, the administrative authority or
authorized agent may without further notice revoke the permit to
operate and/or, upon seven days' notice to the holder of the permit to
operate and record owners of the realty improvements serviced by the
system of a hearing thereon, cause the deficiencies to be corrected, the
entire cost of which, including administrative expenses, as certified by
the authorized agent to the Township Council, shall be paid by the
holder of the permit to operate within seven days of submission of a bill
to the holder of the permit to operate by the Township Council and, if
not paid, thereafter assessed pro rata against each realty improvement
serviced by the system as a lien and tax on those properties, to be
collected and enforced in the same manner as real property taxes.
§ 131-21 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 131-21
1:318
ARTICLE II
Individual Systems
[Adopted by the Board of Health 12-20-1989 by Ord. No. BH 89-2
(Ch. BH:III of the Revised General Ordinances); readopted by the
Township Council 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
§ 131-22. Adoption of standards by reference.
There is hereby adopted by reference the code and regulations set forth
in N.J.A.C. 7:9A, Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal
Systems, except as hereinafter deleted, modified, changed or amended.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq., the aforesaid code and regulations,
which are printed in book form, are incorporated herein, and three copies
of said code, as amended, shall be placed on file in the office of the Health
Officer of the Township of West Windsor. The following sections of N.J.A.C.
7:9A are hereby amended as permitted by N.J.A.C. 7:9A-3.1.
§ 131-23. Amendments to the standards for individual subsurface
sewage disposal systems.133
7:9A-3.4(a)1 Contamination of nearby wells, storm drains, or surface
water bodies...
7:9A-3.4(a)5 The system requires pumping three times in any 12
consecutive month period from the date of first use.
7:9A-3.4(b)3 The administrative authority shall be notified in advance of
all pumping dates. Assurance must be given that the holding tank will be
emptied and the contents disposed of in a manner which complies with
all applicable local, state and federal ordinances, statutes and regulations.
As a means of confirmation, the owner of the system shall submit to the
administrative authority, within 24 hours, written evidence of the date and
quantity of sewage, the name of the facility to which the sewage is taken,
as well as any other information which is requested by the administrative
authority.
7:9A-3.5(c)2.i Horizontal and vertical location of all components of the
proposed system.
7:9A-3.5(c) 2.iii Locations of existing and proposed buildings, roadways,
storm sewers, subsurface drains, wells, ...
7:9A-3.5(c) 2.iv Existing and finished grade topography ([two] one foot
contour...)
7:9A-3.5(c) 2.v Horizontal and vertical location...
7:9A-3.5(c) 2.xii Locations of existing and proposed trees and shrubbery
whose roots may cause clogging of any part of the system.
133. Editor's Note: This section is a direct amendment of the code and regulations set forth in
N.J.A.C. 7:9A, Standards For Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems. Matter
enclosed in brackets [thus] is not enacted and is intended to be omitted in the law. Matter
underscored thus is new matter.
§ 131-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-23
1:319
7:9A-3.5(c) 2.xiii Location of existing and proposed driveways, decks,
patios, accessory buildings, in ground and above ground pools.
7:9A-3.6(a) ...The administrative authority or its authorized agent [may]
shall require a maximum of [15] 30 business days prior [to] written notice
for the purpose of witnessing of soil evaluation or testing procedures. All
data acquired by field testing methods shall be signed by the authorized
agent or designee to certify on-site test witnessing.
7.9A-3.6(b) ...Failure of the administrative authority or its authorized
agent to be present when [15] 30 business days prior written notice
has been given shall not be construed to be a waiver of the witnessing
requirements. It shall be incumbent upon the applicant to provide same
day telephone notification to the authorized agent prior to commencement
of testing in the event of the authorized agent's failure to be present.
7:9A-3.7(d) "As built" septic system plans shall be submitted prior to the
issuance of a certificate of compliance by the administrative authority or
its authorized agent. Location information provided on the as-built plan
shall be certified by the signature and seal of a New Jersey Licensed Land
Surveyor. As-built septic system design specifications shall be certified by
the signature and seal of New Jersey Licensed Professional Engineer.
7:9A-3.13(a) Certificate of Compliance.
Prior to the issuance of a certificate of compliance, the administrative
authority or its authorized agent shall make sufficient inspections during
the course of construction and installation or alteration of the individual
subsurface sewage disposal system to determine that the system has been
located, constructed and installed or altered in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and the approved engineering design. An onsite
inspection must be made.
(i) Upon completion of excavation(s) and prior to placement of filter
material in each disposal trench or bed.
(ii) During placement and consolidation of sand filter materials if and
when required.
(iii) After the filter stone materials have been placed and the distributions
have been laid.
(iv) After the filter stone, salt hay or geotextile material has been placed
over the distribution lines.
(v) After the connection of the building sewer to the septic tank, and the
connecting pipe and laterals to the distribution box. All joints shall be
cured prior to inspection.
(vi) After filling of the septic tank and distribution box with clean water to
test for equal distribution and water-tightness.
Inspections must be requested at least 24 (twenty four) hours in advance.
7:9A-3.15(a) 7 As-built plans and certifications submitted to the
administrative authority.
§ 131-23 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 131-23
1:320
7:9A-3.18 Additional requirements for certification of sewerage facilities
serving subdivisions involving more than [10] 2 realty improvements.
7:9A-3.18(a) ...Where more than [10] 2 realty improvements are involved,
additional information is required as set forth in (c) below.
7:9A-3.18(c) For certifications pursuant to N.J.S.A. 58-11-25, of sewerage
facilities proposed to serve subdivisions consisting of more than [10] 2
realty improvements, the following information is required in addition to
the information required by N.J.A.C. 7:9A-3.5(c).
7:9A-3.18(h) [Delete as written]
In cases where preliminary Planning Board approval is sought, a minimum
of one soil log and one percolation [or permeability] test shall be performed
and witnessed pursuant to 7:9A-3.6(a) in the amount of not less than one
set per acre or one set per lot, whichever parameter will result in the
greater number of tests performed. Additionally, at least one soil log shall
be performed for every soil series present within the area of the subdivision
as shown on Soil Conservation Survey Maps.
7:9A-4.4(a) The disposal field [or seepage pit] shall not be located in an
area where the slope is greater than 25%.
7:9A-4.4(b) Where the slope is greater than 10%, no disposal field [or
seepage pit] shall be placed less than 50 feet up slope of any bedrock
outcrop where signs of groundwater seepage can be detected.
7:9A-4.6(f) No part of a subsurface sewage disposal system shall be
constructed within the New Jersey Flood Hazard Area Design Flood
(NJFHADF) Limit (one-hundred-year flood + 25%).
7:9A-4.6(j) The administrative authority may in its judgment limit the use
of areas which it believes may be subject to surface flooding or where
seasonally high groundwater may interfere with the satisfactory treatment
and disposal through percolation of sewage.
7.9A-4.8 Area Reserved for Sewage Disposal.
(a) The area used for sewage disposal... or interfere with system
maintenance. The disposal field(s), including reserve fields, shall not
be used for any purpose which would have a deleterious effect on
the system or prevent immediate availability in the case of reserve
areas. Vegetative planting upon both primary and reserve disposal
areas shall be limited to grass unless otherwise specified by the
administrative authority.
(b) Proposed lots sized less than 32, 670 S.F., ( 3/4 of an acre), which
are to be served by an individual subsurface sewage disposal system
shall provide a reserve area for an alternate disposal system. The
reserve area shall be sized according to the maximum percolation or
permeability rate obtained within the reserve area during onsite soil
testing.
Testing of reserve areas shall comply with the provisions of N.J.A.C.
7:9A-5.1 et seq.
§ 131-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-23
1:321
Construction of an alternate disposal system within the reserve area shall
commence in the event of a malfunction of the primary disposal system as
defined in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-3.4.
The reserve area may be in the front, rear or side yard and shall comply
with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:9A-4.3.134 The reserve area may occupy the
area between disposal trenches provided the minimum spacing between
trenches (sidewall to sidewall) is increased from six feet to 10 feet and the
maximum proposed trench width is two feet.
Lots on which a disposal bed system is utilized shall provide a reserve
disposal area which is located a minimum of 10 feet away from the primary
disposal bed.
(c) In all cases where percolation rate in excess of 25 minutes per
inch is obtained within soil material proposed to remain in place
below the disposal field a reserve disposal area shall be required. The
reserve area shall be sized according to the maximum percolation rate
obtained within the reserve area.
Testing reserve areas shall comply with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.1
et seq.
Construction of an alternate disposal system within the reserve area shall
commence in the event of a malfunction of the primary disposal system as
defined in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-3.4. The reserve area may occupy the area between
disposal trenches provided the minimum spacing between trenches
(sidewall to sidewall) is increased from six feet to 10 feet and the maximum
proposed trench width is 2 feet.
Lots on which a disposal bed system is utilized shall provide a reserve
disposal area which is located a minimum of 10 feet away from the primary
disposal bed.
7:9A-5.1(a) When a site ... This determination shall be made based upon
soil profile characteristics observed in soil profile pits [and borings] as
prescribed in N.J.A.C. 7:9A 5.2....
7:9A-5.2 Requirements for soil profile pits [and borings]
7:9A-5.2(a) Soil profile pits shall be excavated...present at the site. [Partial
substitution for soil profile pits may be made using soil borings as outlined
in (b) below.]
7:9A-5.2(b) A minimum of two profile pits are required for each disposal
field. [A minimum of three soil borings may be performed in lieu of the
second profile pit, provided that the soil horizons and substrata observed in
the borings are not significantly different from those observed in the first
profile pit.]
7:9A-5.2(c) The location of soil profile pits [and borings] for disposal fields
shall be as follows:135...
134. Editor's Note: See Minimum Required Separation Distance table located at the end of this
chapter.
135. Editor's Note: See Figure 1, Location of Soil Profile Pits, located at the end of this chapter.
§ 131-23 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 131-23
1:322
7:9A-5.2(c).3. [When soil borings are substituted for the second profile pit
... no further than 15 feet beyond the boundaries of the disposal field.]
Reserved
7:9A-5.2(d) [When a seepage pit(s) is proposed ... no further than 15 feet
from the seepage pit.] Reserved
7:9A-5.2(e).l. Profile pits shall be excavated [if possible] to a minimum
depth of [10] 13 feet below the existing ground surface or to solid bedrock
where encountered. [If the profile pit becomes unstable due to lack of soil
cohesion or the presence of groundwater or both the pit may be terminated
... and soil evaluation below the depth of the pit may be carried out by
means of three or more soil borings, performed as prescribed in (f) below.]
7:9A-5.2(e).2. [When a seepage pit is proposed, the profile pit...beyond the
range of the excavating equipment.]
7:9A-5.2(e).3. It is recommended ... may be accomplished by examination
of samples removed by excavating equipment [or by examination of three
or more borings, performed as prescribed in (f) below.]
7:9A-5.2(f) Reserved [Soil borings shall be performed as follows:]
[1. Soil borings shall be...or to solid bedrock where encountered]
[2. Soil borings shall be made ... and does not slump.]
7:9A-5.2(g) In soil profile pits [and borings] the following characteristics
of each recognizable soil horizon ... shall be determined.
7:9A-5.3(a) A soil log shall be prepared for each soil profile pit [or soil
boring].
7:9A-5.6(a).3. When doubt exists as to whether a horizon or substratum
should be considered excessively coarse, the administrative authority. Soil
horizons or substrata which are tested shall be considered excessively
coarse when the measured permeability is faster than 20 inches per hour
or the measured percolation rate is faster than three minutes per inch.
[Alternatively, soil texture may be verified by textural analysis as
prescribed in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.3]. In all cases, percolation tests shall be
performed to determine if excessively coarse soil horizons are present.
Permeability testing shall be performed if and when directed by the
administrative authority.
7:9A-5.7(b) When doubt exists as to whether a soil horizon... The soil
horizon or substratum shall be considered to be hydraulically restrictive if
the measured permeability is slower than [0.2] 0.6 inches per hour or the
percolation rate is slower than [60] 40 minutes per inch.
7:9A-5.8(b).2. Where mottling is not observed, the seasonally high water
table shall be determined based upon [either of] the following method[s].
7:9A-5.8(b)2.ii [During other times of the year, the depth to the seasonally
high water table may be obtained from the Soil Conservation Service
County Soil Survey Report provided...the highest elevation of the range
shall be used as the seasonal high water table.] Reserved.
§ 131-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-23
1:323
7:9A-6.1(a) The design permeability is the basis for determining the
minimum required area... When a soil replacement, mound or mounded
soil replacement installation is proposed, a minimum of one percolation
test shall be conducted within the fill material after it has been emplaced
and compacted, [or a tube permeameter test shall be conducted using
samples of the fill material... In lieu of this, the permeability class rating
method may be used to determine whether the fill material used meets the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:9A-10.1(f)4]
The administrative authority shall require in all cases that at least four
satisfactory percolation tests be performed within the native soil proposed
for sewage disposal. At the discretion of the administrative authority,
additional permeability testing shall be performed as confirmation of
suitability indicated by percolation test results.
7:9A-6.1(c) The type of tests which may be used shall be determined based
upon the purpose of the test and the soil conditions at the depth of the test
as shown in Table 6.1 below.
Table 6.1 Type of Test
Test
Options:
1 — Tube Permeameter Test
2 — [Soil Permeability Class Rating Testt] reserved
3 — Percolation Test Required in all cases
4 — Basin Flooding Test
5 — [Pit-bailing Test] reserved
6 — [Piezometer Test] reserved
Purpose of Test and Soil Conditions at Depth of Test
Acceptable Test Options
I. Determination of Design Permeability at Level of Infiltration
(Conventional Disposal Field), Determination of Design Permeability at
Bottom of Excavation (Soil Replacement, Mound or Mounded Soil
Replacement) Within the Native Soil, Identification of Hydraulically
Restrictive or Excessively Coarse Horizons or Substrata Above the Water
Table
A. Sands and loamy sands with single grain structure...1, [2] or 3
B. Other Soil Textures
1. Undisturbed sample can be taken...1, [2] or 3.
2. Undisturbed sample cannot be taken...[2 or] 3.
II. Identification of Massive Rock Substrata
Above the Water Table....... 4
§ 131-23 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 131-23
1:324
III. Identification of Hydraulically Restrictive Horizons or Substrata and
Massive Rock Substrata and Design Permeability at Bottom of Excavation
Within the Native Soil (Soil Replacement Mound and Mounded Soil
Replacement)
Below the Water Table NONE ACCEPTABLE
IV. [Design of Seepage Pits.... 3]
Reserved
[t] [This test shall not be used in soil horizons or substrata containing
coarse fragments in excess of 50% by volume or 75% by weight]
7:9A-6.1(d) The number and location of permeability tests required shall
be as follows:
1. When the tube permeameter [or the soil permeability class rating]
test [are] is used to [determine] confirm percolation test [the] design
permeability data at the level of infiltration, or the bottom of excavation
for soil replacement, mound and mounded soil replacement, a
minimum of [one] four tests shall be conducted within each disposal
field and each test shall consist of a minimum of [two] four replicates
per test where the variability of test results exceeds the limits allowed
in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.2(i)2, or where the results of soil profile pits [or
borings], made as prescribed in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.2 indicate the presence
of more than one soil type within the area of the disposal field. When
soil tests taken ... the most restrictive conditions found within the area
of the disposal field.
2. When the basin flooding test, [the pit bailing test or the Piezometer test
are] is required for identification of limiting zones, a minimum of [one]
two tests shall be required rwithin and no further than 15 feet beyond
ft boundaries of each disposal field. The administrative authority may
require more than [one] two tests where conditions vary from one part
of the disposal field to another.
3. In cases where a [pit bailing or] basin flooding test or part of a test
pit has been excavated within the boundaries of the proposed disposal
trench or bed... in the soil below the disposal bed or trench.
7:9A-6.1(e)1. When the percolation test is used ... a minimum number of
percolation tests based upon the size of the proposed disposal field as
follows:
Size of Disposal Field
(square feet) Minimum Number of Tests
Less than 1500 [2] 4
1500 - 3000 [3] 5
3000 - 4000 [4] 6
4000 - 6000 [5] 7
§ 131-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-23
1:325
7:9A-6.1(e)2. When the accuracy of a percolation test is questioned... The
[average] most restrictive of the results obtained from replicate tests at a
given location within the disposal field shall be used for design purposes or
for determination of soil suitability of that location.
7:9A-6.1(e)4. [When a percolation test is abandoned due to lack of
measurable percolation, this test may be disregarded provided ...
replicates taken at that location yield measurable percolation rates.]
When a percolation test is abandoned due to lack of measurable
percolation, the horizontal and vertical location of said test shall be
considered unsuitable for on site sewage disposal.
7:9A-6.1(e)7. [When a seepage pit is proposed ... the presence of a limiting
zone is in question] Reserved.
7:9A-6.1(g) When the results of a permeability test or a percolation test...
When the tube permeameter test [or the soil permeability class rating
method] is used ... for verification of soil permeability. All cost associated
with such verification shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant. In
cases...of soil suitability.
7:9A-6.2(c) When the tube permeameter test is used, a minimum of [two]
four tests each consisting of [two] four replicate samples shall be taken
and the procedures outlined in this section shall be followed... It is
recommended that more than [two] four replicate samples be taken to
avoid the necessity of resampling...
7:9A-6.2(j)2. When the purpose of the test is to identify a hydraulically
restrictive horizon or substratum above the water table, the horizon or
substratum in question shall be considered hydraulically restrictive if the
[average] slowest permeability of the replicate samples tested falls within
soil permeability class K0 or K1 as defined in (i) 1 above.
7:9A-6.2(j)3. When the purpose of the test is to identify an excessively
coarse horizon or substratum above the water table, the horizon or
substratum in question shall be considered excessively coarse if the
[average] fastest permeability of the replicate samples tested falls within
permeability Class K5 as defined in (i) 1 above.
7:9A.6.2(K)2 When the purpose of the test is to identify a hydraulically
restrictive horizon or substratum above the water table, the horizon or
substratum in question shall be considered hydraulically restrictive if the
slowest permeability of the replicate samples tested falls within soil
permeability class K0 or K1 as defined in (i) 1 above.
7:9A-6.3 [Soil Permeability Class Rating] reserved
7:9A-6.4(d) In sandy textured soils, including sands [,] and loamy sands,
[and sandy loams] where a rapid percolation rate is anticipated... If this
time is less than [60] 40 minutes, the test procedure may begin as
prescribed in (e) below without further pre-soaking. If water remains in the
test hole after [60] 40 minutes, the hole must be pre-soaked as prescribed
in (c) above before proceeding with the test.
§ 131-23 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 131-23
1:326
7:9A-6.4(e)1. Step One. If water remains.... the test shall be terminated and
the percolation rate shall be reported as greater than [60] 40 minutes per
inch.... If no water remains ... two tenths of an inch.
7:9A-6.4(f)1. When the purpose of the test is to determine the design
permeability... If any of the measured percolation rates are slower than [60]
40 minutes per inch or faster than three minutes per inch the application
shall not be approved. [A percolation rate may be the result of a single
percolation test or the average of several replicate tests as allowed in
N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.1 (e)2.]
7:9A-6.4(f)2. When the result of [the] a test[(s)] is [an average] a
percolation rate slower than [60] 40 minutes per inch, the horizon or
substratum in question shall be considered hydraulically restrictive.
7:9A-6.4(f)3. When the result of [the] a test[(s)] is [an average] a
percolation rate faster than three minutes per inch, the horizon or
substratum in question shall be considered excessively coarse.
7:9A-6.4(f)4. [When a seepage pit is proposed ... shall be excluded from this
computation] Reserved
7.9A-6.5 [Pit-bailing test] Reserved
7.9A-6.6 [Piezometer test] Reserved
7:9A-7.1(c) Individual subsurface sewage disposal systems shall not be
designed in a manner that will permit a direct or indirect detectable
discharge of sanitary sewage or septic tank effluent onto the surface of the
ground, into a subsurface drain or storm sewer, or into any water course.
7:9A-7.6 Type of System
Each system approved by the administrative authority pursuant to this
chapter shall consist of a septic tank which discharges effluent through
a gravity flow, gravity dosing or pressure dosing network to a disposal
field as hereafter described. [Seepage pits shall not be approved for new
installation except in the case of a greywater system as provided by in
N.J.A.C. 7:9A-7.5]. Seepage pits are prohibited from use in West Windsor
Township due to the health hazards associated with the potential for
pollution of underground water supplies. [Installation of a seepage pit
may be approved as an alteration for an existing system subject to the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:9A-3.3].
§ 131-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-23
1:327
Disposal beds shall only be permitted when special approval of the
administrative authority has been granted requests for special permission
to construct a disposal bed shall be accompanied by relevant soil data
including but not limited to U.S.D.A. soil logs, percolation or permeability
test data for each soil horizon or substrata occurring within the proposed
zone of treatment, existing and proposed grade elevations, elevations of
the top and bottom of the proposed zone of treatment and a statement from
the design engineer indicating the basis upon which special permission is
requested. Mounded individual subsurface sewage disposal systems shall
only be permitted when special approval of the administrative authority
has been granted When a mounded system is proposed, a minimum 1.5
acre lot shall be provided. Additionally, an alternating mound (dual system)
shall be provided and a reserve disposal area shall be tested and provided
in reserve for potential future use.
7:9A-8.2 Septic Tanks
(a) The surface of a two compartment septic tank shall be required
for all subsurface wastewater disposal systems. Use of...
(d) [Multiple compartment septic tanks shall be required for
institutional and commercial installations where the daily volume
of sewage determined as prescribed in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-7.4 is greater
than 1 000 gallons. When multiple compartment tanks are used
the following shall be required]
Multiple compartment septic tanks shall be required in all individual
subsurface sewage disposal systems and shall meet the following
specifications:
1. The total capacity...
2. Not more than...
3. Multiple compartments...
(e) Septic tanks shall be designed... All joints below the liquid level of
the tank or below the seasonally high water table shall be provided
with a permanent water-tight seal. A water test to verify absence of
leaks shall be witnessed by the authorized agent prior to backfilling
around two piece septic tanks.
7:9A-8.2(i)4. [Upright cylindrical tanks shall have a minimum diameter of
52 inches. Horizontal cylindrical tanks shall have a minimum length of 72
inches and a minimum width at the liquid level of 36 inches]
Circular septic tanks shall not be permitted.
7:9A-9.2(b)2. The dose volume shall be determined based upon.. the
manifold and the laterals.
§ 131-23 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 131-23
1:328
Soil
Permeability
(in/hr)
Percolation
Rate
(min/in)
Required Dose
Volume-Gravity
Dosing
Required Dose
Volume-Pressure
Dosing
6-[20] 16.5 3-15 Minimum of 75%
V1 Maximum of
25% Q
Minimum of 10 V4
Maximum of 25% Q
[0.2] 0.6 - 6 15 - [60] 40 Minimum of 75% V
Maximum of 100%
Q
Minimum of 10 V
Maximum of 100%
Q
7:9A-9.2(b)3. Reserve capacity is the...
Appendix A. A minimum reserve capacity equal to the daily volume of
sewage shall be required [except where a stand-by pump is provided which
is equivalent in performance capacity to the primary pump and which will
switch on automatically in the event that the primary pump malfunctions].
7:9A-9.2(f) Dosing may be accomplished by means of a pump when either
gravity dosing or pressure dosing is used. Duplicate pumps [may] shall
be required by the administrative authority. The stand-by pump shall be
equivalent in performance capacity to the primary pump and shall switch
on automatically in the event that the primary pump malfunctions.
The following requirements shall be met:
7:9A-9.4(a)(5)iv A permanent concrete monument shall be installed flush
with finished grade directly over the distribution box(es).
7:9A-10.1(a) A disposal field shall be required for all new systems [except
as allowed in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-7.6 in which case a seepage pit may be approved
in lieu of a disposal field]. The disposal field shall...
7:9A-10.1(d) 2. Suitable soil within the zone of treatment shall meet the
following criteria:
i. Coarse fragment content less than 50% by volume.
ii. Permeability less than [20] 16.5 inches per hour and greater than
[0.2] 0.6 inches per hour, or percolation rate slower than three
minutes per inch and faster than [60] 40 minutes per inch.
7:9A-10.1(d) 4. iii. The bottom of the shallowest soil profile pit [or boring]
made within the area of the disposal field.
7:9A-10.1(e) 1. The zone of disposal shall be composed of native soil or rock
material which has a permeability more rapid than [0.2]0.6 inch per hour
or a percolation rate more rapid than [60] 40 minutes per inch.
7:9A-10.1(e) 2. [When the permeability in the zone of disposal has been
determined, as prescribed in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6, to be two inches per hour
or faster, the minimum required thickness of the zone of disposal may
be reduced to two feet. This determination shall not be made using the
percolation test or basin flooding test;] Reserved
§ 131-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-23
1:329
7:9A-10.1 (e) 4. iii. The bottom of the shallowest soil profile pit [or boring]
made below the disposal field.
7:9A-10.1 (f) 4. When fill material is utilized within the zone of treatment,
the fill shall meet the following requirements:
I. Coarse fragment content less than 15 percent by volume or less than
25 percent by weight;
II. Textural analysis, based upon the USDA system of classification,
(composition by weight of size fraction passing the 2 millimeter
sieve): [from 85 to 95 percent sand,] from 80 to 90 percent medium
sand, or coarser, [from five to 15 percent silt plus clay,] from 10 to
20 percent fine sand, very fine sand, silt and clay, with a maximum 5
percent silt and clay, and a minimum two percent clay; and
III. Permeability from two to [16.5] 20 inches per hour; or percolation
rate from [6] 3 to 30 minutes per inch.
IV. Fill material used within the zone of treatment shall be homogeneous
in composition with respect to the distribution of coarse fragments
and soil separates.
7:9A-10.1(f) 5. When fill material is placed within the zone of disposal, the
fill material shall meet the following requirements:
I. Textural analysis (composition, by weight, of size fraction passing the
two millimeter sieve): [85] 80 percent or more medium sand [;], or
coarser; and
II. Permeability greater than two inches per hour; or percolation rate
faster than 30 minutes per inch.
III. Fill material used within the zone of disposal shall be homogeneous
in composition with respect to the distribution of coarse fragments
and soil separates.
Table 10.2(b) Minimum Required Disposal Trench Length Per
Gallon of Daily Sewage Flow L/Q
(ft./gal. per day)
L/Q (ft/gal per day)
Trench Width (feet)
Permeability
(inches per
hour)
Percolation
Rate
(minutes per
inch) 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
6-20 3-15 0.65 0.54 0.46 0.40
2-6 16-30 0.83 0.69 0.59 0.52
0.6-2 31-[45] 40 1.03 0.85 0.73 0.64
0.2-0.6 [46-60] over 40 [1.18 0.98 0.84 0.74]
Not acceptable
§ 131-23 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 131-23
1:330
Table 10.2(c)
Minimum Required Disposal Field Bottom Area Per Gallon of Daily
Sewage Volume A/Q
(ft/gal per day)
Permeability
(inches per hour)
Percolation Rate
(minutes per inch)
A/Q
(feet per gal per day)
6-20 3-15 1.61
2-6 16-30 2.08
0.6-2 31-[45] 40 2.56
0.2-0.6 [46-60] over 40 [2.94] Not acceptable
(1) Additional Requirements.
a. Where garbage disposal units are installed or proposed, the value
obtained from this table shall be increased by a factor of [25] 50 percent
for use in disposal field sizing.
b. When the size ... of the test method.
7:9A-10.3(e) Filter material shall meet the following requirements:
1. Filter material shall cover the distribution lines and extend the full
width of the trench or bed, shall extend between [12 and 18] 18 and
20 inches deep beneath the bottom of the distribution lines and shall
extend at least two inches above the top of the lines.
7:9A-10.3(e)3. The filter material shall be covered with drainage fabric,
[untreated building paper] or a four to eight inch thickness of salt-hay [or
straw] as the laying of the distribution lines progresses. When drainage
fabric [or untreated building paper] is used the following requirements
shall be met:
Subchapter 11. [Seepage Pits] Reserved
7:9A-11.1 [Site/soil requirements]
(a) [Seepage Pits...
1.
2.
3. ...of the seasonally high water table]
Reserved
7:9A-11.2 [Design Requirements] Reserved
[(a) [The percolating area...]
[(b)]
[(c) ...less than 110 square feet]
[Average Percolation... Minimum Area...]
[Over 40 Not Acceptable]
§ 131-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-23
1:331
Reserved
7:9A-11.3 [Construction Requirements] Reserved
(a) [Seepage pits...
(b)
(c)
(d) ... access by children]
Reserved
7:9A-1 2.8 Abandoned Systems
The administrative authority shall be notified at least 48 hours in advance
of the filling of all systems to be abandoned in this manner. The process
may be witnessed at the discretion of the administrative authority.
§ 131-23 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 131-23
1:332
Chapter 133
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewerage Authority — See Ch. 4, § 4-67.
Fees — See Ch. 82.
Sewage disposal systems — See Ch. 131.
Solid waste — See 148.
Street excavations — See Ch. 152, Art. II.
Land use — See Ch. 200.
§ 131-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131-23
1:333

ARTICLE I
Sewerage Authority
[Adopted 12-27-1979 by Ord. No. 79-39 as Sec. 14-1 of the Revised
General Ordinances]
§ 133-1. Authority created. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
Upon the enactment of parallel ordinances by the Boroughs of Hopewell,
Pennington and Princeton and the Townships of Hopewell and Princeton, a
Sewerage Authority is hereby created pursuant to the Sewerage Authorities
Law (N.J.S A. 40:14A-1 et seq.) as a body politic and corporate under the
name and style of the "Stony Brook Regional Sewerage Authority."
§ 133-2. Powers and duties.
The Sewerage Authority hereby created shall have such functions, powers
and duties as are provided by the Sewerage Authorities Law, as amended
and supplemented, and shall be governed, administered and financed
pursuant to that law and any other provision of law applicable to such
authorities.
§ 133-3. Membership.
The Authority shall consist of six members, one to be appointed by each of
the governing bodies, in accordance with the provisions of the Sewerage
Authorities Law, as amended and supplemented.
§ 133-4. Filing of copy. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
The Township Clerk is authorized and directed to file forthwith a duly
certified copy of this article with the Secretary of State of New Jersey and
with the Municipal Clerk of each of the municipalities named in § 133-1.
§ 133-5. When effective. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
This article shall take effect upon passage and publication pursuant to law
and adoption of parallel ordinances by all of the municipalities named in
§ 133-1.
§ 133-6. Contract agreement.
A. Determination of findings. The Township does hereby determine that it
will be economical and otherwise advantageous to it and to the
residents and property owners of this Township for the Township and
the Stony Brook Regional Sewerage Authority to enter into a contract
providing for and relating to the treatment and disposal of sewage and
other wastes originating in this Township by means of a sanitary
sewerage system constructed by said Authority and the cost and
expense of such treatment and disposal; which contract, among other
things, shall obligate said Authority to proceed promptly with the
construction and placing in operation of said sewerage system and
§ 133-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-6
1:335
obligate this municipality (together with various other parties) to pay to
said Authority such sums of money as may be necessary to provide for
deficits which might result from failure or disability of said Authority
to derive adequate revenues from the operation of its properties, all
substantially on the terms of the contract authorized by this article.
B. Execution of contract. The Township of West Windsor, New Jersey, shall
enter into a contract with the Stony Brook Regional Sewerage Authority
(and various other parties) providing for and relating to the treatment
and disposal of waste, on the terms and conditions substantially in the
form hereinafter referred to. The Mayor is hereby authorized and
directed on behalf of this Township to execute the contract under the
Corporate Seal of the Township, which shall be affixed and attested by
the Township Clerk, and to deliver the same. [Amended 4-19-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-07]
C. Form. The contract shall be in substantially the form marked "Exhibit A
- To Stony Brook Regional Sewerage Authority Municipal Service
Contract Ordinances of 1974" and now on file in the office of the Clerk
of this Township, and by this reference thereto made a part of this
article, and the terms and conditions thereof are hereby approved and
specifically agreed to.
§ 133-6 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 133-6
1:336
ARTICLE II
Sewer Use
[Adopted 12-27-1982 by Ord. No. 82-55]
§ 133-7. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the proper and efficient
operation and maintenance of the sanitary sewerage system(s) which have
been or may hereafter be acquired or constructed by or for the Township
and to establish rules and regulations for the use of such systems.
§ 133-8. Other applicable codes, ordinances, laws and regulations.
[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
Other codes, ordinances, laws and regulations which are applicable to the
use of the sanitary sewerage systems of West Windsor Township include:
§ 133-9. Definitions and word usage.
A. The Plumbing Subcode of the State of New Jersey (latest edition).
B. The Sewer Use Rules and Regulations of the Stony Brook Regional
Sewerage Authority.
C. Applicable regulations of the Department of Environmental Protection
of the State of New Jersey.
D. The Sewer Master Plans of West Windsor Township:
(1) For the Stony Brook Drainage Basin - May 1975 Status Report on
Sewerage Facilities, by Ditmars and Carmichael, 1975, amended
January 1976, and associated addenda.
(2) For the Assunpink Drainage Basin - Assunpink Creek Drainage
Basin Study - Sewer Master Plan Revisions Phase II report
February 1, 1982, by Fellows, Read and Associates.
A. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADDITION — Any proposed connection to the West Windsor sanitary
sewer system where the roadway or easement shall have to be opened
for connection to a sewer main.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer beginning three feet outside the building wall.
SANITARY — A building drain which conveys sewerage only.
STORM — A building drain which conveys stormwater or other
drainage, but no sewage.
§ 133-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-9
1:337
BUILDING SEWER — That part of the drainage system which extends
from the end of the building drain and conveys its discharge to a public
sewer, private sewer, individual sewage-disposal system or other point
of disposal.
CLEANOUT — That vertical pipe complete with a removable watertight
cap at the surface of the ground provided for cleaning the lateral or
house connection.
EXTENSION — As set forth in N.J.A.C. 7.9-13.3, any sewer, pipe, line or
any other structure of appurtenance for the transport of sewage which
conveys sewage from more than one building or structure or conveys
or will convey 2,000 gallons or more of sewage per day, determined in
accordance with the values specified in N.J.A.C. 7:9-1.106.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the Township of West
Windsor or the Health Officer's duly authorized agent or
representative.[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
HOUSE CONNECTION — That portion of the building sewer which lies
between the sewer main or public sewer and the cleanout.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade or business, as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
LATERAL — See "house connection."
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface water or groundwater.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.
PLUMBING INSPECTOR — The duly appointed plumbing subcode
official of the Township of West Windsor.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally
admitted.
SEWAGE — Any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in
suspension or solution, or may include liquids containing chemicals in
solution.
SEWAGE WORKS — See "sewerage."
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying liquid wastes.
SEWERAGE — All the facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
SEWER MAIN — See "public sewer."
§ 133-9 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 133-9
1:338
§ 133-10. Use of public sewers required. [Amended 10-17-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-32; 11-28-1989 by Ord. No. 89-49; 10-5-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-20]
§ 133-11. Reservation of capacity.
STORM SEWER — A sewer used for conveying rainwater, surface
water, condensate, cooling water or similar liquid wastes.
TOWNSHIP — The Mayor and Township Council of the Township of
West Windsor or its duly authorized agent, employee or
representative.[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
TOWNSHIP CLERK — The Township Clerk of the Township of West
Windsor.
WATERCOURSE — The channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
B. Word usage. "May" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory.136
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, deposit or permit to be
deposited into any natural outlet within the Township or in any area
under the jurisdiction of the Township any sewage or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with the provisions of the Health Code of the Township.
B. Except as hereinafter provided, all plumbing fixtures installed in any
building for human habitation, occupancy or use located on a premises
abutting on any street, alley or easement in which there is a public
sewer shall be connected to such sewer.
A. Reservation of capacity in the Township sanitary sewage system shall
be obtained from the Township Council for all additions to and
extensions of the Township's sanitary sewer system and for any change
in the use of an existing structure which would increase the anticipated
flow of sewage by 2,000 gallons per day or more.
B. Reservation of capacity shall be sought by means of a letter directed to
the Township Clerk. Said request shall contain the following
information:
(1) The block and lot.
(2) The number of structures.
(3) The use.
(4) The anticipated gallonage.
136. Editor's Note: Former Section 14-2.5, Sewer Department, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07.
§ 133-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-11
1:339
§ 133-12. Building sewers and connections.
C. The reservation of capacity shall not be granted by the Township
Council until such time as the applicant for the reservation has been
granted preliminary subdivision or site plan approval by the Planning
Board or a use variance has been granted by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, and only upon the recommendation of the Township
Engineer that the sewer capacity exists. A fee for said evaluation by the
Township Engineer shall be charged in accordance with Chapter 82,
Fees, § 82-12, Sewer fees, of the Code of the Township of West Windsor.
[Amended 3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-05]
D. The reservation of capacity, when granted by resolution of the Township
Council, shall be in effect for a period of one year and shall be
conditioned upon payment by the applicant of development fees at the
rate authorized by the West Windsor Township Code in effect at the
time the extension is granted. [Added 3-22-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-05]
A. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer (or appurtenance
thereof) or building sewer without first obtaining from the Township a
sewer permit for each habitable structure and paying the sewer permit
fee (as prescribed in Chapter 82, Fees, of this Code).
B. No person in connecting a building sewer to a public sewer shall
excavate or open a public roadway without first having obtained a
street opening permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 152,
Streets and Sidewalks, of this Code.
C. Applications for sewer permits (and street opening permits) shall be
made on forms supplied by the Township. All sewer permit applications
must show the depth and location of the sewer lateral. The permit
applications shall be supplemented by proof of reservation of capacity;
any plans, specifications, security to guarantee proper construction and
restoration; or other information considered pertinent in the judgment
of the Township.
D. All costs and expenses related to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
the Township for any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
E. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another
on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard
or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be
extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building
sewer.
§ 133-11 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 133-12
1:340
§ 133-13. Repairs to and cleaning of building sewer. [Amended
12-6-1993 by Ord. No. 93-35]
F. Existing building sewers may be used in connection with the new
buildings only when, on examination and test(s) required by the
Township, they are found to meet all requirements of this article. The
owner or the owner's agent shall obtain a sewer permit for use of such
sewer.
G. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, the methods to be used in excavation, placing the pipe joining,
testing and backfilling the trench and the connection of the building
sewer to the public sewer shall all conform to the requirements of the
Plumbing Subcode of the State of New Jersey (National Standard
Plumbing Code latest edition), Chapters 51, 63 and 100 of this Code and
all other applicable rules and regulations of the Township. [Amended
4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
H. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the first floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an
approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
I. The permit for a building sewer shall not become effective until the
installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Township. The
Township shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction. The applicant for the sewer permit shall notify the
Township when the building sewer is ready for final inspection and
connection to the public sewer, which final inspection shall be
consistent with the Plumbing Subcode of the State of New Jersey
(National Standard Plumbing Code, latest edition).
J. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the Township.
K. Any obstruction occurring in the building sewer must be corrected by
the homeowner with notice to the Township Sewer Superintendent.
A. The owner(s) shall be responsible for the clearing of all blockages in the
building drain and the building sewer.
B. Repairs to the building sewer from the public sewer to the ROW/
easement line, frequently at a cleanout, are the responsibility of the
Township, upon proper notice by the property owner. Where repairs to
the building drain and the building sewer are required (on private
property), such repairs shall be made at the sole expense of the
property owner(s), who shall also be responsible for obtaining
§ 133-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-13
1:341
§ 133-14. Discharge into public sewers.
necessary plumbing permits and shall be subject to inspection by the
Plumbing Subcode Official.
C. The schematic diagram entitled "Typical Sanitary Sewer Building
Connection" is provided for clarification of the defined terms
referenced herein.
A. No person shall discharge or cause any substance to be discharged into
a public sewer prohibited by or any substance in any amount which
exceeds limits set by the Stony Brook Regional Sewerage Authority.
(See § 133-2.) Among the prohibited substances are:
(1) Discharge from sump pumps.
(2) Swimming pool drains.
(3) Air conditioner or cooling tower drains.
(4) Roof downspouts.
(5) Other collected precipitation or groundwater.
B. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to public sewers, such waters possessing substances or
characteristics prohibited by the Stony Brook Regional Sewerage
Authority and which in the judgment of the Township or the Sewerage
Authority may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works,
processes, equipment or receiving waters or which otherwise create a
hazard to life, public health or safety or constitute a public nuisance,
the Township may:
§ 133-13 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 133-14
1:342
§ 133-15. Sewer extensions/additions.
§ 133-16. Power and authority of Township.
Duly authorized employees of the Township bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter any and all properties for the
purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this article.137
(1) Reject the wastes.
(2) Require pretreatment by the owner(s) at the owner's expense to
meet the standards set by Stony Brook Regional Authority for
discharge into the public sewers.
(3) Require control over the qualities and rates of discharge.
(4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes.
C. If the Township permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flow,
the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the Township and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
D. The Township reserves the right to use whatever tests are available to
determine the existence of unauthorized connections and/or discharges
to the public sewer system. There shall be no cause for action against
the Township law or equity for the effects of such tests when properly
conducted.
A. All extensions/additions to the Township sewer system shall comply
with the respective Sewer Master Plan in effect for the particular
drainage basin.
B. All pipe sizes shall be as dictated by the Sewer Master Plan (or
applicable code). Deviation from the Sewer Master Plan requirements
may be granted by resolution of the Township Council.
C. All plans to enter the sewer system shall be reviewed and approved by
the appropriate Township boards or employees.
D. All plans for proposed extensions to the Township sewer system shall
provide for gravity flow.
E. Private pumping stations are prohibited except where a waiver may be
granted by the Township Council upon good cause shown.
137. Editor's Note: Former Section 14-2.11, Sewer Department fees, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 133-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-17
1:343
§ 133-17. User service charges.
For user service charges, see Chapter 82, Fees.
§ 133-18. Violations and penalties. [Added 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-07]
Penalties for violation of this article shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3.
§ 133-17 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 133-18
1:344
ARTICLE III
Individual Water Metering
[Adopted 10-17-1988 by Ord. No. 88-34; amended in it entirety
11-14-1988 by Ord. No. 88-39]
§ 133-19. Installation.
Remote individual reading meters shall be installed by the developer for all
buildings containing two or more dwelling units in order that water flow
may be measured for each unit.
§ 133-20. Developer to obtain approval.
Prior to receiving preliminary site plan approval from the board of
jurisdiction, the developer shall obtain approval of the type and location
of individual metering for buildings containing two or more dwelling units
from the Plumbing Subcode Official and shall consult with the
Elizabethtown Water Company with respect thereto.
§ 133-21. Violations and penalties. [Added 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-07]
Penalties for violation of this article shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3.
§ 133-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-21
1:345

ARTICLE IV
Grease Control
[Adopted 12-29-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-51138]
§ 133-22. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is:
§ 133-23. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EGI or EXTERNAL GREASE INTERCEPTOR — Also known as a "gravity
grease interceptor" and means a plumbing appurtenance or appliance that
is designed by a licensed professional engineer to be installed in a sanitary
drainage system to intercept nonpetroleum fats, oils, and greases (FOG)
from a wastewater discharge and is identified by volume, baffle(s), a
minimum of two compartments, and gravity separation.
EXISTING ESTABLISHMENT — Any nonresidential establishment licensed
to operate as a retail food establishment or which has obtained a valid
sewer connection permit, Health Department plan approval or permits to
construct from West Windsor Township prior to the effective date of this
article.
FOG or FATS, OILS AND/OR GREASE — Organic polar compounds derived
from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain
triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable
using analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be
amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as
"grease" or "greases."
IGI or INTERNAL GREASE INTERCEPTOR — Also known as a
"hydromechanical grease interceptor," means a plumbing appurtenance
or appliance that is installed in a sanitary drainage system to intercept
nonpetroleum fats, oils, and grease (FOG) from a wastewater discharge and
is identified by flow rate, separation and retention efficiency. The design
incorporates air entrainment, hydromechanical separation, interior baffling,
A. To prevent the obstruction and overflow of the municipal sewer system
caused by a blockage or other interference resulting from wastewater
discharge containing fats, oils and/or grease from food-related
businesses into the sewer system.
B. To abate a nuisance and prevent any health hazards created by the
discharge of fats, oils, and/or grease into the sewer system that may
threaten or cause injury to public health, safety, and welfare of life,
property and/or the environment.
138. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. IV, Grease Interceptors, adopted
1-27-1997 by Ord. No. 97-1, as amended.
§ 133-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-23
1:347
and/or barriers in combination or separately, and an external flow control,
with air intake (vent).
NEW ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment that is not defined as an
existing establishment.
PDI — The Plumbing and Drainage Institute.
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — As defined in N.J.A.C. 8:24.
§ 133-24. Enforcement; waiver; construal of provisions.
§ 133-25. Best management practices for grease control in retail
food establishments.
The Township shall establish and maintain best management practices for
grease control in retail food establishments. The Township shall conduct
an annual review of this document, seeking advice from the Township
Engineer, Health Officer, Plumbing Subcode Official, and the Director of
Public Works. Revisions shall be made as necessary and approved by the
Business Administrator. All businesses or property owners affected by this
article shall take all steps necessary to ensure compliance with the
Township's best management practices. Copies of the Township's Best
Management Practices can be obtained from the Township Health
Department.
§ 133-26. Grease interceptors required.
Nonresidential properties and/or businesses which may potentially
discharge FOG into the West Windsor Township sewerage system must
install, operate and maintain approved grease interceptors or similar
technology to achieve compliance with the objectives of this article.
A. The Business Administrator, Township Engineer, Health Officer,
Plumbing Subcode Official, Director of Public Works or other
designated and duly authorized employees of West Windsor Township
shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article.
B. The Township may waive or relax specific requirements set forth by this
article when in its opinion the release of FOG into the sewer system is
not likely to occur. The property or business owner shall submit a
written request for a waiver from the requirements of this article.
C. This article shall be liberally construed to permit the Township of West
Windsor to discharge its functions and duties.
D. The Township Engineer, Health Officer, Director of Public Works,
Plumbing Subcode Official, or other designated employees, shall
exercise his or her discretion with respect to any related matters not
directly governed by this article.
§ 133-23 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 133-27
1:348
§ 133-27. Prohibited acts.
No person, property owner or business owner shall:
§ 133-28. Discharge of wastewater containing fats, oils and/or
grease.
A. Discharge or cause to be discharged FOG into the Township's sewer
system in a manner that will allow the accumulation of liquid and/or
solidified grease that is in a quantity which is capable of being visually
observed in the sewer lines or which accumulates within the system in a
manner that potentially obstructs or hinders the flow of sewage along
its intended path.
B. Store, dispose of, handle, or discharge FOG in a manner that creates a
nuisance or potential nuisance.
C. Clean grease interceptors, monitoring pits and/or sewer lines in a
manner that allows solidified or emulsified FOG to be transported into
the Township's sewer system. This includes the improper use of
chemicals, hydraulic sewer line jetting without the subsequent
reclamation of dislodged FOG, steam cleaning or any other manner that
fails to ensure the removal of the FOG from the sewer system prior to
release into the downstream municipal sewer system.
D. Permit the installation of new or the replacement of existing food
grinders and/or garbage disposal units within the plumbing system of
any retail food establishment that generates FOG.
E. Dispose of waste cooking oil into the sewer system. All waste cooking
oil shall be collected and stored in leakproof, securely covered
receptacles such as barrels or drums for recycling or alternate,
approved method of disposal. Written documentation of disposal
methods must be maintained on-site for a minimum of three years.
A. Owners of nonresidential properties and/or businesses engaged in a
food-related business shall not discharge or cause to be discharged any
wastewater containing fats, oils and/or grease, either directly or
indirectly, into the West Windsor Township sewer system without
complying with this article.
B. No person, property owner or business owner shall discharge, cause to
be discharged, or permit to be discharged into the public sewer system,
sanitary wastewater with FOG content in excess of 100 ppm.
C. Nonresidential properties which must comply with the above include
but are not limited to retail food establishments or other nonresidential
establishments involved in the production, preparation, manufacture,
storage, transportation or handling of food. The Township may also
require other nonresidential properties that are not engaged in a foodrelated
business to adhere to the requirements of this article when, in
its opinion, a discharge of FOG is likely to occur.
§ 133-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-28
1:349
§ 133-29. Grease control plan required.
All businesses and properties that are required to have a grease interceptor
shall have a written grease control plan in accordance with the following
requirements. Applications for the grease control plan shall be submitted to
the Township for review.
D. Sampling and testing shall be conducted in accordance with
appropriate methods established in 40 CFR 136.
A. New establishments.
(1) All new establishments which require a grease interceptor shall
operate under an approved grease control plan. Approval of the
grease control plan must be obtained prior to submission of
applications for Health Department plan review, construction
permits and sewer connection permits.
(2) The grease control plan shall be signed and sealed by a licensed
design professional and shall include, at a minimum: a completed
West Windsor Township Application for grease control plan,
detailed plans, equipment listings, equipment specifications,
calculations, supporting documentation and operational directives.
The plan shall include all grease-related features and components
planned for the operation.
(3) The approved grease control plan shall be maintained on-site and
be made immediately available to Township officials upon request.
Operational maintenance records shall be retained on-site for three
years.
(4) Grease interceptors shall be designed and installed in accordance
with the manufacturer's specifications, the current PDI guidance
documents, the National Standard Plumbing Code in effect at the
date of application for plumbing permits for the project and West
Windsor Township's best management practices for grease control
for nonresidential properties. EGIs shall be designed by a
professional engineer and shall meet the standards set forth in
N.J.A.C. 7:9A-8.1.
(5) Any drain that may potentially receive FOG waste must be directed
through an approved grease interceptor. This includes but is not
limited to those leading from three-basin sinks, meat/poultry/fish
food preparation sinks, scullery sinks, pot wash sinks, floor drains
and troughs, soup kettles, woks, hood drains, dishwashers,
prerinse stations and existing food grinders.
(6) Grease recovery units, active grease removal components, or
alternate technologies for grease control may be permitted if the
applicant can demonstrate and certify that the discharge
limitations set forth in this article can be achieved.
§ 133-28 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 133-29
1:350
(7) Grease interceptors shall be designed and located to facilitate easy
access for cleaning and inspection. Access openings, lids, and
inspection ports shall not be obstructed.
(8) A prerinse station must be installed immediately adjacent to every
automatic dishwasher and shall direct wastewater through a
strainer prior to release to the grease interceptor or grease
recovery unit.
(9) New establishments which are heavy grease generators shall be
required to install an EGI. These include but are not limited to
establishments that operate fixtures similar in nature to a fryer,
grill, charbroiler, rotisserie, griddle, wok, or whose menu reflects
foods with a high grease or fat content and/or that serve a large
population such as a school, hospital, food court, conference
center, or similar facility. The Township may waive this requirement
if the applicant presents sufficient convincing data to demonstrate
that the discharge of FOG into the sewers will be prevented
through alternative means.
(10) EGIs shall be installed entirely on the owner's property.
(11) Grease interceptors shall be sized in accordance with
manufacturer's specifications, the current PDI guidance
documents, the National Standard Plumbing Code in effect at the
date of application for plumbing permits for the project and West
Windsor Township's best management practices for grease control
for retail food establishments. Design requirements and sizing
formulas are intended as a guide in determining grease interceptor
sizes and shall be considered the minimum sanitary sewer
protection against prohibited FOG discharge. In approving a design
for a grease interceptor, the Township does not accept liability for
the failure of a system to adequately limit concentrations of FOG or
to prevent prohibited discharges of FOG. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner to ensure at all times that the
appropriate level of treatment and maintenance is provided to
comply with this article.
(12) Nonmonolithic tanks functioning as EGIs in which the seam is
below the liquid level shall be designed, installed and inspected
under the direction of a licensed professional engineer. Written,
signed and sealed leak testing results shall be submitted prior to
operation of the unit.
B. Existing establishments. Existing establishments which do not have a
Township-approved grease control plan shall develop and implement a
written grease control plan in accordance with the requirements of this
article. Existing establishments shall submit a grease control plan to
the Township within 180 days from the effective date of this article. The
grease control plan shall at a minimum include:
§ 133-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-29
1:351
(1) A schematic or plan showing the location of the existing grease
interceptor(s) or related equipment, including all drains and foodrelated
equipment that are tributaries to the grease interceptor.
(2) A listing of all food-related equipment on-site that may potentially
discharge FOG, including, but not limited to, the three-basin sinks,
meat/poultry/fish food preparation sinks, scullery sinks, pot wash
sinks, floor drains and troughs, soup kettles, woks, hood drains,
dishwashers, prerinse stations, and food/garbage grinders and
disposals.
(3) Design specifications on the grease interceptor(s), including but
not limited to the manufacturer, model number, certification, and
grease retention capacity.
(4) Maintenance records, including contracts for professional
servicing, cleaning logs, and reclamation histories.
(5) Manufacturer details and maintenance logs and contracts on all
chemical additives, alarms, pump systems, filters or similar
technologies installed in association with grease control at the
establishment.
(6) Existing establishments may be required to comply with the grease
control plan approval process for new establishments as set forth
above if there is a change of ownership, the establishment
undergoes renovation, or there are documented violations of this
article.
C. Multiuse properties.
(1) The owner of all nonresidential properties that have one or more
FOG-generating establishments must have a grease control plan as
set forth in this section. Multiuse properties include but are not
limited to shopping centers, malls, retail centers, office parks, and
professional centers.
(2) Multiuse properties that have existing FOG-generating
establishments shall submit a grease control plan to the Township
within 180 days from the effective date of this article.
(3) Grease control plan.
(a) The grease control plan for existing and proposed multiuse
properties shall as a minimum include the following:
[1] Documentation signed and sealed by a licensed design
professional.
[2] A site plan locating sewer laterals, connections, manholes,
inspection ports, monitoring pits, EGIs, and related
elevations; locations housing EGIs, grease retention
capacities for EGIs and supporting calculations.
§ 133-29 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 133-29
1:352
§ 133-30. Monitoring pits.
[3] Maintenance plans, self-inspection schedules and related
documentation for grease control of the property.
[4] Written rules and requirements for FOG-discharging
establishments located on the property.
[5] Contact names and phone numbers for grease-related
emergencies.
[6] Manufacturer's documentation and maintenance logs for
all chemical additives, alarms, pumps, filters or similar
technologies installed in association with FOG control on
the property.
(b) The Township may waive or relax any of these items for
existing properties when, in its opinion, the release of FOG into
the sewer is not likely to occur or where the establishment has
demonstrated that the information is not available.
A. A monitoring pit as shown in Figure 1, shown below, shall be provided
downstream of the EGI outlet and as close as possible to the public
sewer main but prior to connection of an additional discharger.
B. When IGIs are the sole means of grease control for a new
establishment, the installation of a monitoring pit may be required by
the Township.
C. New multi-use properties with two or more FOG-generating
establishments shall provide a monitoring pit.
D. Monitoring pits shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the specifications in Figure 1. Monitoring pits shall be located on
private property and downstream of all FOG discharges to be observed
and prior to but as close as possible to the municipal sewer connection.
E. Figure 1, entitled "Monitoring Pit Detail," is provided below for
clarification.
§ 133-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-30
1:353
§ 133-31. Sewer/grease interceptor additives.
§ 133-32. Maintenance and operation.
A. The use of chemical additives such as enzymes, emulsifiers, or similar
chemicals that will liquefy FOG are prohibited from use where they may
be discharged into grease waste sewer lines or grease interceptors.
B. Bioremediation media which have been approved by the Stony Brook
Regional Sewerage Authority may be used for grease control.
Bioremediation media shall only be used with approved FOG disposal
systems, ASME A112.14.4. These systems shall be designed and
installed under the direction of a licensed professional engineer. In no
case will the additives negate the requirement for a grease interceptor.
The Township may prohibit the use of specific additives if they may
cause adverse effects to any component of the sewer system.
§ 133-30 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 133-32
1:354
A. Good repair. Grease interceptors, monitoring pits, grease recovery
units and all associated grease control equipment shall be maintained
in good repair and sound operating condition.
B. Cleaning. Grease interceptors shall be maintained in an efficient
operating condition by the periodic removal of accumulated grease,
scum, oil, or other floatable substances and solids deposited in the
interceptor. Cleaning intervals shall be frequent enough such that
grease does not bypass the interceptor. At no time shall the
accumulated grease waste within the interceptor be permitted to
exceed 25% of the wetted height of the grease interceptor, as measured
from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe. IGIs shall
be cleaned a minimum of one time per month. EGIs shall be cleaned a
minimum of one time every three months. Time-interval dependent
cleanings can be waived or adjusted if the facility can demonstrate
through documentation that the discharge requirements can be met
through an alternative schedule.
(1) The cleaning of grease interceptors, sewer lines and related
equipment shall be performed in a manner that will not permit the
discharge of FOG into the sewer system operated by West Windsor
Township.
(2) Solidified FOG that has accumulated in sewer lines on the owner's
property shall be removed in a manner approved by the West
Windsor Township Department of Public Works as set forth in the
Township's best management practices and under no
circumstances shall be permitted to be released downstream into
the Township's sewer system.
C. Notification of sewer line cleaning. Property owners shall notify the
Township Department of Public Works prior to jetting or cleaning of the
sewer lines external to a structure. Property/Business owners shall
notify the Township Department of Public Works 48 hours prior to any
routine cleaning operation. Emergency cleanings due to blockages shall
be reported to the Township Department of Public Works prior to
commencing the cleaning operation.
D. Safety. Confined space entry associated with the cleaning of sewer lines
on private property shall be conducted in a safe manner and comply
with OSHA standards, 29 CFR 1910.146. The Department of
Emergency Services shall be notified in accordance with the guidelines
set forth in this article for activities involving confined space entry.
E. Records. Written documentation of grease interceptor maintenance and
repairs shall be kept on-site for three years. A maintenance log shall be
kept which includes at a minimum the following information: date and
time of cleaning, quantity of grease removed, results of visual interior
self-inspections, disposition of the waste, and name of individual or
company performing the maintenance.
§ 133-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-32
1:355
§ 133-33. Inspections.
§ 133-34. Recovery of costs.
In the event it is determined that a blockage or interference of the Township
sewer system is the result of the discharge from any FOG-generating
property, all costs incurred by the Township will be charged to the owner
and/or tenant. Such costs may include, but are not limited to, costs of
investigating the source of and clearing the blockage/interference; damages
to sewer lines and pump stations; laboratory testing; administrative, legal
and engineering costs, cleanup of pollution to surrounding soils or water
and reimbursement of any penalties imposed by regulatory agencies.
§ 133-35. Violations and penalties.
F. Multiuse properties. Owners of multiuse properties that are required to
have a grease control plan shall maintain the following documentations:
logs with dates of sewer line cleanings, dates and locations of greaserelated
blockages, name and contact information for professional
services, receipts for professional cleaning services, logs of sewer
maintenance efforts, and self-inspection records of FOG-generating
establishments. All requested documentation shall be made available to
the Township upon request.
G. Education. All kitchen employees whose job responsibilities may impact
the grease control plan must be trained on the requirements of the
facility's plan. A written verification of training shall be retained by the
facility during the employee's term of employment with the facility and
for three years thereafter.
H. Posting. Drains that are not directed through a grease interceptor and
are located in high grease handling areas of commercial kitchens shall
be affixed with a nonabsorbent posting stating "No Grease."
A. Authorized representatives of the Township, including but not limited to
personnel of the Department of Public Works, Health Department,
Plumbing Subcode Official, and Office of the Township Engineer or
designated representatives, shall be permitted to enter and inspect all
properties that are required to have a grease control plan. This right of
investigation and inspection shall include the right to measure,
observe, monitor, video (with a sewer camera if deemed necessary by
the inspector), photograph, sample, test, record, review and make
copies of all pertinent documents.
B. The owner of the property or establishment shall maintain on-site the
tools necessary to gain access to grease interceptors, monitoring pits
and inspection ports.
A. In locations where the property owner differs from the business owner,
both parties shall be jointly and separately responsible for ensuring that
prohibited items are not discharged into the sewer system.
§ 133-32 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 133-35
1:356
B. Unless otherwise provided herein, penalties for violations of this article
shall be as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Penalty,
§ 1-3.
C. If a violation results from a prohibited discharge or grease blockage in
the Township's sewer system, the Township may require design
improvements in addition to the penalties assessed.
D. If a prohibited discharge and/or blockage/interference is a repeat
violation, the Township may require the installation of an audiovisual
alarm system equipped with a means of recording and identifying when
the storage capacity which allows for efficient operation of the grease
interceptor system has been exceeded.
E. If a prohibited discharge and/or blockage occurs two or more times
within a twelve-month period, the violator will be required, under the
direction of a licensed design professional, to investigate the source of
the prohibited discharge and implement an improved grease control
plan to prevent future prohibited releases. The written improved grease
control plan shall be submitted to the Township within 30 calendar days
of receipt of the notice of violation for approval. Remedial management
plans shall be implemented immediately.
F. Upon written notification by the Township of mandated design
improvements due to an illegal release of FOG into the sewer system or
a documented grease blockage or interference, the owner/operator
shall install and maintain said improvements within 90 days. Failure to
comply within the allotted time period shall be considered a violation of
this article.
§ 133-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-35
1:357
Chapter 136
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Display of fetal alcohol syndrome warning
signs — See Ch. 36, § 36-8.
Shooting range signs — See Ch. 86, § 86-4F
Township firearms signs — See Ch. 86, § 86-5.
No-solicitation signs — See Ch. 126, § 126-15.
Street excavation signs — See Ch. 152,
§ 152-12.
Street closing signs — See Ch. 152, § 152-29.
Preliminary site plan approval — See
§ 200-13.
Site plan performance standards — See Ch.
200, § 200-21.
Sign design details — See Ch. 200, § 200-32.
Street and neighborhood or directional
signs — See Ch. 200, § 200-57H.
Traffic signs — See Ch. 200, § 200-91U.
Temporary signs — See Ch. 200, § 200-152.
§ 133-35 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 133-35
1:358
ARTICLE I
Off-Premises Real Estate Temporary Signs
[Adopted 8-10-1987 by Ord. No. 87-29 (Sec. 3-14 of the Revised
General Ordinances)]
§ 136-1. Hours of display and size of signs.
Signs designating a real estate development, open house or similar sales
activity shall be permitted on public rights-of-way adjacent to private
property between the hours of 12:00 noon and 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays and
Sundays. Such signs shall not exceed six square feet, and no side of any sign
shall exceed three feet. Such signs shall not be fastened to any utility pole
or traffic control or street signs.
§ 136-2. Violations and penalties.139
Penalties for violation of this article shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3.
139. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 136-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-2
1:359
Chapter 140
SMOKING AND USE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS BANNED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Smoking restricted — See § 115-8.
§ 136-2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 136-2
1:360
ARTICLE I
School Facilities and Properties
[Adopted 4-2-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-04]
§ 140-1. Smoking prohibited; exceptions.
The smoking of tobacco products within any facility, property or vehicle
owned, leased or contracted for by the District140 by an individual within the
Township of West Windsor is prohibited. Consistent with N.J.S.A. 26:3D-16
and 26:3D-17, "smoking" means the burning of a lighted cigar, cigarette,
pipe or any other matter or substance which contains tobacco, except as
part of a classroom instruction or a theatrical production.
§ 140-2. Enforcement.
Section 140-1 shall be enforced by the administrative officials of the District
and/or school facility, property or vehicle where such prohibited activities
are undertaken or the administrative officials of the District, or both. In
the case of any vehicle, § 140-1 shall be enforced by the administrative
officials of the facility or property at which the vehicle is operated or the
administrative officials of the District, or both.
§ 140-3. Violations and penalties.
Any individual guilty of smoking tobacco products at any school facility,
property or vehicle will be subject to a fine of up to $100 and/or community
service as determined by the Township of West Windsor Municipal Court.
§ 140-4. Signs.
Signs shall be posted by the District in prominent locations at the perimeter
of all school grounds and at the public entrance to all school facilities,
property or vehicles owned or leased by the District within the Township
of West Windsor indicating that smoking is prohibited and violators will be
subject to a fine as set forth in § 140-3 of this chapter.
140. Editor's Note: The "District" means the West Windsor-Plainsboro Regional School District.
§ 140-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-4
1:361

ARTICLE II
Public Places
[Adopted 12-23-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-18]
§ 140-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
ENCLOSED AREA — All areas between a floor and ceiling, extending to the
outer perimeter wall of a structure.
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — Shall include all public parks,
playgrounds, ball fields, swimming pools, gardens, plazas publicly owned or
leased by the Township of West Windsor and all property owned or leased
by the Township of West Windsor upon which the public is invited or upon
which the public is permitted and where individuals gather for recreational
activities, including all areas adjacent to such facilities, including, but
limited to, any sidewalk, parking area, driveway or drive aisle.
MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS — Shall include all structures owned, leased,
rented and/or operated by the Township of West Windsor, and/or occupied
by Township employees and used for official business of the Township of
West Windsor.
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or
the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other matter or
substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked,
or the inhaling or exhaling of smoke.
§ 140-6. Prohibition of smoking in public places; signs.
A. Municipal buildings. Smoking shall be prohibited within a thirty-fivefoot
radius of all entrances of municipal buildings. No-smoking signs or
the international no-smoking symbol (consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a
diagonal red line through its cross section) shall be clearly, sufficiently
and conspicuously posted at each entrance onto municipal complexes
and on building entrances where smoking is prohibited by this chapter.
The signs shall be clearly visible to the public and shall contain letters
or a symbol which contrast in color with the sign, indicating that
smoking is prohibited therein. The sign shall also indicate that violators
are subject to a fine. [Amended 3-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-10]
B. Parks and recreational facilities. Smoking shall be prohibited in all
public parks and recreation facilities owned or leased by the Township
of West Windsor and all property owned or leased by the Township of
West Windsor upon which the public is invited or upon which the public
is permitted and where individuals gather for recreational activities,
including all areas adjacent to such facilities, including, but not limited
to, any sidewalk, parking area, driveway or drive aisle which has been
designated with no-smoking signs. No-smoking signs or the
§ 140-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-6
1:363
§ 140-7. Enforcement.
The enforcement authority of this article shall be the Business
Administrator, Chief of Police, Director of Parks and Recreation, Health
Officer or designees.
§ 140-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $100 for the first offense, $250 for the second offense
and $500 for each subsequent offense.
international no-smoking symbol (consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a
diagonal red line through its cross section) shall be clearly posted at or
near the entrance to areas regulated by this chapter. The sign shall also
indicate that violators are subject to a fine. However, the posting of said
signs shall not congest the overall appearance of the areas regulated
by this chapter nor impose an inordinate expense upon the Township of
West Windsor. [Amended 3-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-10]
C. Municipal vehicles. Smoking shall be prohibited in any vehicle
registered to the Township of West Windsor.
§ 140-6 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 140-8
1:364
ARTICLE III
Sales of Electronic Smoking Devices
[Adopted 2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01]
§ 140-9. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish licensing requirements for
establishments that sell electronic smoking devices. The funds collected
through licensure of such establishments may be used to fund the
development and maintenance of a tobacco age of sale enforcement
program and other smoking cessation, prevention and control programs as
may be established by the West Windsor Township Health Department.
§ 140-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE — An electronic or other powered device
that can be used to deliver nicotine or other substances to the person
inhaling from the device, including, but not limited to, electronic cigarette,
cigar, cigarillo or pipe, or any cartridge or other component of the device
or related product, including but not limited to any substances used in such
devices, such as liquids or powders.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, cooperative, association,
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any
other legal entity.
RETAIL ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE ESTABLISHMENT — A physical
establishment, duly licensed by the Board of Health, that sells, offers for
sale, gives, distributes or furnishes electronic smoking devices designed for
consumption through inhalation.
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or the
possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other matter that can be
smoked, or the inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from an electronic
smoking device.
VAPOR/VAPE SHOP — Is a retailer that either devotes 25% or more of the
floor area or display area to, or derives 75% or more of gross sales receipts
from, the sale of electronic smoking devices and/or related products.
§ 140-11. License requirements; fees.
A. No person shall conduct, maintain or operate a retail electronic
smoking device establishment that sells, offers for sale at any cost or no
cost, distributes or furnishes electronic smoking devices, or any
cartridge or other component of the device or related product without
first obtaining a license to do so.
B. No itinerant establishments or vendors shall be permitted to obtain an
electronic smoking device establishment license.
§ 140-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-11
1:365
§ 140-12. Requirements and prohibitions.
No person shall sell or offer for sale at any cost or no cost, distribute or
furnish electronic smoking devices or any cartridge or other component of
the device or related product to any person under the age of 21 years.
C. Applications for licenses shall be submitted, together with the fee
established in Chapter 82, Fees, as follows:
(1) Applications shall be submitted not less than 30 days prior to the
proposed date of commencement of operations.
(2) All licenses issued for electronic smoking device establishments
shall expire on January 1 of the year following which they were
issued or upon transfer of ownership or operation of the licensed
premises, whichever comes first.
(3) Applications for renewals of annual licenses shall be submitted on
or before December 1 of each year preceding the year for which the
application is made.
A. Licensed retail electronic smoking device establishments shall
conspicuously post signs having a minimum size of six inches by eight
inches where EDS and related products are displayed and at all points
of sale notifying customers that proof of age is required to purchase
such products.
B. No person or retailer selling electronic smoking devices shall allow an
employee to sell or distribute such products until the person has read
the local ordinances and state laws pertaining to the sale and
distribution of ESDs and has signed a statement of understanding form
that they have read and understand such ordinance and laws. A list of
applicable regulations and a statement of understanding form shall be
provided to the establishment owner/representative by the West
Windsor Health Department. The signed statement of understanding
form for each separate employee shall be maintained by the owner on
the premises for a minimum of one year following the employee's
termination of employment.
C. The establishment shall post the license in a conspicuous place in such
establishment.
D. As a condition prior to the issuance of a license or renewal of any such
license, the applicant or licensee shall be required to establish, by
written documentation, that the person in charge of the retail ESD
establishment has established an employee training policy.
E. Smoking, vaping, consuming or otherwise sampling electronic delivery
devices or refill products is prohibited within a facility licensed as retail
electronic smoking device establishment.
§ 140-11 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 140-12
1:366
§ 140-13. Enforcement.
§ 140-14. Violations and penalties.
F. The sale of any electronic smoking device refill, including but not
limited to any and all liquids, gels, wax or powders, and whether or not
such refill contains nicotine, that is intended for human consumption
and is not contained in packaging that is child-resistant is prohibited as
set forth in N.J.S.A. 2A: 170-51.9 et seq.
G. License holders can only do in-person sales of ESD at their retail
electronic smoking device establishment. There shall be no sales at
nonregistered retail locations or mobile locations, including, but not
limited to, street fairs, local fairs, festivals or similar events.
H. Vapor/vape shops shall be prohibited from obtaining a license to
operate retail electronic smoking device establishments in this
municipality.
A. The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Health Officer,
Chief of Police and/or their designees. Additional municipal officials
may be appointed as enforcement agents by the Business Administrator
as deemed necessary.
B. Any person found to be selling or offering electronic smoking devices or
product without a valid license issued by the Health Department shall
cease activity immediately upon receipt of written order by the
enforcement official.
A. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction, pay a fine of $250 for the first violation,
$500 for the second violation, and $1,000 for third and each subsequent
violation. Each violation, and every day in which a violation occurs,
shall constitute a separate violation. No fines shall be issued for 60 days
after publication of this article.
B. In addition to the penalty assessment in § 140-13A, a person(s) found
guilty of three or more violations of § 140-11A, sales of electronic
smoking devices or products to a youth under the age of 21, will, upon
conviction, have the license permanently revoked.
C. The foregoing civil penalties are in addition to any penalties that may
be imposed under N.J.S.A. 2A: 170-51, et seq. and N.J.S.A. 2C:33-13.1,
et seq.
D. The defenses enumerated in N.J.S.A. 2A:170-51,4b and N.J.S.A.
2C:33-13.1b shall constitute defenses to any prosecution brought
pursuant to this article.
E. Civilian complaints may be filed in Municipal Court against violators of
this article.
§ 140-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-14
1:367
Chapter 143
SOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 82. Streets excavations — See Ch. 152, Art. II.
§ 140-14 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 140-14
1:368
ARTICLE I
Soil Removal
[Adopted 12-27-1979 by Ord. No. 79-39 as Sec. 18-1 of the Revised
General Ordinances]
§ 143-1. Permission required to remove soil. [Amended 4-19-1999
by Ord. No. 99-07]
No person shall excavate or otherwise remove soil for sale or for use other
than on the premises from which the soil shall be taken without first having
procured permission thereof from the township, except in connection with
the construction or alteration of a building on the premises and excavation
or grading incidental thereto or in connection with a pond soil bank, and/
or pond soil bank for agricultural purposes or in the operation of any
horticulture, floriculture, landscaping, sod or turf business.
§ 143-2. Application; permit fee; map; test boring. [Amended
4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
The township shall not consider any application for the removal of soil
from the premises for sale or otherwise unless and until the owner of
the premises shall first file with the township an application requesting
such permission, together with a permit fee as established in Chapter 82,
Fees, together with a map of the premises showing the contour lines and
proposed contour grades resulting from such intended removal of soil in
relation to the topography of the premises and the proposed inspection and
approval of the Township Engineer. No such permission for soil removal
shall be issued until such map has been filed and until the proposed contour
lines and grades have been approved by the Township Engineer. The
applicant shall obtain a test boring approved by the Township Engineer.
The hours of operation shall be from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. from Monday
through Saturday, with no Sunday operation unless otherwise approved by
the Mayor or designee.
§ 143-3. Hearing; considerations of Hearing Officer. [Amended
4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
A. Upon written request for a hearing made by the applicant to the
Business Administrator or the Business Administrator's designated
Hearing Officer, an opportunity to be heard shall be granted within 30
days thereafter, and the Business Administrator, in considering and
reviewing the application and in arriving at its decision, shall be guided
and take into consideration the public health, safety and general
welfare, and particular consideration shall be given to the following
factors:
(1) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(2) Drainage.
(3) Soil fertility.
§ 143-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-3
1:369
§ 143-4. Conduct of operations. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-07]
If permission to remove the soil shall be granted, the owner or person
in charge shall so conduct the operations that there shall be no sharp
declivities, pits or depressions and in such a manner that the area shall be
properly leveled off, cleared of debris and graded to conform to the contour
lines and grades, as approved by the Township Engineer.
§ 143-5. Topsoil; finish grade. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-07]
The owner of the premises or the person in charge of the removal of soil,
when permission has been duly granted, shall not take away the top layer
of arable soil for a depth of six inches, but such top layer of arable soil
to a depth of six inches shall be set aside for retention on the premises
and shall be respread over the premises when the rest of the soil has been
removed, pursuant to levels and contour lines approved by the Township
Engineer, unless permission to remove such soil shall be granted by the
Township Engineer. The finish grade shall not be lower than one foot above
road grade.
§ 143-6. Surety bond. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
Before any permit or permission for soil removal shall be granted or issued,
the owner or applicant shall file with the township a bond, in form and
with surety acceptable to the Township Attorney, in such amount as in the
opinion of the Township Engineer shall be sufficient to ensure the faithful
performance of work to be undertaken pursuant to the permission granted
pursuant to the provisions of this article.
(4) Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and lands.
(5) Land value and uses.
(6) Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious physical development of the township.
B. If after examining the application and the map provided for in § 143-2,
and after the hearing, in the event that a hearing is requested by the
applicant, the Business Administrator shall be of the opinion that the
proposed soil removal will not create conditions inimical to the public
health, welfare and safety and will not result in the creation of any
sharp declivities, pits or depressions, soil erosion or fertility problems,
depressed land values, nor create any drainage or sewerage problems
or other conditions of danger, permission to remove the soil shall be
granted.
§ 143-3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 143-7
1:370
§ 143-7. Permit required; conformance with provisions.
No excavation shall be made and no soil shall be removed under the
provisions of this article unless a permit therefor shall have been first
obtained, as provided herein, and no excavation shall be made and no soil
shall be removed except in conformity with the provisions of this article.
§ 143-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to
the penalty stated in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3.
§ 143-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-8
1:371

ARTICLE II
Excavations
[Adopted 12-27-1979 by Ord. No. 79-39 as Sec. 18-2 of the Revised
General Ordinances]
§ 143-9. Permit required. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
No excavating, digging or mining of sand, clay, gravel or other mineral
deposits may be done for commercial purposes in the township without first
obtaining a permit from the Township Engineer.
§ 143-10. Fee; expiration and renewal of permits.
A fee as established in Chapter 82, Fees, shall accompany the application
for the purpose of paying the cost of administering this article. Permits
shall expire annually on December 31 and may be renewed on the same
conditions as originally issued and/or amended, changed or modified. An
updated site plan with contours shall be submitted with the application or
renewal.
§ 143-11. Bond. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
Prior to issuance of a permit to operate a sand, clay or gravel pit or other
mineral deposits excavation, it shall be prerequisite to produce at the time
of application and to keep in force for the term of the permit a bond or cash
payment in an amount sufficient in the opinion of the Township Engineer to
assure the rehabilitation of the site of operations. Such bond shall be issued
by a recognized surety company authorized to do business in New Jersey.
§ 143-12. Application requirements.
Applications shall be accompanied by a site plan, signed and sealed by a
professional engineer and land surveyor licensed in New Jersey, showing
the proposed area of operation and adjoining properties, both existing and
proposed final contours, the minimum distance between any excavation
or stripping operation, existing street and property lines and existing
structures, the proposed manner of operation, including the routing of
traffic to and from the site, and proposed restoration or improvements of
the site annually.
§ 143-13. Additional rules and regulations.
In addition, the following conditions shall be complied with:
A. Days and hours of operation. There shall be no operation on Sundays,
legal holidays nor at any time between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. on weekdays and 9:00 a.m. on Saturdays (prevailing time).
[Amended 5-19-1986 by Ord. No. 86-09]
B. Fencing. Where any open excavation shall have a depth of 10 feet or
more and shall create a slope of more than 30º, there shall be erected a
§ 143-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-13
1:373
chain-link fence, or equal, at least six feet high with suitable gates,
where necessary, effectively blocking access to the area in which such
excavation is located. Such fence shall be located 50 feet or more from
the edge of the excavation.
C. Erosion. The banks of any excavations which are created by mining or
quarrying operations shall be protected against the effects of erosion by
a natural growth of trees, shrubs or grass or by the planting of shrubs
and/or trees. The trees shall be planted at intervals of not more than 50
feet.
D. Lateral support. In any case, the licensed operation shall not adversely
affect the lateral support of abutting land or other properties.
E. Survey monuments. The property lines shall be adequately defined by
survey monuments and easily visible markers so that regulations for
keeping the excavation back from property lines can be checked by
visual observation.
F. Slope. The slope of the material in any excavation shall be one foot
vertical to 1 1/2 feet horizontal from the surrounding surface of
adjacent land to the bottom of the aforesaid excavation.
G. Minimum distance from lot lines. The top of the natural slope or cuts for
any excavation and any mechanical equipment shall be at least 50 feet
from any lot line. Both the base and top of such slope shall not be nearer
than 200 feet to any public street or nearer than 50 feet to any property
line; or within 500 feet of any church, school or public or semipublic
building; or within 1,000 feet of any residential or business
development.
H. Rehabilitation of site. After any such operation, the site shall be made
reusable for a use permitted in the zone. Where topsoil is removed,
sufficient arable soil shall be set aside for retention on the premises and
shall be respread over the premises after the operation. The area shall
be brought to a final grade by a layer of earth of two feet in thickness or
its original thickness, whichever is less, capable of supporting
vegetation. Fill shall be of a suitable material approved by the Township
Engineer.
I. General regulations.
(1) Control of smoke, dust and noise hazards shall be in accordance
with accepted standards of practice, including those promulgated
by state and federal agencies. The determination of compliance
with this subsection shall be based upon inspection by the Engineer
or the Health Officer of the township after proper investigation.
(2) Control of operations or methods which may be injurious to the
persons in the community or which may cause pollution to the air
or water of the township shall also be in accordance with accepted
standards of practice. Determination of undue pollution of the air
§ 143-13 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 143-13
1:374
§ 143-14. Revocation or suspension of license.144
After ten days' notice and an opportunity to be heard, the township may
revoke or suspend any license issued hereunder if it finds that the licensee
is violating the terms of this article or any state law.
or water of the township shall be the responsibility of the Health
Officer based on standards of health and welfare established by
agencies of the State of New Jersey and which, in the opinion of
the Health Officer, are injurious to the health and well-being of the
citizens of the community.
J. Performance bond. In the event that there is a breach of conditions of
approval, the township may, after five days' notice to the applicant or its
representatives, take possession of the site and proceed with the
rehabilitation of the premises in accordance with the plan subscribed in
Subsection H, charging the cost thereof to either the applicant or
surety company or both.141
K. Liability insurance. Every operator or owner shall deliver a public
liability insurance policy in limits fixed by the Mayor or designee
against liability arising from any such operation as activities incidental
thereto during the period of such operation.142
L. Pit areas shall:
(1) Be graded and sloped finally so that they will blend into the general
topography of the area.
(2) Not be operated or left in such condition that ditches and other
drainage facilities become silted or cause mosquito problems.
(3) Have satisfactory natural drainage or may be left as ponds,
provided that they have a source of fresh water supply, that a
minimum depth of seven feet may be maintained therein, that they
shall be fenced as specified and that written approval of the
township and the property owner shall be obtained therefor. The
applicant, at the applicant's own expense, shall furnish and erect
around the periphery of such ponds a steel post and galvanized
woven-wire fence, at least four feet high, with one access gate, as
shown on submitted plans, or, if not so shown or prescribed, the
fence shall be of a type to be approved by the Township Engineer.143
141. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
142. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
143. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 143-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-15
1:375
§ 143-15. Violations and penalties.145
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to
the penalty stated in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3.
145. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 143-15 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 143-15
1:376
Chapter 148
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 48. Littering — See Ch. 108.
§ 143-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-15
1:377

ARTICLE I
Unauthorized Collections
[Adopted 12-27-1979 by Ord. No. 79-39 as Sec. 11-6 of the Revised
General Ordinances]
§ 148-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED PERSON —
§ 148-2. Collection by other than authorized persons prohibited.
No person other than an authorized person shall touch, handle, pick up,
collect or remove any newspapers, magazines or glass when any of the same
are placed for collection in the vicinity of the curbline or street line of any
premises within the township.
§ 148-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-18-1989 by Ord. No.
89-42]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction therefor, be liable to the penalty in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3 or in Article III, Recycling, § 148-25 of
this chapter.
An owner or occupant of premises on which or abutting which
discarded newspapers, magazines and glass are placed for collection.
A.
A collector of trash or garbage authorized by either the township, the
Improvement Authority or the occupant of any premises within the
township to remove said items while in the performance of prescribed
collection duties. [Amended 9-18-1989 by Ord. No. 89-42]
B.
A person authorized by either the township, the Improvement Authority
or the owner or occupant of any premises within the township to pick
up and collect any of such items for recycling purposes in accordance
with Article IV, Recycling, of this chapter. [Amended 9-18-1989 by
Ord. No. 89-42]
C.
A duly authorized representative or agent of any of the foregoing
persons.
D.
§ 148-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-3
1:379

ARTICLE II
Refuse Collection
[Adopted 6-28-1982 by Ord. No. 82-27 (Secs. 11-4 through 11-6 of
the Revised General Ordinances)]
§ 148-4. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
ASHES — The residue from the burning of wood, coal or other combustible
materials.
CONTRACTOR — A person or firm engaged in a business or service,
construction, repairing, refurbishing, remodeling or the demolition of
buildings or grounds within the township.
GARBAGE — Any animal or vegetable waste solids resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of foods, but not including
human wastes.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Wastes presenting a clear danger to health
and safety by reason of their pathological, explosive, radiological or toxic
characteristics.
IMPROVEMENT AUTHORITY — The Mercer County Improvement
Authority.[Added 9-19-1989 by Ord. No. 89-42]
NONRESIDENTIAL USER — Any type of commercial, industrial or similar
activity (whether or not operating for a profit) occupying premises within
the township and creating solid waste in any form.
REFUSE — Garbage, rubbish, trash and ashes.
RESIDENT — Any person occupying or maintaining a place of residence
within the Township of West Windsor.
RESIDENTIAL USER — A dwelling unit, such as a home, trailer or
multifamily dwelling, of three or fewer units.
RUBBISH AND TRASH — Combustibles, such as paper, wood and yard
debris, and non-combustibles, such as metal, glass, stone, plastic and ashes.
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION CONTRACTOR — A person or firm for hire,
properly licensed in the State of New Jersey and the Township of West
Windsor to collect solid waste.
§ 148-5. Collection and disposal within the Township. [Amended
9-18-1989 by Ord. No. 89-42; 3-5-1990 by Ord. No. 90-7; 4-19-1999
by Ord. No. 99-07]
The Township of West Windsor, its designee and its solid waste collector
contractor, the Mercer County Improvement Authority and its designee
and its solid waste collector contractor shall be responsible to collect and
dispose of solid wastes within the township. This responsibility shall not
§ 148-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-5
1:381
include collection and disposal of demolition and hazardous materials,
nonresidential user solid wastes and grass clippings except as set forth in
Article III, Recycling, of this chapter.
§ 148-6. Refuse receptacles.
A. The owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of every dwelling or other
premises where refuse accumulates shall provide and keep on such
premises sufficient and suitable receptacles, with tight-fitting covers,
for receiving and holding the aforesaid refuse.
(1) "Sufficient" is defined for the purpose of this article to be at least
one receptacle for each family unit or other occupant of premises
and at least two such receptacles for each restaurant, market, store
or similar business establishment where the aforesaid refuse shall
accumulate.
(2) Except for recycling material receptacles as set forth in Article IV,
Recycling, of this chapter, "suitable" is defined for the purpose of
this article to be a watertight metal or plastic receptacle with a
tight-fitting cover, so constructed as to prevent spillage or leakage
of its contents. Each receptacle for use at a single residence shall
have a capacity of not more than 30 gallons, shall not exceed 60
pounds in weight and shall be equipped with a pull handle or
handles. [Amended 9-18-1989 by Ord. No. 89-42]
B. Receptacles for refuse from multidwelling units or industrial premises
may have a greater capacity than that prescribed in Subsection A(2)
hereof, provided that they are:
(1) Watertight.
(2) Constructed of metal or plastic.
(3) Equipped for handling by motorized equipment.
(4) Cleaned and sanitized as needed after emptying.
(5) Replaced by the same type of receptacle if removed for emptying.
C. Receptacles that are badly broken or otherwise fail to meet the
requirements of this section may be classed as refuse and collected and
disposed of as such by the person or agency responsible for the
collection of refuse.
D. Receptacles of refuse shall not be set out for collection before 6:00 p.m.
of the day prior to the collection day on the route along which the same
is situated, nor shall empty receptacles be allowed to remain on the
curbline after 8:00 p.m. of the day of collection.
E. Receptacles shall be conveniently located on premises for storage of
refuse and maintained in such manner as to prevent creation of a
nuisance or menace to public health.
§ 148-5 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 148-6
1:382
§ 148-7. Collection conditions.
§ 148-7.1. Dumpsters on public property. [Added 9-30-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-27]
F. Except for recycling materials receptacles, as set forth in Article III,
Recycling, of this chapter, all trash, garbage and solid waste, when
placed outside for collection, shall be placed in closed receptacles or
properly sealed plastic bags, in accordance with the provisions of
Subsection A(2) of this section. Plastic bags shall not exceed 30 pounds
in weight. Such receptacles and plastic bags must prevent their
contents from escaping therefrom and littering or leaking on the streets
and private property within the township. [Amended 9-18-1989 by
Ord. No. 89-42]
A. Tree branches and tree limbs, not to exceed three inches in diameter, or
either, shall be bundled and tied properly so that each bundle may be
picked up and handled by one person. No bundle shall exceed 60
pounds in weight, four feet in length or two feet in diameter.
B. Excessively bulky items, such as washing machines, refrigerators,
stoves, household appliances and other household furnishings, shall not
be left at the curb for collection unless special arrangements have first
been made with the solid waste collection contractor.
C. All broken glass and such other dangerous materials shall be placed in
a secure container to facilitate safe handling and loading.
D. No hazardous materials shall be placed or set out for collection either
by itself or with other permitted matters which may be collected
pursuant to this article.
E. Ashes from coal or woodburning stoves shall be placed in a
conspicuously marked metal container and shall be one week old before
being placed for collection.
F. Refuse shall be picked up only between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 8:00
p.m. prevailing time.
A. Placement of roll-off dumpsters and containers on right-of-way or other
public property.
(1) Roll-off dumpsters and containers shall not be parked, placed or
left unattended along any public right-of-way or on any public
property without the authorization of the Division of Police
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 27:51-1 et seq.
B. Removal of dumpsters; costs; violations and penalties.
(1) The Division of Police may cause to be removed any roll-off
dumpster or container parked, placed, or left unattended along any
public right-of-way or on any public property contrary to the
§ 148-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-7.1
1:383
§ 148-8. Violations and penalties. [Added 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-07]
Penalties for violation of this article shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3.
requirements of this article, and recover from the owner thereof
the costs associated with such removal, in addition to the fine
specified at N.J.S.A. 27:51-1-1(b).
§ 148-7.1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 148-8
1:384
ARTICLE III
Recycling
[Adopted 9-18-1989 by Ord. No. 89-41 (Ch. 12 of the Revised
General Ordinances); amended in its entirety 6-23-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-12]
§ 148-9. Compliance with Recycling Plan.
Pursuant to the Statewide Mandatory Source Separation and Recycling Act,
each resident of the Township of West Windsor shall be required to comply
with the Recycling Plan of the Township of West Windsor, adopting the
Mercer County Recycling Plan to meet the state-mandated recycling goals.
To effectuate and implement the West Windsor Township Recycling Plan, it
is hereby required that the following standards apply.
§ 148-10. Adoption of Recycling Plan; contracts for collection and
disposal.
§ 148-11. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
ACCEPTABLE ALUMINUM CONTAINERS — Metal aluminum containers of
the type commonly used for the packaging of beverages and food products.
ACCEPTABLE BIMETAL CONTAINERS — Those cans with side and bottom
construction made of steel and with top construction made of aluminum.
ACCEPTABLE COMMINGLED MATERIALS — Those materials which would
otherwise become municipal solid waste for municipalities as listed here,
and which may be collected, separated, processed and returned to the
economic mainstream in the form of materials or products. Acceptable
commingled materials shall include acceptable metal containers and
acceptable glass as here defined herein. In no event shall acceptable
commingled materials include unacceptable commingled materials.
ACCEPTABLE FERROUS METAL CONTAINERS — Metal containers of the
type commonly used for the packaging of beverage and food products.
ACCEPTABLE GLASS CONTAINERS — Any clear, amber and green glass
container of the type commonly used for beverage and food products.
Expressly exempted from this definition are glass containers used for nonbeverage
or non-food products such as pesticides, herbicides, or other
A. The Township of West Windsor hereby adopts this article to provide for
recycling within its borders pursuant to the Recycling Act, adopting
herein the Mercer County Recycling Plan as its official municipal
recycling program.
B. All municipal contracts for solid waste collection and/or disposal within
the Township of West Windsor shall be consistent with this article and
the Mercer County Recycling Plan.
§ 148-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-11
1:385
chemicals. Light bulbs, plates, safety and mirrored glass are also not
considered acceptable glass.
ACCEPTABLE METAL CONTAINERS — Metal containers (cans) of the type
commonly used for beverage and food products only, and may include
aluminum, tin plate steel and bimetal cans. Expressly exempted from this
definition are cans utilized for the packaging of chemicals or other non-food
and non-beverage products.
ACCEPTABLE MIXED PAPER — Newspapers and associated inserts and
periodical magazines.
ACCEPTABLE PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Any polyethylene terephthalate
(PET) and high-density polyethylene (HDPE) plastic container of the type
commonly used for beverage and food containers only. PET or HDPE
containers utilized for non-food and non-beverage items are expressly
exempted from this definition.
BATTERY — A group of two or more cells connected together to furnish
electric current. For the purposes of this article, the "battery" and/or
"batteries" being referred to are only for motor vehicles, including
automobiles, trucks and motorcycles.
BEVERAGE CONTAINER — An individual, separate, hermetically sealed, or
made airtight with a metal or plastic cap, bottle or can composed of glass,
metal, plastic or any combination thereof, containing a beverage.
BEVERAGES — Milk, alcoholic beverages, including beer or other malt
beverages, liquor, wine, vermouth and sparkling wine, and nonalcoholic
beverages, including fruit juice, mineral water and soda water and similar
nonalcoholic carbonated and noncarbonated drinks intended for human
consumption.
COLLECTION UNIT — Any equipment determined to be necessary to
complete the collection services described in the Recycling Plan and
ordinance attached hereto and made a part hereof.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those businesses which constitute
wholesale, retail or service establishments such as restaurants, stores,
markets, theaters, hotels, warehouses and offices.
CORRUGATED — Corrugated containers having liners of test liner, jute or
kraft.
COUNTY RECYCLING SYSTEM — The Mercer County collection and
processing system as more fully described in the Mercer County Recycling
Plan and any amendments thereto attached hereto and made a part hereof.
CULLET — Crushed or shattered glass with an average particle size of one
millimeter by one millimeter to two millimeters by two millimeters (+/-).
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials named in the
approved Mercer County Recycling Plan and any amendments thereto
attached hereto and made a part hereof.
§ 148-11 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 148-11
1:386
END USER — The ultimate market for designated recyclable materials,
which utilizes said materials as raw materials in the manufacture of new
commodities.
EXISTING TRANSFER STATION — The Mercer County Improvement
Authority's solid waste transfer station located in Ewing Township, New
Jersey, at Block 13, Lots 3, 10, 16, 17 and 37.
FOOD PRODUCT — A food commodity packaged in any manner in advance
of sale in units suitable for retail sale and which is not intended for
consumption at the point of manufacture.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those businesses which include
manufacturing, industrial, and research and development entities.
MULTIFAMILY UNITS — Any building or structure of one or more stories
and any land appurtenant thereto, and any portion thereof, in which three
or more units of dwelling space are occupied, or are intended to be occupied
by three or more persons who live independently of each other. This
definition shall also mean any group of 10 or more buildings on a single
parcel of land or on contiguous parcels under common ownership, in each of
which two units of dwelling space are occupied or intended to be occupied
by two persons or households living independently of each other, and any
land appurtenant thereto, and any portion thereof. This definition shall
also include apartments, townhouses, condominiums and retirement
communities. "Condominiums" as used herein shall include the form of
ownership of real property under a master deed providing for ownership
by one or more owners of units of improvement together with an undivided
interest in common elements appurtenant to each such unit.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE STREAM — All residential, commercial and
institutional solid waste generated within the boundaries of any
municipality.
NONPROFIT GROUP — Those groups or organizations operating not-forprofit,
such as the Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts, religious organizations, etc., and
other types of service organizations that may on occasion conduct recycling
fund-raising activities.
OFFICE PAPER — High-grade paper, fine paper, bond paper, offset paper,
xerographic paper, mimeo paper, duplicator paper, and related types of
cellulose material containing not more than 10% by weight of volume of
noncellulose material such as laminates, binders, coatings, or saturates.
OTHER PAPER — Junk mail, cereal, cookie, cracker, dry detergent boxes,
shoe boxes, juice boxes, milk and juice containers and telephone books.
PAPER — Includes all paper grades, including but not limited to newspaper,
high-grade office paper, fine paper, bond paper, offset paper, xerographic
paper, mimeo paper, duplicator paper, and related types of cellulose
material containing not less than 10% by weight or volume of noncellulose
material such as laminates, binders, coatings, or saturates.
PRIVATE RECYCLER — Any individual or group registered with the Mercer
County Improvement Authority to collect recyclable materials.
§ 148-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-11
1:387
RECYCLABLE CONTAINER — A container intended for the in-home storage
and collection of recyclable materials, to be approved by the Mercer County
Improvement Authority, and to be signed with an appropriate recycling
slogan.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Those materials which would otherwise
become municipal solid waste, and which may be collected, separated,
processed and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of
materials or products.
RECYCLING — The activity whereby a secondary material is introduced as
a raw material into a process in which it is transformed into a new product
in such a manner that its original identity is essentially lost.
RECYCLING ACT — The New Jersey Statewide Mandatory Source
Separation and Recycling Act, P.L. 1987, Chapter 102, N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.1
et seq.
RECYCLING CENTER — Any facility designed and operated solely for
receiving, storing, processing and transferring source-separated,
nonputrescible or source-separated commingled nonputrescible metal,
glass, paper, plastic containers, and corrugated and other cardboard, or
other recyclable materials approved by the Department.
RECYCLING FACILITY — Any place, equipment or plant designed and/
or operated for the purpose of recycling to collect, store, process or to
redistribute separated waste so as to return the material to market.
SCAVENGER — Any individual or group that is not registered with the
Mercer County Improvement Authority to collect recyclable materials, or
an individual or group which has not been granted an exemption to the
registration requirement.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse, and other discarded materials resulting
from industrial, commercial and agricultural operations, and from domestic
and community activities, and shall include all other waste materials,
including liquids, except for solid animal and vegetable wastes collected by
swine producers licensed by the State Department of Agriculture to collect,
prepare and feed such wastes to swine on their own farms.
SOLID WASTE FACILITIES — Includes the plants, structures and other real
and personal property acquired, constructed or operated or to be acquired,
constructed or operated by any person pursuant to the provisions of the
Solid Waste Management Act, N.J.S.A. 13:1e-1 et seq., or any other act,
including transfer stations, incinerator, resource recovery facilities, sanitary
landfill facilities or other plants for the disposal of solid waste, and all
vehicles, equipment and other real and personal property and rights therein
and appurtenances necessary or useful and convenient for the collection or
disposal of solid waste in a sanitary manner.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The act of segregating designated recyclable
materials from residential, commercial and institutional solid waste by the
generator thereof for the purpose of collection, disposition and recycling.
§ 148-11 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 148-11
1:388
TIN-PLATE CANS — Those cans with a basic steel construction with an
interior coating of tin.
TIRE — A continuous solid or pneumatic rubber cushion encircling a wheel
usually consisting, when pneumatic, of an external rubber-and-fabric
covering that contains and protects from injury an air-filled inner tube for
use on a motor vehicle not for commercial use. A tire as defined herein shall
have the rim removed.
UNACCEPTABLE COMMINGLED MATERIALS — Those materials which are
not defined as "acceptable commingled materials."
UNACCEPTABLE MIXED PAPER — Those materials which are not defined
as "acceptable mixed paper" and are unsuitable for consumption as the
grade specified.
WHITE GOODS — Refrigerators, freezers, washers, dryers and other
appliances of steel construction.
§ 148-12. Collection of leaves.
§ 148-13. Disposal of tires.
The Township of West Windsor may deliver tires to the existing transfer
station or such site as designated by the Mercer County Improvement
Authority for transfer to a tire recycler.
§ 148-14. Notification of requirements.
The Township of West Windsor shall, at a minimum, within 30 days after the
adoption of this article, and at least once every six months thereafter, notify
all persons occupying residential, commercial and institutional premises
within these municipal boundaries of recycling opportunities and the source
separation requirements of this article and the Mercer County Recycling
Plan. In order to fulfill the notification requirements of this section, this
municipality may, in its discretion, place an advertisement in a newspaper
A. The Township of West Windsor shall heretofore provide for a collection
system for leaves generated from residential premises and require that
persons occupying residential premises within these municipal
boundaries shall, for the period from September 1 to December 31 of
each year, source-separate leaves from solid waste generated at those
premises and, unless leaves are stored or recycled for composting or
mulching by the generator, place the leaves for collection in the manner
provided for herein.
B. Leaves shall be collected by the Township in one of two manners:
vacuum collection at curbside or collection of bagged leaves at such
times as may be determined by the Township. All such collected
material shall be deposited at the Township's registered compost
facility or at such other place as may be designated. Residents shall be
permitted to deposit such material directly at the registered compost
facility or other site designated.
§ 148-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-14
1:389
circulating in the municipality or post a notice in public places where
public notices are customarily posted and include a notice with other official
notifications periodically mailed to residential taxpayers, as the
municipality deems necessary and appropriate.
§ 148-15. Review and revision of Master Plan.
§ 148-16. Residential curbside collection.
A. The Township of West Windsor shall, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16c,
within 30 days of the effective date of this article, and at least once
every 36 months thereafter, conduct a review and make necessary
revisions to the Master Plan and development regulations adopted
pursuant to L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), which revisions
shall reflect changes in state, county and municipal policies and
objectives concerning the collection, disposition and recycling of
designated recyclable materials.
B. The revised Master Plan shall include provisions for the collection,
disposition and recycling of recyclable materials designated in this
article and for the collection, disposition and recycling of designated
recyclable materials within any development proposal for the
construction of 50 or more units of single-family residential housing or
25 or more units of multifamily residential housing and any commercial
or industrial development proposal for the utilization of 1,000 square
feet or more of land.
A. On and after the official commencement date of the County Recycling
System within the Township of West Windsor, each person residing in
areas designated for recycling collection shall separate for curbside
collection on designated collection days and such additional days as
may be designated by the Mercer County Improvement Authority those
materials designated in the Mercer County Recycling Plan as listed
below, and shall do so in the manner as set forth in this article.
B. All residents shall recycle or cause to be recycled, at a minimum, the
following categories of recyclables:
(1) Paper, including:
(a) Newspapers;
(b) Magazines;
(c) Corrugated cardboard;
(d) Other paper; and
(2) Clear, green and amber glass food and beverage containers.
(3) Aluminum food and beverage containers.
§ 148-14 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 148-16
1:390
§ 148-17. Special conditions for residential curbside collection.
Grass clippings may be deposited at the Township's registered compost
facility and shall not be part of the Township's refuse collection program.
§ 148-18. Commercial, industrial and institutional establishments;
recycling requirements.
(4) PET beverage and HDPE beverage and laundry detergent
containers.
(5) Tin-plate steel containers.
(6) Bimetal containers.
(7) Tires.
(8) Vehicle batteries.
(9) White goods.
(10) Leaves.
(11) Used motor oil.
(12) Ferrous automotive scrap.
C. Any and all persons having been found to have violated the provisions of
the Recycling Plan of the Township of West Windsor will be assessed
warnings, penalties and fines pursuant to § 148-24 of this article.
D. At the time of placement of recyclable materials designated for
collection by the Recycling Plan of the Township of West Windsor at the
curb- or street side of residential units, said materials shall be
considered the sole property of the Mercer County Improvement
Authority and shall be considered a conscious contribution by that
resident to the County Recycling System for collection by the Mercer
County Improvement Authority or its agent.
E. Any resident within the Township of West Windsor may donate or sell
designated recyclable materials to any person, whether operating for
profit or not-for-profit, provided that the receiving person may not
perform curbside collection under any circumstances unless that
person has registered with the Mercer County Improvement Authority
as a private recycler.
A. All commercial, industrial and institutional establishments located
within the Township of West Windsor shall recycle or cause to be
recycled, at a minimum, the following categories of recyclables:
(1) Paper, including:
(a) Newspapers;
§ 148-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-18
1:391
(b) Magazines;
(c) Corrugated cardboard;
(d) Other paper; and
(2) Clear, green and amber glass food and beverage containers.
(3) Aluminum food and beverage containers.
(4) PET beverage and HDPE beverage and laundry detergent
containers.
(5) Tin-plate steel containers.
(6) Bimetal containers.
(7) Tires.
(8) Vehicle batteries.
(9) White goods.
(10) Leaves.
(11) Used motor oil.
(12) Ferrous automotive scrap.
B. All commercial/industrial/institutional establishments located within
the Township of West Windsor shall submit a source-separation
recycling plan to the Mercer County Improvement Authority to meet
the state recycling mandates identifying or incorporating the following:
(1) All waste material generated, listed by type.
(2) All volumes of these waste categories currently recycled.
(3) Any agreement with any solid waste hauler or with a separate
entity for the recycling of source-separated designated materials as
defined within the Mercer County Recycling Plan.
(4) A description of current or proposed recycling efforts for
designated materials.
C. The schedule for submittal of these commercial/industrial/institutional
recycling plans to the Mercer County Improvement Authority shall be
as follows:
(1) All commercial/industrial/institutional establishments whose waste
is collected by private haulers and not serviced by municipal
collection shall submit the plan within four months of enactment of
this article and shall implement the same within two months
following approval of the plan by the Mercer County Improvement
Authority.
§ 148-18 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 148-18
1:392
(2) All commercial/industrial/institutional establishments whose waste
is collected through a municipal collection system shall be part of
the municipal collection system of recyclables.
D. All commercial/industrial/institutional establishments required to
submit a recycling plan under this article may, at their option, submit a
joint recycling plan with any other entity or entities whereby a common
hauler and/or collection point for common pickup is set forth. However,
each commercial/industrial/institutional establishment shall submit a
plan identifying that they are part of this joint plan and shall attach a
copy of the same, incorporating it by reference.
E. Any such commercial/industrial/institutional recycling plan shall be
consistent with those terms, conditions and goals set forth in the
Mercer County Recycling Plan and this article. The failure to submit
said plan or to comply with the same shall subject the commercial/
industrial/institutional establishment to penalties as set forth in this
article.
F. An extension of the time for plan submittal and/or plan implementation
of up to 90 days may be requested from the Mercer County
Improvement Authority, depending upon the size of the establishment.
Justification for such a request shall be submitted to the Mercer County
Improvement Authority, in writing, and shall be verified as necessary or
justified.
G. Upon failure of a commercial/industrial/institutional establishment to
meet the source separation recycling provisions of this article and/or
the source separation and recycling provisions of the Recycling Act, if
not exempted pursuant to Subsection H described hereafter, the
Mercer County Improvement Authority shall cause to be provided said
recycling service, and all fees and costs for providing said recycling
service shall be paid to the Mercer County Improvement Authority and,
if applicable, shall be assessed at rates established by the New Jersey
Board of Public Utilities and Mercer County's solid waste franchise, and
penalties shall be assessed as provided for in this article.
H. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16(d) of the Recycling Act, all
municipalities shall have the right to exempt persons occupying
commercial and institutional premises within their municipal
boundaries from the source separation requirements of the ordinance if
those persons have otherwise provided for the recycling of the
recyclable materials designated in the Mercer County Recycling Plan
from solid waste generated at those premises. Each municipality shall
annually submit to the Mercer County Improvement Authority a list of
those commercial/industrial/institutional establishments requesting
exemptions under this subsection and the results of the municipal
determination with an explanation for said action. To be eligible for an
exemption pursuant to this subsection, a commercial or institutional
solid waste generator shall annually provide written documentation to
the municipality and the Mercer County Improvement Authority of the
§ 148-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-18
1:393
§ 148-19. Disposal of batteries.
Batteries shall not be a part of the curbside collection program but shall
be disposed of in markets set forth in the Mercer County Recycling Plan
Market Guide.
§ 148-20. Private recyclers.
§ 148-21. Enforcement of Recycling Plan.
The enforcement of the Recycling Plan of the Township of West Windsor
shall be provided individually and severally by the Township of West
total number of tons recycled. Persons occupying commercial and
institutional premises exempted under this section shall not be
exempted from the reporting provisions of the Recycling Act.
I. At the time of placement of recyclable materials designated for
collection by the Mercer County Recycling Plan at the curb- or street
side of commercial, industrial or institutional establishments, said
material shall be considered the sole property of the Mercer County
Improvement Authority and shall be considered a conscious
contribution to the County Recycling System for collection by the
Mercer County Improvement Authority or its agent.
J. Any future commercial waste private recycling facilities must be
approved by the Mercer County Improvement Authority and shall be
included by amendment to the Mercer County Solid Waste Management
Plan.
K. Any and all such designated commercial recycling centers shall comply
with all applicable laws, ordinances, and statutes, and the Mercer
County Solid Waste Plan.
A. Any person or group of persons wishing to collect recyclable materials
shall register with the Mercer County Improvement Authority as a
private recycler.
B. No private recycler shall conduct recycling collection activities within
the Township of West Windsor on designated county collection days.
C. Upon registration, each private recycler shall receive an identification/
registration decal from the Mercer County Improvement Authority and
shall prominently display the same on recycling vehicles when
collecting recyclables within the Township of West Windsor.
D. An ongoing condition of collection activities within the municipality
shall be the submittal of certified weight tickets to the Mercer County
Improvement Authority for material sold to quantify levels for statemandated
recycling goals. Said tickets shall be submitted to the Mercer
County Improvement Authority no later than 30 days following the date
of sale of the subject material.
§ 148-18 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 148-21
1:394
Windsor, with regard to enforcement of this article, and/or the Mercer
County Improvement Authority and/or the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
§ 148-22. Registration requirements; fee; display of identification/
registration decal.
§ 148-23. Violation of registration requirements.
§ 148-24. Violations and penalties.
A. No person shall collect recyclables within the Township of West
Windsor unless registered with the Mercer County Improvement
Authority and the requisite fee has been paid. Exemption from the
registration fee, but not the registration requirement, shall be provided
to nonprofit service groups collecting recyclable materials on a limited
number of occasions during a given year.
B. Upon registration and payment of applicable fees, the registrant shall
be issued an identification/registration decal which shall be
prominently displayed on each recycling vehicle at all times while
collecting recyclables; and
C. The following schedule of registration fees, based upon vehicle size,
shall be applicable to all private recyclers within Mercer County:
(1) For vehicles between one yard and five yards: $25;
(2) For vehicles over five yards but not exceeding 15 yards: $50; and
(3) For vehicles over 15 yards: $100.
D. Any operator of a private (non-county-operated) recycling drop-off
center where materials will be received for processing shall register
with the Mercer County Improvement Authority and shall be subject to
a registration fee of $250 per annum and the quarterly reporting
requirements of the Mercer County Improvement Authority. Approved
nonprofit recycling drop-off locations and/or facilities shall be exempted
from the registration fee but not from the reporting requirement.
A. Failure to register or to display the identification/registration decal on
vehicles while collecting recyclables within the Township of West
Windsor shall subject such private recycler to a fine of $250 per offense.
B. Any person or entity conducting recycling collection activities within
the Township of West Windsor on designated county recycling
collection days shall be assessed a penalty of $250 per offense.
A. Residents. Any resident of any municipality within Mercer County who
is found to have violated the provisions of this article shall be subject to
the following procedures and penalties:
§ 148-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-24
1:395
(1) A notice of violation shall be issued upon the first infraction that
said ordinance is violated; and
(2) Thereafter, a cessation in the collection of garbage which contains
recyclable materials from that household; and/or
(3) A fine of up to $500 per day of violation depending upon the extent
of and circumstances of the violation, to be assessed pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 13:1E-9 by the Mercer County Improvement Authority, as
authorized hereby and pursuant to the inclusion of this article
within the Mercer County Solid Waste Management Plan.
B. Commercial, industrial and institutional establishments.
(1) Failure to submit the plan or have an approved plan in place as
required by this article shall subject the commercial/industrial/
institutional establishment to a fine of up to $100 per day until plan
submittal requirements are met.
(2) Any commercial/industrial/institutional establishment located
within Mercer County found to have violated the terms and
provisions of this article and/or its required recycling plan as
submitted to the county pursuant to § 148-10 of this article shall be
subject to the following procedures and penalties:
(a) A notice of violation shall be issued upon the first infraction
that said ordinance is violated; and
(b) A fine of up to $1,000 per day of violation depending upon the
extent of and circumstances of the violation and the size of the
violating establishment, to be assessed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
13-1E-9 by the Mercer County Improvement Authority, as
authorized hereby and pursuant to the inclusion of this article
within the Mercer County Solid Waste Management Plan.
§ 148-24 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 148-24
1:396
Chapter 150
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SP3)
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 40.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 48.
Nuisances — See Ch. 115.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 122.
Sewage disposal systems — Ch. 131.
Sewers — Ch. 133.
Solid waste — Ch. 148
Stormwater control — See Ch. 200, Art. XXI.
§ 148-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-24
1:397

ARTICLE I
Illicit Connection
§ 150-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of West Windsor,
so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties
for the failure to comply.
§ 150-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the
text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. The definitions
below are either the same as or based on corresponding definitions in
the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations (such as appliances).
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process wastewater
or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the municipal separate
storm sewer system operated by the Township of West Windsor, unless
that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other than the Tier
A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit Number
NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not limited to,
leaks, flows or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited to,
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b) or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance
or system of conveyances (including streets with drainage systems, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, channels or storm drains) that is owned or
operated by the Township of West Windsor or other public body and collects
and conveys stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
§ 150-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-2
1:399
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 150-3. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Township of West Windsor any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water,
process wastewater or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 150-4. Enforcement and penalties.
This article shall be enforced by the Police, Township Engineer, Health
Officer or the Plumbing Subcode Official and/or their designee of the
Township of West Windsor by the issuance of complaints to responsible
property owners with penalties to be imposed on violators as provided in
Chapter 1, § 1-3, General penalty, of the Township Code.
§ 150-2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 150-4
1:400
ARTICLE II
Improper Disposal of Waste
§ 150-5. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the spilling, dumping or disposal
of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) operated by the Township of West Windsor, so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure
to comply.
§ 150-6. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of West
Windsor is prohibited. The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other
than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants
to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited except as
provide in Article VI, Yard Waste Collection.
§ 150-7. Exceptions.
The following exceptions may be allowed with the stipulation that the
discharge does not create or contribute to a public health nuisance (as
defined in § 115-3A):
A. Waterline flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
C. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use for
their intended purposes; and
(2) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing materials
immediately following salt and de-icing material applications. Prior
§ 150-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-7
1:401
§ 150-8. Enforcement and penalties.
This article shall be enforced by the Police, Township Engineer, Health
Officer or the Plumbing Subcode Official and/or their designee of the
Township of West Windsor by the issuance of complaints to responsible
property owners with penalties to be imposed on violators as provided in
Chapter 1, § 1-3, General penalty, of the Township Code.
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded. Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the
above situation, is limited to exterior, undercarriage and exposed
parts and does not apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
J. Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street during the seven days
prior to a scheduled and announced collection, and not placed closer
than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet as permitted in § 150-26.
K. Proper use of lawn fertilizer.
§ 150-7 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 150-8
1:402
ARTICLE III
Litter Control
§ 150-9. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements to control littering
in the Township of West Windsor, so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 150-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been manufactured or otherwise man-made and has been discarded,
whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper or other natural
or synthetic material, or any combination thereof, including, but not limited
to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or detachable tab of any bottle,
jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar, match or any flaming or glowing
material or any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or
other lawn or garden waste except as provided in Article VI, Yard Waste
Collection, newspapers, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers
or other packaging or construction material, but does not include the waste
of the primary processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging,
sawmilling, farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of litter.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any dwelling or structure, whether or not occupied,
as well as any yard, grounds, sidewalk, wall, fence, driveway, porch, steps,
vestibule or mailbox belonging to or appurtenant to such dwelling or
structure.
PUBLIC WAYS ADJACENT TO PRIVATE PROPERTY — The areas from the
side edge of a highway, street or road, whether or not curbed, to and
including the sidewalk, if any, and if no sidewalk, to the front property line
of the adjacent private property, and all areas used for any public park,
playground, municipal building or other installation, including driveways,
parking areas, walks, paths, bikeways, bicycle lanes and other public ways
thereupon.[Amended 12-29-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-53]
§ 150-11. Prohibited acts and regulated activities.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place upon, deliver, deposit, throw
upon, leave or abandon within or upon any private property or public
ways adjacent to private property in the township any garbage, cans,
bottles, cartons and other types of refuse or any handbills,
advertisements, brochures, flyers, shoppers or other unsolicited
commercial matter, printed or otherwise, of every kind or nature
whatsoever other than in a litter receptacle,
§ 150-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-11
1:403
§ 150-12. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to the delivery of:
§ 150-13. Unsolicited and nonsubscribed commercial publications.
The delivery of unsolicited and nonsubscribed newspapers and publications
and other periodicals of a commercial nature shall be discontinued at such
time as the owner or occupant of any property within the township shall, in
writing, transmit to the publisher and/or deliverer notice of objection to the
continued delivery of any such unsolicited and nonsubscribed publication.
B. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this article, the operator or owner, or
both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to have violated
this article.
A. Mail, parcels or packages by and in accordance with the rules of the
United States Postal Service.
B. Parcels, packages and materials by and in accordance with the rules of
the Railway Express Agency or other utility licensed or regulated for
such purposes and those delivered by vendors where ordered by the
owner or occupant of the recipient premises.
C. Newspapers and other publications and periodicals, only if subscribed
to by the owner or occupant of the recipient premises, provided that
they are either placed firmly in a receptacle designed for such purpose
of or, if none, then tightly wrapped to prevent blowing or scattering
upon the recipient premises or adjacent areas.
D. Laundry, dry cleaning, dairy, bakery and similar food products and
commercial product sampling by agreement with or invitation of the
owner or occupant of the recipient premises.
E. Solicitation cards, brochures and flyers by duly authorized bona fide
nonprofit charitable organizations, including, but not limited to, United
Fund, American Red Cross, religious, educational and medical and
volunteer police, fire and ambulance organizations, provided that they
are packaged and placed in such manner as not to blow or scatter upon
the recipient premises or adjacent areas.
F. Noncommercial handbills of a political or other nature whose
distribution is or may be protected by constitutional rights of free
speech, provided that they are packaged and placed in such manner as
not to blow and scatter upon the recipient premises or adjacent areas.
G. Unsolicited and nonsubscribed newspapers, publications and other
periodicals of a commercial nature, in whole or in part, provided that
distribution of the same is in compliance with this article, and further
provided that they are packaged and placed in such manner as not to
blow or scatter upon the recipient premises or adjacent areas.
§ 150-11 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 150-13
1:404
Such notice of objection shall continue in effect until revoked, and it shall
be deemed a violation of this section for any person to deliver or continue
to deliver any such unsolicited and nonsubscribed publication to any such
objecting owner or occupant.
§ 150-14. Enforcement and penalties.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Township
of West Windsor by the issuance of complaints to responsible parties with
penalties to be imposed on violators as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-3, General
penalty, of the Township Code.
§ 150-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-14
1:405

ARTICLE IV
Pet Waste
§ 150-15. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements for the proper
disposal of pet solid waste in the Township of West Windsor, so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to
comply.
§ 150-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
IMMEDIATE — That the pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal. Proper disposal does not include placement of waste in privately
owned trash cans or dumpsters unless the owner of such grants permission
for said disposal.
§ 150-17. Requirement for disposal.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 150-18. Exemptions.
A. Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance
animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this article while such
animal is being used for that purpose.
B. Any owner or keeper who disposes of pet waste, such as horse or cow
manure, upon the property of a resident to West Windsor Township at
the request of such resident for the purpose of a vegetable or flower
garden shall be exempt from the provisions of this article.
§ 150-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-19
1:407
§ 150-19. Enforcement and penalties.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by either the Police or Animal
Control Officer of West Windsor Township by the issuance of complaints to
responsible parties with penalties to be imposed on violators as provided in
Chapter 1, § 1-3, General penalty, of the Township Code.
§ 150-19 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 150-19
1:408
ARTICLE V
Wildlife Feeding
§ 150-20. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife
in any public park, private deed restricted (e.g., open space, greenbelt,
conservation) area or on any other property owned or operated by the
Township of West Windsor, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 150-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 150-22. Prohibited conduct.
§ 150-23. Enforcement and penalties.
A. No person shall feed any wildlife in any public park, private deed
restricted (e.g., open space, greenbelt, conservation) area or on any
other property owned or operated by the Township of West Windsor,
excluding confined wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks
or rehabilitation centers, or unconfined wildlife at environmental
facilities and education centers).
B. A licensed Animal Control Officer, Public Health Official or other
designated official, under the direction of the Health Officer or Chief of
Police, may be exempt from the prohibition of wildlife feeding when
such activities are conducted for the purpose of health and welfare.
A. This article shall be enforced either by the Police or the Animal Control
Officer of the Township of West Windsor.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
C. If a person shall persist in violating this article after being ordered to
cease feeding, then, in that event, such person shall be subject to the
penalties provided in Chapter 1, § 1-3 General penalty, of the Township
Code, after the issuance of a complaint by the Police or Animal Control
Officer.
§ 150-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-23
1:409

ARTICLE VI
Yard Waste Collection
§ 150-24. Purpose. [Amended 1-6-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-19]
The purpose of this article is to establish a residential yard waste collection
and disposal program in the Township of West Windsor, so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure
to comply.
§ 150-25. Definitions. [Amended 12-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-23]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket, or
other vessel, excluding bags, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling
or blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
YARD WASTE — Brush, leaves, yard debris (e.g., branches less than fourinch
diameter and five feet in length, tree trunks and logs that do not exceed
six inches in width and are less than 18 inches in length, twigs, shrub
clippings, garden trimmings, plant stalks, pine needles, tree trimmings,
pruning debris, weeds, flowers, brown Sweet Gum balls, etc.). Yard waste
does not mean grass, soil, garbage, fruits, vegetables, railroad ties,
landscape timber, pressure-treated material, concrete, bricks, tree stumps
or large tree limbs, wood, construction materials, stones, plywood, two-byfours,
etc.[Amended 1-6-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-19]
§ 150-26. Yard waste collection. [Amended 12-29-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-53; 1-6-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-19]
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection, and yard waste
shall not be placed closer than 10 feet to any storm drain inlet, nor in such
a manner that it blocks a bicycle lane or other depressed curb crosswalk.
Placement of such yard waste in the public ways adjacent to private
property (as defined in § 150-10B of Article III) or at any other time or in
any other manner is a violation of this article. Yard waste collection shall
not take place for the months of January and February. There shall be an
exclusion from the requirements of this section for storm events that are
defined by the declaration of a state of emergency by the Mayor of West
Windsor or Governor of the State of New Jersey.
§ 150-27. Enforcement and penalties.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department or
the Director of Public Works and/or their designee of the Township of West
Windsor by the issuance of complaints to responsible property owners with
penalties to be imposed on violators as follows:
§ 150-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-27
1:411
A. Upon the observance by a Township employee of a violation of § 150-26,
the property owner shall be issued a notice of violation giving them five
business days to comply.
B. If at the end of the five business days' time the violation continues, a
summons shall be issued by the Township and a penalty of $100 shall be
assessed.
C. Should the violation be a threat to the public's health, safety and
welfare, the Township shall also have the ability, after five days, to
remediate the violation and assess the property owner for all fees and
costs by placing a lien against the property by the filing of a certificate
with the County Clerk's office. The Township may also proceed in a
summary action before the courts. Said lien shall include all interest
and fees that occur with the filing of the lien.
D. If a second separate violation occurs within two years' time, the fine
shall increase to $250 and $500 for the third violation during the twoyear
time period.
E. Persons found illegally dumping yard waste, as defined in this article,
shall be assessed a penalty of $250 for the first offense and $500 for any
subsequent offense.
F. All records of violations shall be kept and maintained by the
Department of Public Works.
§ 150-27 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 150-27
1:412
ARTICLE VII
Refuse Containers/Dumpsters
[Added 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-20]
§ 150-28. Purpose.
For the purpose of this article, all dumpsters and other refuse containers
that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater are required to be covered at all
times and it prohibits the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge
of liquids, semiliquids or solids from the containers to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of West Windsor
and/or the waters of the State of New Jersey so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 150-29. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions below
are either the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of West Windsor or
other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls, or
operates, including dumpsters, trash cans, garbage pails, food waste
containers, grease waste containers and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 150-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-30
1:413
§ 150-30. Prohibited conduct.
§ 150-31. Exceptions to prohibition.
Exceptions to prohibition are:
§ 150-32. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out,
overflowing or accumulating adjacent to said container.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semiliquids, solids or any conveyance
which discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s)
operated by the Township of West Windsor and/or the waters of the
State of New Jersey.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual residential property trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
A. This article shall be enforced by the Police, Township Engineer, Health
Officer and/or their designee of the Township of West Windsor.
B. Penalties for violation of this article shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3.
§ 150-30 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 150-32
1:414
ARTICLE VIII
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
[Added 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-20]
§ 150-33. Purpose.
For the purpose of this article, all existing privately owned storm drain
inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction,
regrading or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property
must be retrofitted to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such
as plastic bottles, cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of West Windsor
so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties
for the failure to comply.
§ 150-34. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions below
are either the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of West Windsor or
other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 150-35. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property shall authorize the repaving,
repairing, resurfacing (including, but not limited to, top coating or chip
§ 150-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-35
1:415
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin layer of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with or in close proximity to
an existing storm drain inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet
either:
§ 150-36. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 150-35 shall comply with the following
standard to control the passage of solid and floatable materials through
the storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see § 150-37.
§ 150-37. Exceptions and exemptions.
A. Already meets the design standard provided in § 150-36 to control
passage of solid and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the design standard provided in
§ 150-36 prior to the completion of the project.
A. Grates.
(1) Property owners and/or their design engineers shall use either of
the following grates whenever they use a grate in pavement or any
other ground surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a
storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT
Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and
Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, provided each individual void space in that
grate has an area of no more than 7.0 square inches, and/or is
no greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
(2) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever property owners and/or their design engineers use a curbopening
inlet, the void space in that curb opening (or each individual
void space, if the curb opening has two or more void spaces) shall have
an area of no more than 7.0 square inches, and/or be no greater than
2.0 inches across the smallest dimension used in calculating the
opening area.
§ 150-35 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 150-37
1:416
§ 150-38. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Exceptions to the prohibitions identified in § 150-35:
(1) Residential lot with one single-family residential dwelling.
(2) Repair of individual cracks, potholes, sinkholes and/or depressions
by filling to meet surrounding existing grades.
B. Exemptions to the design standards identified in § 150-36:
(1) Where the Township Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional and/or larger storm drain inlets
that meet these standards.
(2) Where, prior to discharge to waters of the state, flows are conveyed
through any device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed, at a
minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable materials
that could not pass through one of the following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(This option does not apply for outfall netting facilities.); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 of an inch.
(3) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register-listed historic property.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Police, Township Engineer, Health
Officer and/or their designee of the Township of West Windsor.
B. Penalties for violation of this article shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3.
§ 150-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-38
1:417
Chapter 152
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public emergencies — See Ch. 9.
Fees — See Ch. 82.
Driving out of parking lots across
sidewalks — See Ch. 118, § 118-13.
Excavations for mineral deposits — See Ch.
143, Art. II.
Traffic and parking — See Ch. 168.
Trees blocking view at intersections — See
Ch. 170, § 170-6.
Maintenance of streets prior to
acceptance — See § 200-95.
§ 150-38 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 150-38
1:418
ARTICLE I
Use of Streets
[Adopted 12-27-1979 by Ord. No. 79-39 as Sec. 11-1 of the Revised
General Ordinances]
§ 152-1. Damage to streets due to improper tires.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive upon or operate on any of the
streets or any portions thereof any motor vehicles, tractor or machinery
or equipment which is or which may be mechanically operated or drawn,
unless each and every such motor vehicle, tractor or mechanically operated
or drawn machinery and equipment shall be equipped with rubber tire
wheels or metal or wooden wheels with tread of sufficient width and
smoothness or such other device as shall prevent any damage being done
to any part of the streets by reason of the motor vehicle, tractor or
mechanically drawn or operated machinery or equipment using the streets
or any portion thereof.
§ 152-2. Turning around of farm equipment.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or cause to be used any portion
of any of the streets as a headland or for the turning around of or crossing
over by any motor vehicle, tractor or machinery or equipment being used in
connection with farming operations on lands adjacent to any street in such
a manner so as to cause damage to any portion or portions of the streets by
reason thereof.
§ 152-3. Damaging or obstructing ditches, culverts and shoulders.
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or cause to be damaged the
shoulders, ditches or culverts of any township road; or to hinder, impede or
obstruct the drainage of these roads by putting or causing to be put in the
ditches or culverts dirt, stones, bags or any other thing which may impede
or obstruct the flow of drainage through said ditches or culverts.
§ 152-4. Notice of violation; failure to comply; enforcement
procedure.
A. Should any owner or tenant of lands abutting or bordering upon
township streets or employees or agents of the owner or tenant violate
the provisions of this article and damage the street or obstruct the
ditches or culverts of the street along such lands, the township may give
notice to the owner and tenant, if such be the case, of this land to repair
the damage or remove the obstruction within 10 days after the service
of such notice; and in case the owner or tenant shall fail to repair the
damage or remove the obstruction within 10 days after service of the
notice, the Mayor or designee may have the damage repaired or
obstruction removed and cause the cost thereof to be charged against
the lands abutting or bordering upon the highway, and the amount so
charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall be
§ 152-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-4
1:419
§ 152-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-07]
Penalties for violation of this article shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3.
collected and enforced by the same officer and in the same manner as
taxes. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
B. This notice shall be served upon the owner or tenant, if resident of the
township, in person or by leaving the same at his or her usual place of
abode with a member of the family above the age of 14 years; and in
case the owner or tenant shall be a nonresident of the township, the
notice may be served upon the owner or tenant in person or it may be
served upon the occupant of the lands or a copy of the notice may be
mailed to the owner or tenant at his or her last known address. Notice
to infant or mentally incompetent owners or tenants shall be served
upon their guardians. When lands are held by two or more persons as
joint tenants, tenants in common or tenants by the entirety, service
upon any one or more of such owners shall be sufficient and shall be
deemed to be notice to all.
§ 152-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 152-5
1:420
ARTICLE II
Excavations
[Adopted 12-27-1979 by Ord. No. 79-39 as Sec. 11-2 of the Revised
General Ordinances]
§ 152-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FAR-SIDE OPENINGS — Any openings which cross the center line of the
surface of a road.
IMPROVED ROAD —
LONGITUDINAL OPENINGS — Openings which run parallel to the center
line of the road.[Added 6-22-1981 by Ord. No. 81-22]
NEAR-SIDE OPENINGS — Any openings which do not cross the center line
of the surface of a road.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The land used or intended for use as streets, as shown on
deeds, plats, tax maps or the Master Plan.[Added 4-23-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-14]
UNIMPROVED ROAD — Any cinder, dirt or gravel road without oil
treatment.
§ 152-7. Permit required. [Amended 4-23-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-14]
No person shall cut, dig, drill or make any hole, trench or other excavation
in any public right-of-way, road, street, alley or highway under the
jurisdiction of the township without first having obtained from the township
a permit therefor.
§ 152-8. Applications requirements.
CLASS A — Any road surfaced with a pavement such as asphalt,
concrete, brick or similar pavement; and/or any road having a concrete
base.
A.
CLASS B — Any road surfaced with stone or slag uniformly deposited
in layers, with a total thickness of not less than four inches, where said
stone or slag has been compacted by the use of a power roller and
bound together by the application of oil.
B.
CLASS C — Any old macadam or other road surfaced with a light coat of
stone and oil or any water-bound macadam road without oil treatment;
and any gravel and/or cinder road with oil treatment.
C.
A. The application for a permit required by § 152-7 shall be made to the
Township Engineer, who is hereby authorized to issue the same, subject
to the provisions of this article; the applications shall be made, in
§ 152-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-8
1:421
§ 152-9. Fees; bond in lieu of fees; general street improvements.
[Amended 6-22-1981 by Ord. No. 81-22]
writing, on the forms furnished by the Township, and signed by the
applicant.
B. The permit shall state the name and address of the applicant, the name
of the street or road where the opening is to be made and the house
number and tax map lot and block number of the property for which the
opening is to be made. It shall set forth the reasons for the work
proposed, the type of surface to be opened, the classification of the
opening under this article, the amount of the fee paid and the time limit
for the completion of the work for which the permit is issued.
[Amended 6-22-1981 by Ord. No. 81-22; 4-23-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-14]
A. The application for the permit required by § 152-7 shall pay to the
Township Engineer for the use of the township the fee fixed by the
schedule contained in Chapter 82, Fees, § 82-13, and post the
appropriate bond as outlined in Subsection E below. [Amended
4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
B. A municipal or utility corporation may, in lieu of posting of individual
bonds, file an approved bond with the Township in the penal sum of
$10,000, conditioned for the complete restoration to the satisfaction of
the Township Engineer of the foundation and surface of any road
permitted by the Township Council to be opened by it. [Amended
4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07; 4-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14]
C. A municipal or utility corporation may, in lieu of the payment of
individual permit fees herein prescribed, pay an annual permit fee of
$1,000 to cover the costs of administration of said opening applications.
The municipal entity or public utility corporation shall be responsible
for all inspection fees incurred by the Township, and will reimburse the
Township for the cost of said inspections upon receipt of billings from
the Township. [Amended 4-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14]
D. No fee shall be required for any permit to open any street to make an
underground conduit extension demanded by the township because of a
proposed improvement to an unimproved road.
E. In the event that the applicant does not have an existing or previously
approved bond, the amount of the bond to be posted shall be calculated
as follows:
(1) Near-side opening: $500.
(2) Far-side opening: $1,000.
(3) Longitudinal openings: $500 for the first 15 feet, plus $30 per foot
for anything in excess of 15 feet.
§ 152-8 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 152-10
1:422
§ 152-10. Rules and regulations for openings.
All permits issued under § 152-7 shall be subject to the following rules and
regulations:
A. Protection for traveling public. The party or parties to whom the permit
is issued shall keep such opening properly guarded and at night shall
place lights thereat and, in doing the work, shall interfere as little as
possible with the travel along the road and not close the road to traffic
unless the party or parties to whom the permit was issued was granted
permission so to do by resolution of the Township Council.
B. Time limit. In case the work has not been completed before the date of
expiration as stated in the permit and the party or parties to whom the
permit was issued have not requested an extension of time, the
Township Engineer may, if deemed advisable, take steps to backfill the
trench and replace a permanent pavement over the opening for which
the permit had been issued, and if any extension of time beyond said
date is needed for the completion of the work, a new application must
be filed.
C. Excavation. The work shall be so conducted as not to interfere with any
water main, sewer or their connections with houses until permission of
the proper authorities shall have been obtained. All rock within five feet
of a water main or other pipe which will be damaged thereby shall be
removed without blasting. No excavation which will damage trees or
township property shall be made without the approval of the township.
[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
D. Trench restoration. All trenches in existing township roads shall be
restored to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer, and such
restoration shall include the following: [Amended 12-30-1985 by
Ord. No. 85-37]
(1) All bedding material in the haunch portion of the bedding area shall
be:
(a) Choked clean stone using approximately one part clean sand to
two parts clean, uniformly graded crushed stone or river
gravel; or
(b) Sandy gravel (insitu material), if approved by the Engineer on
a site specific basis; or
(c) Clean stone, only if enveloped with filter fabric of a type
approved by the Engineer.
(2) Above the bedding haunch area to one foot above the pipe shall be
clean sand with not more than 10% passing the number 100 sieve
size. This material shall be compacted to 90% maximum dry
density.
§ 152-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-10
1:423
(3) Above the bedding area as described in Subsection D(2) above shall
be sand/cement backfill.
(a) If placed wet, sand/cement material shall be vibrated
sufficiently to ensure that no voids remain, using 180 cycles
per second in head motor vibrator or equal.
(b) If placed dry, the placement of sand/cement shall be in layers
not more than 12 inches deep and compacted to 95% maximum
density at optimum moisture content.
(c) In the case of either Subsection D(3)(a) or D(3)(b) above, the
sand/cement backfill shall be brought to a level six inches
below the bituminous concrete stabilized base course and
FABC of such thickness as is specified in § 200-91 of the Code
of the Township of West Windsor for the specific class of road
being restored.
(d) Following the placement of the sand/cement backfill, the
contractor shall line cut the existing edges of pavement so that
the minimum length and width of the existing sound pavement
removal shall be not less than 24 inches wider than the widest
and longest disturbed portion of the trench excavation. Such
line cuts shall be in a clean, single straight line so as to permit
proper compaction of 1 to 5 soil aggregate and bituminous
stabilized base course. [Amended 4-23-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-14]
(e) Six inches of 1-5 soil aggregate is required in the area
identified in Subsection D(3)(d) above. Careful attention
should be paid to the percent of content of fines in any portion
of the restoration, and such content shall not exceed the
current New Jersey Department of Transportation standards
for 1-5. This soil aggregate shall be compacted to 95%
maximum density at optimum moisture content.
(f) Upon proper placement and compaction of the 1-5 soil
aggregate and bituminous concrete base course, the edges of
the existing pavement of the FABC shall be tack coated with an
approved tack coat material. In no case shall the existing
pavement thickness reduce the thickness of the pavement
restoration requirements.
(g) The two inches FABC shall be placed in such a level so as to
support the entire weight of the roller on the newly placed
FABC so that when the rolling is finished, the FABC shall be
consolidated to the density consistent with the requirements of
the current NJDOT specifications and be 1/4 inch higher than
the existing and/or surrounding pavement. In the event that
the 1/4 inch higher pavement could cause drainage problems,
§ 152-10 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 152-10
1:424
the exact elevation of the patch FABC shall be as approved by
the Township Engineer.
(h) All edges shall be sealed with the same material used for tack
coat, such as rapid curing cutback asphalt, grades RC70 or RCT
or approved equal.
E. Violations and penalties. Any person violating Subsection D of this
section shall, upon conviction, pay a penalty of not less than $500 for
each violation. Every day in which a violation exists shall constitute a
separate violation, with the minimum penalty as heretofore described.
The maximum penalty shall be as is otherwise provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3 of this Code. [Amended
12-30-1985 by Ord. No. 85-37; 4-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14]
F. Backfills in tunnels. In cases where it becomes necessary to resort to
tunneling operations to reach the point of connection with the main
line, the backfill in such tunnel shall be of rammed cement concrete
composed of a mixture by volume of one part cement to six parts of
coarse aggregate material not inferior to cinders.
G. Special conditions. The township reserves the right to impose special
conditions in special cases.
H. Whenever any road opening shall require the closing of a road or the
disruption of any utilities, 72 hours advance notice of such opening
shall be provided to the Township Engineer. [Amended 9-27-1982 by
Ord. No. 82-44]
I. Indemnification of Township. Each permittee shall, as a condition of
accepting any permit issued hereunder, save, hold and keep harmless
and indemnify the Township, its officers, agents, servants and
employees from and against any loss, damage, claim, demand or
expense arising out of any suit or claim for damage or injury alleged to
have been sustained as a result of any work done under such permit.
[Added 4-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14]
J. Insurance. No permit shall be issued until the applicant has furnished
the Engineer with satisfactory proof that he/she is insured against
injury to persons and damage to property caused by any act or omission
of the applicant, his/her agents, employees or subcontractors done in
the course of the work to be performed under the permit. The insurance
shall cover all hazards likely to arise in connection with the work,
including, but not limited to, collapse and explosion, and shall also
insure against liability arising from the completed operations. The
limits of the insurance shall be $300,000 for injury to any one person,
$500,000 for injuries to more than one person in the same accident and
$300,000 for property damage for a single incident. The governing body
may waive the requirements of this subsection for public utilities on the
presentation of satisfactory proof that they are capable of meeting
claims against them up to the amount of the limits of the insurance
§ 152-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-10
1:425
§ 152-11. Promulgation of additional rules and regulations.
[Amended 12-17-1982 by Ord. No. 82-57; 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-07]
The Township Engineer may make any rules and regulations which he or she
considers necessary for the administration and enforcement of this article,
but no regulation shall be inconsistent with, alter or amend any provision
of this article or impose any requirement which is in addition to those
expressly or by implication imposed by this article. No regulations shall
be effective unless they are approved by the Mayor. Copies of all current
regulations shall be furnished each permittee at the time of the issuance of
the permit.
§ 152-12. Specifications for barricades and signs. [Amended
12-27-1982 by Ord. No. 82-57]
The permit holder shall conform to the requirements in the current Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, Part VI, when
required by the township to provide barricades and/or signs.
§ 152-13. Traffic safety precautions. [Amended 12-27-1982 by Ord.
No. 82-57; 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
Prior to the issuance of a road opening permit, the applicant shall contact
the Township Police Division, Traffic Safety Bureau, for instructions on the
traffic safety precautions to be taken.
§ 152-14. Notice of street improvement; time frame for completion
of work. [Amended 12-27-1982 by Ord. No. 82-57]
Before any street is improved or paved, the Township Engineer shall give
notice to all persons owning property abutting on the street and to all public
utilities and authorities operating in the township that the street is about to
be paved or improved. All connections and repairs to utilities in the street
shall be completed within 30 days from the receipt of notice. The time for
the completion of the work may be extended, in writing, by the Township
Administrator upon application by the person performing the work. This
policy which would otherwise be required. The insurance required by
this section shall name West Windsor Township as additional certificate
holder and additional insured. [Added 4-23-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-14]
K. Acceptance of work. Acceptance or approval of any excavation work by
the Township Engineer shall not prevent the Township from asserting a
claim against the permittee and his/her or its surety under the surety
bond required hereunder for incomplete or defective work, if
discovered within 12 months from the completion of the excavation
work. The Township Engineer's presence during the performance of
any excavation work shall not relieve the permittee of its
responsibilities hereunder. [Added 4-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14]
§ 152-10 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 152-14
1:426
section shall not excuse any person from the requirement of obtaining a
permit as provided in § 152-7 above.
§ 152-15. Special permission required for excavations in recently
improved streets. [Amended 12-27-1982 by Ord. No. 82-57]
Except in case of an emergency, no person to whom notice was given as
provided in § 152-14 above shall be issued a permit to excavate the street
to which the notice related for a period of five years from the date of
completion of the work for which the permit has been issued unless its
issuance is approved by the Township Council.
§ 152-16. Relocation of overhead utility wires. [Added 11-16-1998
by Ord. No. 98-30]
§ 152-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-07]
Penalties for violation of this article shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3.
A. Relocation required. When at any time, the township determines that it
would be in the interest of the public welfare to make improvements to
public streets and sidewalks where overhead utility lines exist and said
improvements would require excavation of the public street or
sidewalk, the Council may require said utilities to relocate the existing
overhead wires to underground conduits at the expense of the utility.
B. Notice and hearing. The municipality shall provide written notice to a
utility at its place of business no less than 10 days prior to a hearing to
be held regarding the matters of improvement of the public way in
question and the need for utility relocation to underground. Subsequent
to such hearing, the Council, by resolution, may order said utility
company to relocate its overhead wires to underground conduits at its
own expense.
C. Relocation plan. No less than 30 days prior to the date of excavation to
improve a public way is to begin, the utilities obligated to relocate their
overhead wires to underground conduits shall submit a plan to the
Township Engineer for said relocation, showing the exact location and
dimensions of the underground conduit, together with a statement
giving detailed and complete information as to the character of the
work to be performed. Such plans and statements shall remain
permanently on file in the office of the Township Engineer.
§ 152-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-17
1:427

ARTICLE III
Maintenance, Repair and Construction of Sidewalks and Retaining
Walls in Public Right-of-Way
[Adopted 6-25-1984 by Ord. No. 84-23 (Sec. 3-6 of the Revised
General Ordinances); amended in its entirety 4-23-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-14]
§ 152-18. Snow and ice removal or treatment required.
The owner, occupant or tenant of the premises abutting or bordering upon
any street in the Township shall remove all snow and ice from the abutting
sidewalks of such streets or, in the event of ice which may be so frozen as to
make removal impracticable, shall cause the same to be thoroughly covered
with sand, ashes or rock salt within 24 hours after the same shall cease to
fall or be formed thereon.
§ 152-19. Depositing snow or ice upon streets or sidewalks
prohibited.
No person, owner, tenant or occupant of any premises abutting on any
street or sidewalk shall throw, place or deposit any snow or ice accumulated
on private property into or upon any such street or sidewalk in the
Township.
§ 152-20. Maintenance and repair; notice; failure to comply.
A. Duties of owners/occupants. The owner, occupant or tenant of the
premises abutting or bordering upon any street in the Township shall
repair and maintain the abutting sidewalks and retaining walls of such
streets in accordance with the standard construction details for
sidewalks and retaining walls on file in the office of the Township
Engineer. This standard does not apply to those types of large retaining
walls typically constructed as part of grade separated roadway
intersection improvements projects.
B. Notice to repair. Whenever an owner, occupant or tenant of such
property shall fail to maintain and repair the sidewalks and retaining
walls abutting said owner's, occupant's or tenant's property or shall
permit them to deteriorate into such condition that the safety of the
public is impaired, written notice shall be given to the owner and
occupant or tenant, if any, directing said owner, occupant or tenant to
perform such maintenance or repairs within 30 days after the giving of
the notice.
C. Contents of notice; service. The notice shall contain a description of the
property sufficient to identify it, but need not contain a legal
description. Notice may be given in the same manner as provided for
the service of judicial process in any of the courts of the State of New
Jersey or by sending it registered mail, return receipt requested,
§ 152-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-20
1:429
§ 152-20.1. Construction feasibility; permits; standards and
specifications; grades.
addressed to the owner and occupant or tenant, if any, at his or her last
known post office address.
D. Noncompliance procedure. If the owner and occupant or tenant, if any,
of such lands to whom such notice shall have been given as aforesaid
shall refuse or neglect to perform such repairs or maintenance within
the thirty-day period, then the work may be performed by the Township.
The cost of said work, when certified to the Township Engineer and
found by it to be correct, shall be charged against the property affected,
as provided for in N.J.S.A. 40:65-14 et seq. The amount so charged shall
forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall be added to the taxes
next to be assessed and levied upon such lands, bearing interest at the
same rate as taxes and collected and enforced in the same manner as
taxes.
E. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to relieve any property
owner from the obligation of inspecting and maintaining any sidewalks
or retaining walls located in the public right-of-way abutting their
property, nor be construed as an assumption by the Township of any
responsibility to inspect sidewalks.
A. Feasibility. A retaining wall in the public right-of-way is permitted only
where it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Township
Engineer that there is no feasible, reasonable alternative to either
construct the retaining wall outside of the public right-of-way, or to
perform an alternative slope treatment to solve the grade differential
problem. No wall is permitted where it may present a danger or hazard
to public welfare. No wall is permitted where it may violate clear sight
triangle requirements at street corners.
B. Permits. No sidewalk or retaining wall located in the public right-of-way
shall be constructed, altered, repaired or replaced except pursuant to a
permit issued by the Township Engineer on application and payment of
an application fee in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
Repairs of a minor nature shall be exempt from the requirement for the
filing of a plan and from the fee requirement.
C. Standards. All sidewalks and retaining walls in the public right-of-way
shall be constructed, repaired or altered in accordance with the
standard construction details for sidewalks and retaining walls on file in
the office of the Township Engineer.
D. Specifications and grades for sidewalks. All new sidewalks shall be
constructed of Portland cement air-entrained concrete, having a
standard compressive strength of 4,500 pounds per square inch, of
natural color, to lines and grades approved by the Township Engineer,
and in the manner and under the conditions hereinafter specified in this
§ 152-20 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 152-20.1
1:430
§ 152-21. Violations and penalties.
Any owner, occupant or tenant violating any provision of this article shall be
liable to the penalties established in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
II, Penalty, § 1-3.
chapter. All repairs, replacements or alterations to existing sidewalks
may be constructed of the same material used in the existing sidewalk.
E. Specifications and grades for retaining walls. Upon the approval of the
Township Engineer, retaining walls may be constructed of steelreinforced
Portland cement concrete, a commercial modular concrete
block retaining wall system, brick or stone, or a combination of the
above, to lines and grades approved by the Township Engineer, and in
the manner and under the conditions hereinafter specified in this
chapter. Design requirements for walls are subject to proposed height,
surcharge loads from adjacent structures and/or driveways, and site
soil conditions. In instances where the slope on the upper side of the
retaining wall exceeds 3:1 and/or wall height exceeds 47 inches, a
guard rail or other restraining device must be provided at the top of the
retaining wall.
§ 152-20.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-21
1:431

ARTICLE IV
Traffic Controls During Construction
[Adopted 7-27-1987 by Ord. No. 87-27 (Sec. 11-2 of the Revised
General Ordinances)]
§ 152-22. Preconstruction meetings.
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor or public utility
wishing to conduct work on, under or above any roadway to contact the
West Windsor Township Police Division, Traffic Safety Bureau, in order to
arrange a preconstruction meeting in order to submit plans for the safe
movement of traffic during such period of construction of work. Any person,
contractor or utility who fails to comply with this article prior to the start of
such work or whose plans are not approved by the Traffic Safety Bureau of
the West Windsor Township Police Division is in violation of this article.
§ 152-23. Emergency contact telephone numbers.
The person, contractor or utility shall provide the Traffic Safety Bureau
with at least two emergency contact telephone numbers to be called in
case of emergency problems at the construction or maintenance site prior
to the start of any work. If for any reason emergency contacts cannot be
reached or if the emergency contact person does not respond to a call
from the Police Division to correct a hazardous condition, the township
may respond to correct such hazardous condition. The reasonable fees for
such emergency services by the township shall be charged to the person,
contractor or utility responsible for such condition.
§ 152-24. Hours.
There shall be no construction, maintenance operations or utility work on
any street or highway in the township before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after
4:00 p.m. This time limit may be adjusted to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m.
or after 4:00 p.m. by the officer in charge of the Traffic Safety Bureau of
the West Windsor Township Police Division. If it is determined by the officer
in charge of the Traffic Safety Bureau that the construction or maintenance
operations prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. would substantially delay
traffic or cause a safety or health hazard, the work shall then be permitted
only between 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
§ 152-25. Detours.
Traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved by the officer in
charge of the Traffic Safety Bureau.
§ 152-26. Traffic directors.
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when determined by the officer in charge of the Traffic Safety Bureau that
§ 152-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-26
1:433
the same is necessary to provide for the safety and expeditious movement
of traffic.
§ 152-27. Authority to stop work to abate hazards.
The Traffic Safety Bureau of the West Windsor Township Police Division
shall have the authority to stop work, including the removal of equipment
and vehicles, stored material within the street right-of-way, backfilling of
open excavations and/or other related work, in order to abate any nuisance
and/or safety hazard or for any violation of this article.
§ 152-28. Violations and penalties.
A. Penalties for violation of this article shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3. [Amended 4-19-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-07]
B. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 152-26 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 152-28
1:434
ARTICLE V
Street Closings
[Adopted 1-23-1989 by Ord. No. 89-7 (Sec. 11-3 of the Revised
General Ordinances)]
§ 152-29. Authorization to close street or street portion.
The Mayor of the township is hereby authorized to provide by proclamation
for the closing of any street or portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic on
any day or days during specified hours whenever the Mayor finds that such
closing is necessary for the preservation of the public safety, health or
welfare.
§ 152-30. Posting of proper warning signs.
Any proclamation by the Mayor under and in accordance with § 152-27
above shall provide for the posting of proper warning signs of such closing
in any street or portion thereof during the time the same is closed pursuant
thereto.
§ 152-31. Approval of proclamations.
Any proclamation adopted under this article shall not become effective
unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the Commissioner
of Transportation of the Department of Transportation, if required by law.146
146. Editor's Note: This article was approved 2-28-1989.
§ 152-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-31
1:435
Chapter 162
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 82. Land use — See Ch. 200.
§ 152-31 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 152-31
1:436
ARTICLE I
WaterWorks at West Windsor Community Pool
[Adopted 6-17-1974 (Sec. BH:5-6 of the Revised General
Ordinances); readopted by the Township Council at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III)]
§ 162-1. Establishment of rules and schedule of fees.
The township shall establish rules for the supervision and control of the
municipal swimming pool and a schedule of fees147 in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:61-22.26 and 40:61-22.7.
§ 162-2. Supervision.
General supervision and control over the maintenance and operation of the
municipal swimming pool is hereby assigned to the Board of Recreation
Commissioners.
§ 162-3. Adoption of Facility Rules.
The Facility Rules of the municipal swimming pool, as published by the
Board of Recreation Commissioners, are hereby adopted for the supervision
and control of all activities carried on in connection with the municipal
swimming pool. The Facility Rules are appended hereto and shall appear in
the Appendix of this Code.
§ 162-4. Enforcement.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:61-22.28, the Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction
over actions for the violation of any of the Facility Rules of the municipal
swimming pool, and the Facility Rules shall be enforced by the same
proceedings and processes, and the practice for enforcement thereof shall
be the same as that provided by law for the enforcement of other ordinances
of the municipality.
§ 162-5. Violations and penalties.
Penalties for violation of this article shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3.
147. Editor's Note: For specific fees and charges, see Ch. 82, Fees.
§ 162-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-5
1:437

ARTICLE II
Public Swimming Pools
[Adopted 6-17-1974 (Ch. BH:V of the Revised General Ordinances);
readopted by the Township Council at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III)]
§ 162-6. Applicable provisions.
The provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:26-1.1, pertaining to public recreational
bathing, shall apply in the Township of West Windsor, with revisions as set
forth in § 162-7. Copies of N.J.A.C 8:26-1.1 are available in the office of the
Township Clerk.
§ 162-7. Amendments.
§ 162-8. License required.
No person shall locate and construct, alter or operate a swimming pool until
licenses shall have been issued by the township.
§ 162-9. License expiration and renewal.
Licenses issued for the operation of a swimming pool shall expire annually
on April 1 of each year, and application for renewal shall be submitted,
together with the required fee, prior to March 31 of each year.
§ 162-10. Denial or suspension of license.
Licenses required by this article or code may be denied or suspended by the
Health Officer for failure to comply with this article or code.
§ 162-11. Violations and penalties.
A. N.J.A.C. 8:26-2.4(c) is amended to add the following additional
requirement:
The Administrative Authority shall be notified in writing at least seven
(7) days in advance of the emptying or cleaning of any swimming
pool.
B. N.J.A.C. 8:26-4.8(d)7 is amended to add the following additional
requirement:
Complete instructions, in duplicate, shall be furnished, complete with
such drawings and tagging of all drains and valves as are necessary
to clearly define required maintenance procedures. In addition, all
pipes shall be color coded: green for city or potable water, red for
wastewater, yellow for circulating, etc., and otherwise to the
satisfaction of the Administrative Authority.
§ 162-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-11
1:439
A. Penalties for violation of this article shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-4.
B. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 162-11 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 162-11
1:440
ARTICLE III
Private Swimming Pools
[Adopted 12-27-1979 by Ord. No. 79-39 as Ch. XIII of the Revised
General Ordinances]
§ 162-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Any manufactured, artificially constructed
or developed swimming pool or swimming pond, excluding reservoirs or
ponds used by farmers as part of their irrigation system, which has a depth
in excess of 18 inches at any point and is permanently or temporarily
established or maintained upon any premises by any individual for such
individual, such individual's family or such individual's guests.
§ 162-13. Construction permits.
§ 162-14. Forwarding of application to Health Officer.
The application will be forwarded by the Construction Official to the Health
Officer, who, within 14 days after receipt of the application, shall take one
of the following actions:
A. Permit required. No private swimming pool shall hereafter be
constructed, installed or altered without the property owner having
first obtained a permit in the manner hereinafter provided.
B. Application for permit. An application for such a permit shall be made
to the Construction Official. The application shall include:
(1) Two sets of plans and specifications or descriptive brochures.
(2) Two plot plans drawn to scale, showing the entire lot upon which
said pool is proposed to be constructed, developed, installed or
altered and showing the area within 300 feet of the proposed pool
site. The plot plan shall also include the size, shape, depth and
location of the pool; the type, height and location of the fence; the
distance of the pool from property lines and from all other
structures on said lot or adjacent area; and the location of the
septic system and any electrical installation within 15 feet of a pool
edge or above any part of the pool.
(3) A description of the water inlet system.
(4) A description of the method of disinfection (refer to § 162-18B and
C), treatment and disposal (refer to § 162-18H) of the water to be
used.
A. Approve the application and so indicate to the Construction Official.
§ 162-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-14
1:441
§ 162-15. Processing approved applications.
Upon receipt of an approved application from the Health Officer, the
Construction Official will examine the application for conformity to existing
building codes and this article. The Construction Official will issue a permit
upon payment of applicable fees.
§ 162-16. Inspections.
Before the pool is put into use, the Construction Official and Health Officer
will make an inspection and assure compliance with the structure and
health requirements. The building permit shall then be endorsed as a use
permit.
§ 162-17. Fees.
The following fees for permits shall apply: same as for building permits.148
§ 162-18. Construction and equipment requirements; distance
restriction; fencing.
B. Approve the application subject to additional sanitary safeguards
deemed necessary for the safeguard of public health, and so indicate to
the Construction Official.
C. Reject the application and indicate the reasons therefor to the
Construction Official.
A. No provision of this article shall mitigate any provision of the Building
Code that is applicable to swimming pools.149
B. The construction of any swimming pool (portable or permanent) shall
follow the design and safety precautions of good building practice. All
pools shall be designed and constructed so as to facilitate emptying and
cleaning and shall be maintained and operated in such manner as to be
clean and sanitary at all times.
C. All permanent swimming pools shall be so constructed, developed,
installed and maintained as to provide necessary equipment for
chlorination and other disinfection and filtration. The filtration system
shall have sufficient capacity to complete the recirculation of pool water
in 18 hours or less.
D. Swimming pools will not be located over or within 20 feet horizontally
from any septic disposal field or within 10 feet horizontally of a septic
tank or D-box. No property will be subdivided if the result will be that a
swimming pool will be separated in ownership from an adjoining
residence.150
148. Editor's Note: See Ch. 82, Fees.
149. Editor's Note: See Ch. 63, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 162-14 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 162-18
1:442
E. All private swimming pools now existing or hereafter constructed,
installed, established or maintained shall be enclosed with a substantial
fence and gate that comply with the minimum requirements listed
below:
(1) There shall be a fence at least four feet in height of such nature and
construction so as to reasonably preclude the easy entrance of
children to the pool area.
(2) All gates shall be the self-latching type and equipped with a
suitable locking device. Where the entire yard or premises whereon
the pool is situated is enclosed with fencing and gates of the above
specifications, this may be considered proper enclosure of the pool
area.
(3) An above-the-ground pool having a sidewall height of at least four
feet above finished ground level is exempt from the above fencing
requirement, provided that access to the pool is by means of a
removable or retractable ladder. A retractable ladder shall be
equipped with a key-operated locking device which will secure the
ladder in the retractable position when not in use.
(4) An above-the-ground pool of sidewall height less than four feet
above finished ground level may be exempt from the above fencing
requirements, provided that a suitable strong protective covering is
placed over the pool and adequately secured whenever the pool is
unattended or not in use; and provided, further, that the above
provisions with regard to ladders are also adhered to where
applicable.
(5) Small wading pools which are emptied when not in use are exempt
from these fencing requirements.
(6) No part of said fence shall be nearer than five feet to the pool,
except this distance shall not be applicable to the aboveground,
prefabricated type of pool which has an integral fence attached.
The fence shall be constructed in such a way that no person may
gain access to the pool beneath or through the fence.
F. No electrical switches, outlets or appliances and no electrical wiring
not in well-grounded shielding conduit shall be within a 10 foot radius
of any point of the pool's edge or surface as measured in any direction.
No electrical installation shall be so constructed or located that, in the
event that it should collapse or fall, it would fall into the pool. The
circulating pumps, motors, lights, filtration equipment and all other
electrical equipment used in conjunction with a swimming pool shall be
electrically supplied through an underwriter's approved ground fault
circuit breaker. Such breaker will be mounted within the main service
panel within the building on which Public Service has mounted its
150. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 162-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-18
1:443
§ 162-19. Operation and maintenance; artificial lighting.
All artificial lighting of the pool area shall be shielded from direct view of
neighboring properties or roads.
§ 162-20. Violations and penalties.151
Penalties for violation of this article shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3.
meter. Ground fault breakers designed to plug into existing wall
receptacles will not be approved for pool use. All electrical equipment
other than described above which is within 10 feet of any part of the
pool or its deck area that may be wetted by pool activity will be installed
as to comply with the National Electrical Code, 1978, and as thereafter
adopted by the State of New Jersey.
G. There shall be no physical connection between a potable water system
and a pool. The water supply system for a pool shall be in compliance
with the National Standard Plumbing Code, 1978, and as thereafter
adopted annually by the State of New Jersey.
H. Preferably, the discharge should empty into a storm sewer, stream or
dry well of adequate capacity. In no case shall the pool water be
discharged into a public sanitary sewer or on the ground within 50 feet
of a well or within 25 feet of an adjacent property, pool or residence.
151. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 162-18 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 162-20
1:444
Chapter 165
TAXICABS AND VEHICLES FOR HIRE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 82. Traffic and parking — See Ch. 168.
§ 165-1. Authority and scope.
§ 165-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have
the meanings given herein:
DRIVER'S LICENSE — A license required by all operators of a vehicle for
hire doing business within the Township.
LIMOUSINE — Any vehicle which has been issued a livery license plate
by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission and is used exclusively to
carry passengers for hire on an hourly or daily basis pursuant to a written
contract, does not have an established route and is constructed and
designed as to comfortably seat not more than 14 passengers as established
in N.J.S.A. 48:16-13, Article 2, excluding the operator of the
vehicle.[Amended 12-23-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-15]
LIMOUSINE OR LIVERY SERVICE — Includes the business of carrying
passengers for hire by limousines.
OWNER'S LICENSE — A license required by all owners or lessees of a
vehicle for hire doing business within the Township.
TAXICAB and TAXI — Any full-size, four-door sedan, station wagon, sports
utility vehicle or van, with a carrying capacity of not less than four
passengers, not including the driver, used in the business of carrying
passengers for hire, and particularly accepts and discharges such persons
from points and places to points or places within or outside the Township.
A. The authority to license and regulate taxicabs and limousines is set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40:52-1 and N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 et seq.
B. This chapter shall apply to all businesses commonly known as "vehicles
for hire," "taxicabs," "limousines" and "livery services" operating in
West Windsor Township. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
regulate hotel buses, buses employed solely in transporting school
children or teachers, autobuses which are subject to the jurisdiction of
the Department of Transportation, interstate autobuses or vehicles for
hire passing through the Township without stopping for businessrelated
purposes.
§ 162-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-2
1:445
TAXICAB STAND — A section of a public street or public place set apart
for the exclusive use of a limited number of taxicabs when the section is
distinctly marked as such.
TAXIMETER — A mechanical instrument or device by which the charge
for hire of a taxicab is mechanically calculated, either for the distance
traveled or for waiting time, or for both, and upon which such charges
shall be plainly indicated by means of figures, based upon rates established
pursuant to § 165-10.
VEHICLE FOR HIRE — A limousine or taxicab as defined herein.
§ 165-3. Licenses required.
A. Types of licenses. There shall be two separate licenses required before
a vehicle for hire may operate on the streets of this municipality.
(1) Owner's license. No person shall own or lease a vehicle to be
operated as a vehicle for hire without first having obtained from the
Township an owner's license for the specific vehicle. In addition, all
owners of a limousine and rental car chauffeur service industry
must follow the law changes found in N.J.S.A. 48:16-22.3a that were
adopted January 18, 2010.
(2) Driver's license. No person shall operate a vehicle for hire without
first having obtained one of the following:
(a) In the case of a taxicab: a vehicle for hire driver's license, the
procedures for which are set forth in § 165-6; or
(b) In the case of a limousine operator: chauffeur endorsement
qualification letter, or a commercial driver's license (A, B, or C
Class) with passenger endorsement "P" issued by the New
Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission.
(c) A list should be provided each year from the owner of the
limousine company in the form of a spreadsheet, or copies of
each chauffeur endorsement qualification letter or CDL with a
"P" endorsement for each limousine operator. This includes all
out-of-state companies that also operate within West Windsor
Township.
(d) All drivers of a limousine and rental car chauffeur service
industry must follow the law changes found in N.J.S.A.
48:16-22.3a that were adopted January 18, 2010.
B. Owner licenses are transferable, provided that the license is in active
status (has not lapsed due to a failure to renew) at the time of transfer
(or on the date of death in the case of a transfer by will).
C. License fees. License fees shall be as established in Chapter 82, Fees.
§ 165-2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 165-3
1:446
§ 165-4. Taxi owner's licenses. [Amended 12-23-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-15]
D. Where to file application. Applications for all licenses issued under this
chapter shall be filed on forms furnished by the Township, available at
the municipal offices. Completed applications shall be submitted to the
Municipal Clerk's office located in the Municipal Building.
E. Falsification of information prohibited. Falsification of information on
any application may result in rejection of the application.
F. Limitation on number of taxi owner licenses. The number of owner's
licenses issued to individuals who operate taxis shall be limited. The
maximum number of owner's licenses issued to individuals or
corporations who operate their vehicles as taxis shall be established at
a maximum of 43.
A. Who must file application. Applications for all owner’s licenses for
vehicles for hire shall be made by the owner of the vehicle. The owner
shall be responsible to bring in renewal paperwork for the lessee and
each driver by the March 31 deadline. Lessees and drivers are
responsible to provide their paperwork to the owner for submittal in a
timely manner. [Amended 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-15]
B. Time to file renewal application for owner's license. All renewal
applications for owner's licenses issued under this chapter will be
accepted from January 1 through February 28 each year. A charge of
$25 will be imposed daily for late submissions. [Amended 10-16-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-31]
C. Applications for newly transferred owner licenses or vehicle
replacements will be accepted throughout the licensing year and shall
be effective for the remainder of the current licensing year.
D. Issuance and term of owner's license. Each owner's license issued
under this chapter shall be effective for a period of one year, from May 1
to April 30 of the next year.
E. Requirements for an applicant for an owner's license. Each applicant
for an owner's license for a vehicle for hire under the terms of this
chapter must conform to the following requirements:
(1) Be at least 21 years of age.
(2) If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation must either be
incorporated in the State of New Jersey or incorporated in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the State of New York and
authorized to do business in this state. If the applicant is an
individual, the individual must be a resident of the State of New
Jersey, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or the State of New
York.
§ 165-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-4
1:447
(3) Not be convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude. If a
partnership, this subsection shall apply to each partner, or, if a
corporation, it shall apply to the officers and directors.
(4) The applicant must be a citizen of the United States or a legal
resident alien. If the applicant is a partnership, then each partner
must be a citizen of the United States or a legal resident alien. A
copy of the alien registration card or work permit must be
submitted with the application.
(5) Owners are responsible for the submission of all renewal
paperwork, any transactions, transfers, leases, drivers and
anything related to the taxi company and their lessees and/or
vehicles. [Added 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-15]
F. Insurance required.
(1) No owner's license shall be issued until the applicant has first filed
with the Township a certificate of insurance issued by a company
duly licensed to transact business under the insurance laws of New
Jersey, evidencing the following minimum amounts of insurance
coverage for each vehicle the applicant seeks to have licensed in
the Township:
(a) Personal injury, per person: $50,000. [Amended 10-16-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-31]
(b) Property damage: $25,000. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-31]
(c) Uninsured motorist coverage in such amounts as shall be fixed
by statute at the time of the application.
(2) The Township of West Windsor must be named as an additional
insured on any insurance policy submitted in compliance with the
requirements of this subsection.
(3) The applicant shall, concurrent with the filing of a certificate of
insurance with the Township, execute and deliver to the Township a
power of attorney wherein the Township Clerk shall be appointed
the applicant's true and lawful attorney for the purpose of
acknowledging service of any process served against the insured
pursuant to the insurance policy.
(4) Cancellation/termination/expiration of an insurance policy shall
subject the licensee to a license suspension or revocation in
accordance with § 165-9D.
(5) When the insurance coverage is changed to a different provider,
proof of insurance shall be provided, and the certificate of
insurance shall be provided within one week of the change.
§ 165-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 165-4
1:448
G. Leased vehicle requirements. [Amended 8-4-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-15]
(1) If the vehicle for hire is leased, the names of the owner, lessee, and
name of company lessee is doing business as (d/b/a), and West
Windsor Township must appear on the insurance policy and
certificate of insurance submitted with the license application.
(2) A copy of the lease agreement must be submitted to the Township
with the license application each year during the renewal period or
at time of transfer to a different lessee.
H. Fingerprints required. New applicants shall provide their fingerprints
for new licenses on such form as may be prescribed by the Township. If
deemed necessary by the Director of Public Safety, a SBI form may be
required for new licenses. Renewal licenses will be required to file a
SBI form yearly. Fees associated with this are authorized in Chapter 82,
Fees. The results of the fingerprinting shall be sent by the prescribed
entity or contractor directly to the West Windsor Township Police
Division.
I. Information required to be submitted on application for owner's license.
An applicant for an owner's license shall be required to provide the
following information on the application for an owner's license:
(1) If an individual, the full name of the applicant, street and post office
business address and phone number; place of residence and phone
number; previous places of employment; citizenship information;
whether charged with, arrested or convicted of a crime or other
violation of law and, if so, what crime or offense; whether
previously licensed to operate a vehicle for hire and, if so, where;
whether such license to operate has ever been revoked and, if so,
for what cause; whether previously licensed to own a vehicle for
hire and, if so, where; and whether or not such owner's license has
ever been suspended or revoked and, if so, for what reason(s).
(2) If a partnership, the firm name, main office and branch office
locations and names, addresses and phone numbers of partners.
The additional information required in Subsection H above shall
also be required for each partner.
(3) If a corporation, the name of the corporation, main office and
branch office locations with phone numbers, the state of
incorporation, the names and addresses of all officers and directors
and their citizenship status and a list of all stockholders who hold
more than 10% of the corporate stock, The additional information
required in Subsection H above shall also be required for each
officer and director.
(4) Information about the vehicle to be licensed, including the
following:
§ 165-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-4
1:449
(a) Vehicle year, make, model and color of vehicle.
(b) Vehicle identification number.
(c) New Jersey State license plate number.
(d) Passenger capacity.
(e) Insurance company, policy number and expiration date.
(5) All applications shall be signed by the applicant, if an individual,
and, if a partnership or corporation, by a person duly authorized by
said entity.
J. Proof of insurance letter to be issued upon submission of complete
application. Proof of insurance letter for the purposes of motor vehicle
registration will only be issued by the municipality after a completed
application, including proof of adequate insurance in the form of a
certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to
transact business in the State of New Jersey naming West Windsor
Township and the owner of the license or lessee as the additional
insured and a power of attorney are submitted. The issuance of a proof
of insurance letter should not be construed as the Township's approval
of the issuance of an owner's license. A fee shall be charged for the
preparation of the proof of insurance letter for motor vehicle
registration, as authorized in Chapter 82, Fees. [Amended 8-4-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-15]
K. Operation only with license. No owner of any vehicle for hire for which
an owner's license has been issued shall allow such car to be driven or
operated by any person who is not the holder of an operator's license
duly issued under the provisions of this chapter. Failure to comply will
result in owner license suspension.
L. Investigation of application. The Police Division shall make an
investigation of the applicant's background, including records of the
State Bureau of Investigation and municipality, as well as the
applicant's prior licensing history. The applicant shall provide other
relevant information as requested by the Police Division. The Police
Division shall make a recommendation to the Director of Public Safety
(or the Director's designee), who shall approve or disapprove the
application.
M. Changes in owner's license information. Any change in information
contained in the owner's license application shall be reported to the
Township within three days thereof. A charge in the amount of $25 shall
be levied for each calendar day after three days that any such changes
are not reported to the Township.
N. Lost and replacement licenses.
§ 165-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 165-4
1:450
§ 165-5. Vehicle requirements.
All vehicles for hire which an owner intends to have licensed for operation
in the Township shall be subject to the following requirements:
(1) A lost or damaged license may be replaced upon application to the
Township Clerk's Office if requested. The fee for replacement of a
lost or destroyed license is as established in Chapter 82, Fees.
(2) In the event that information must be revised on the license, the
licensee may obtain a replacement license with revised information
by applying to the Township Clerk's office. The fee for a
replacement license shall be as set forth in the Chapter 82, Fees.
A. Inspection of vehicle. [Amended 12-23-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-15]
(1) No vehicle for hire shall be licensed until it has been inspected and
examined by the West Windsor Township Police Division and found
to be in a safe condition for the transportation of passengers. Such
inspection shall be made and approval given prior to issuance of an
owner's license.
(2) Inspections will be done by appointment only.
(a) Appointments are to be scheduled by phoning the West
Windsor Police Division-Traffic Bureau (telephone number
609-799-1222).
(b) All renewal inspections must be completed no later than March
31 of the renewal year. Any inspection not completed by March
31 shall be fined $10 a day until the inspection has been
completed. [Added 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-31]
(3) Every vehicle operating pursuant hereto shall be periodically
inspected by the Police Division or other enforcement personnel of
the municipality to ensure the continued maintenance for safe
operation and clean and sanitary conditions. If a vehicle fails to
comply with § 165-5B and C during said inspection, the owner will
be given a time frame by the Police Division in which to comply with
requirements in order to pass re-inspection. A fine of $25 shall be
levied for each calendar day, after the day given by the Police
Division, that the vehicle does not pass re-inspection.
B. Vehicle requirements for all vehicles for hire.
(1) The owner's license of the vehicle for hire shall be affixed in each
vehicle for hire in a place where it can be conveniently seen by any
passenger at any time.
(2) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:3-76.2a, no vehicles for hire shall
transport a child under the age of eight and weighing less than 80
pounds unless that child is secured in a federally approved child
restraint seat provided by the passenger. Vehicles for hire shall
§ 165-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-5
1:451
employ the use of federally approved child restraint seats as
necessary to comply with the law and any requirements imposed by
the insurance company providing property and casualty insurance
coverage for the vehicle when transporting such a child.
(3) No vehicle for hire shall be licensed if it uses or imitates any color
scheme, name or monogram used by any other person operating a
vehicle for hire. The Township shall be notified of any change in the
color scheme, name or monogram of a vehicle.
(4) Vehicles for hire shall post in a conspicuous place, such as the rear
of the driver's seat, the complaint procedure authorized by this
chapter.
C. Vehicle requirements exclusive to taxicabs.
(1) Age of vehicle. A taxicab shall not fail to comply with vehicle
requirements based on the age of the vehicle alone.
(2) Vehicles both inside and out should be maintained in a professional
manner at all times. This includes engaging a certified mechanic to
provide required maintenance as outlined in the vehicle's owner's
manual. The vehicles shall also be washed at least once every two
weeks, vacuumed, and cleaned on the inside. [Added 8-4-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-15152]
(3) Rates and meters. Rates shall be determined by a rate sheet, which
must remain in the taxicab at all times. Rates may be periodically
revised by Council, which shall establish rates by resolution. In the
event that Council determines, after due consideration and by
resolution, that good cause exists for requiring meters in taxicabs,
then vehicles for hire shall be equipped with a meter, visible to all
passengers, which shall operate on a rate-per-mile basis, with a
minimum allowable rate as established by resolution of the Council,
and no license for a taxicab shall then be issued until the taximeter
attached thereto shall have been inspected and found to be
accurate.
(4) Identification required. Each taxicab shall have a dome light
displaying the trade name of the company affixed to its roof and
shall have the trade name of the taxicab lettered on its exterior.
When a change of the company name occurs, the owner is required
to have the dome light professionally manufactured with the
appropriate change. Each taxicab shall also conspicuously display
on the right and left side of the dome light a number assigned by
the Township and shall display on the body of the vehicle the taxi
license number along with each municipality that has issued a taxi
license to that taxicab. The information shall be three inches in
height. The taxi license number must be located on the center rear
152. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection C(2) and (3) as
Subsection C(3) and (4).
§ 165-5 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 165-5
1:452
§ 165-6. Taxi driver's license.
quarter panel on the driver and passenger side as well as the
rear center line of the trunk. The list of each municipality shall be
displayed on each rear door. West Windsor taxicab magnets can be
acquired through the Clerk's office at cost or purchased at a vendor
of your choice, provided the letters are three inches in height.
"West Windsor" may also be professionally painted or decaled on
the vehicle. [Amended 1-30-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-01;
12-23-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-15; 8-4-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-15153]
(5) Any taxicab registered by West Windsor Township shall be
prohibited from being used as a device for advertisement of any
other business except for the taxicab service for which the vehicle
is functioning under. This includes placing signs upon the taxicab
or using a vehicle "raps" to advertise other businesses. All
registered taxicabs with West Windsor Township are prohibited
from being used for other purposes such as delivery of items or
products and can only be used as a taxi as defined by Township
ordinance. [Added 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-15]
(6) Map required. There shall be an up-to-date West Windsor Township
indexed street map in each taxicab, which shall be supplied by the
Township as part of the license fee.
A. Time to file application for taxi driver's license; issuance and term.
(1) Applications to renew an existing taxi driver's license shall be
accepted from January 1 through February 28 each year. A charge
of $25 will be imposed daily for late submissions. Renewed licenses
shall be valid for a period of one year, from May 1 to April 30 of the
next year. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-31]
(2) Applications for a new taxi driver's license (drivers that have not
been licensed in West Windsor Township for the past 12 months)
may be submitted throughout the year. New driver's licenses shall
be for the remainder of the licensing year only (until April 30).
[Amended 8-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-15]
B. Requirements for an applicant for a driver's license. Each applicant for
a vehicle-for-hire driver's license must conform to the following
requirements:
(1) Be at least 21 years of age.
(2) Certification of a licensed physician showing that the applicant has
been examined within the last 60 days and that the applicant is of
sound physical condition, has eyesight corrected to 20/20 vision
153. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection C(4) as Subsection
C(6).
§ 165-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-6
1:453
and is not subject to any infirmity of body or mind which might
render the applicant unfit for safe operation of a vehicle for hire.
(3) Not be addicted to the use of narcotics or intoxicating liquors.
(4) Not have been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude.
(5) Be the holder of a valid New Jersey, Pennsylvania or New York
driver's license. A copy of the valid driver's license shall be
submitted with the application.
(6) Be a citizen of the United States or a legal resident alien. A copy of
the alien registration card or work permit must be submitted with
the application.
(7) Be able to speak and understand the English language.
(8) Have a thorough knowledge of the law, taxi regulations and
geography of West Windsor Township, the Motor Vehicle Act, the
Traffic Act and other ordinances and regulations having to do with
traffic. Each applicant may be examined as to the applicant's
knowledge of these provisions, and, if the result of the examination
is unsatisfactory, the applicant shall be refused a license.
(9) The applicant must demonstrate that, for a period of three years
prior to the date of application, the applicant has not been
convicted of reckless driving, driving while intoxicated, leaving the
scene of an accident or speeding over 30 miles per hour above the
speed limit and that, at the time of application, the applicant has no
more than eight New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission points on
said applicant's driving record, or the equivalent if licensed in any
other state.
C. Fingerprints required. New applicants shall provide their fingerprints
for new licenses on such form as may be prescribed by the Township. If
deemed necessary by the Director of Public Safety, a SBI form may be
required for new licenses. Renewal licenses will be required to file a
SBI form yearly. Fees associated with this are authorized in Chapter 82,
Fees. The results of the fingerprinting shall be sent by the prescribed
entity or contractor directly to the West Windsor Township Police
Division. [Amended 12-23-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-15]
D. Photographs required. Each applicant must file with the application two
unmounted, untouched and glossy photographs of said applicant taken
within 30 days preceding the filing of the application. Photographs are
to be no larger than passport size (two inches by two inches), one of
which shall be attached to the license when issued. The photograph
shall be so attached to the license that it cannot be removed and
another photograph substituted without detection. New photographs
must be submitted whenever the licensee's appearance changes
significantly or if the license was changed because of loss or
§ 165-6 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 165-6
1:454
information changes. [Amended 12-23-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-15;
10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-31]
E. Information required to be submitted on the application for a driver's
license. An applicant for a vehicle-for-hire driver's license shall be
required to provide the following information on the application for a
driver's license:
(1) The full name of the applicant.
(2) The present residence, phone number and place of residence for
the past five years.
(3) The date of birth, age, weight, height, color of eyes and hair, social
security number, driver's license number and expiration date;
places of employment for the past five years; citizenship status;
military service information, including discharge; whether the
applicant has been charged with, arrested or convicted of a crime
or other violation of law, and, if so, what, where and the disposition;
whether the applicant has ever been licensed to operate a vehicle
for hire in West Windsor Township or any other municipality; and
whether such license has ever been revoked and for what cause.
[Amended 12-23-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-15]
(4) The application shall include notarized affidavits affirming good
moral character from two residents of New Jersey who have known
the applicant personally for at least one year preceding the date of
application.
(5) The application shall include an authorization from the owner of
the vehicle for hire whose vehicles the applicant intends to operate.
(6) The application shall include a certificate from the last employer
regarding the applicant and such employment.
(7) The applicant shall provide a certified abstract of drivers' history
only for non-New Jersey licenses.
F. Investigation of application. The Police Division shall make an
investigation of the applicant's background, including records of the
State Bureau of Investigation and municipality, as well as the
applicant's prior licensing history. The applicant shall provide other
relevant information as requested by the Chief of Police. The Police
Division shall make a recommendation to the Director of Public Safety
(or the Director's designee), who shall approve or disapprove the
application.154
G. Changes in taxi driver's license information. Any change in information
contained in the driver's license application shall be reported to the
154. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, regarding temporary taxicab driver’s licenses, was
repealed 12-23-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-15. This ordinance also redesignated former
Subsections H and I as Subsections G and H, respectively.
§ 165-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-6
1:455
§ 165-7. Taxicab stands.
Township within three days thereof. A charge in the amount of $25 shall
be levied for each calendar day after three business days that any such
changes are not reported to the Township.
H. Changed, lost and replacement licenses.
(1) An operator licensed under this section may request a license
change for employment by an additional vehicle-for-hire company.
The fee for a replacement license shall be as set forth in Chapter
82, Fees. [Amended 12-23-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-15]
(2) A lost or damaged license may be replaced upon application to the
Township Clerk's office. The fee for replacement of a lost or
destroyed license is as established in Chapter 82, Fees.
(3) In the event that information must be revised on the license, the
licensee shall apply for a replacement license containing the
revised information upon application to the Clerk's office. The fee
for a replacement license shall be as set forth in Chapter 82, Fees.
A. Designation of stands. The governing body may designate a taxicab
stand or stands within the Township. When a taxicab stand or stands
are designated, the procedures of this section shall apply.
B. Regulations regarding taxicab stands.
(1) No taxicab shall stand at any place in or upon any of the streets or
highways or any other public place within the Township either
awaiting employment for hire or awaiting a passenger pursuant to
a contract for hire, except at designated taxicab stands.
(2) Only a taxicab licensed by West Windsor Township may occupy or
deliver a passenger to a taxicab stand in the Township.
(3) When the area designated for standing is fully occupied, no other
taxicab shall remain at such stand while waiting for employment.
(4) As a taxicab shall leave the line or move forward, the taxicab
behind it shall be moved forward, and the driver of another taxicab
seeking a space at the stand shall approach from the rear of the
stand and shall stop as near as possible to the last taxicab in line.
(5) No driver of a taxicab shall refuse to transport any orderly person
seeking a taxicab who agrees to pay the posted rate of fare;
provided, however, that this provision shall not prevent any
prospective passenger from selecting a taxicab at any stand,
whether or not it shall be the head of the line. A refusal to carry an
orderly passenger shall be presumptively unreasonable when the
refusal is based on the amount of money the driver expects to
receive or is based upon the race, sex, religion or ethnic
background of the passenger.
§ 165-6 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 165-7
1:456
§ 165-8. Operating regulations.
(6) No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall stop at any public
taxicab stand except to load or unload goods, wares or
merchandise or to receive or discharge passengers.
(7) Each taxicab stand shall be marked with suitable markings, which
shall bear a statement that the stand is a stand reserved for
taxicabs licensed by West Windsor Township only.
(8) No taxicab shall remain in a taxicab stand while unattended for
more than 10 minutes. [Amended 12-23-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-15]
(9) No person operating a taxicab shall do maintenance of any kind
while occupying space at a public taxicab stand.
(10) Roof lights shall be illuminated between dusk and dawn while
occupying space at a public taxicab stand.
A. A New Jersey, New York State or Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
driver's license required. A taxi driver shall carry a valid New Jersey,
New York State or Commonwealth of Pennsylvania driver's license on
the driver's person while on duty and operating the vehicle for hire.
B. Display of driver's license. The driver's license issued by the Township
must be conspicuously displayed on the driver's outer garment when
the driver is on duty.
C. Driver's license to be surrendered. A driver shall immediately
surrender his or her vehicle-for-hire driver's license to the Township
upon the suspension or revocation of his or her New Jersey,
Pennsylvania or New York driver's license.
D. Responsibility to Township. An operator shall answer and comply as
directed with all inspections, communications, directives and
summonses from the Township and its representatives. Owners and
operators shall comply with the Taxi Inspection Schedule published
each year by the Clerk's office.
E. False representation of vehicle not licensed. No person shall present,
hold out or advertise any vehicle for hire as such if said vehicle is not
licensed under this chapter.
F. No standing in prohibited areas. A taxicab shall not stand in front of the
entrance to any building within any prohibited space after the
passengers have left the vehicle, or stand in the prohibited space
waiting for passengers.
G. Soliciting employment. No vehicle for hire, while waiting for
employment by passengers, shall stand on any public street or space
other than at or upon a taxicab stand designated or established in
accordance with this chapter; nor shall any driver seek employment by
§ 165-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-8
1:457
repeatedly and persistently driving back and forth in a short space
or by otherwise interfering with the proper and orderly access to or
egress from any theater, hotel, restaurant or other public or private
place; provided, however, that employment may be solicited by driving
through any public street or other place without stops other than those
due to obstructions of traffic and at a rate of speed that will not
interfere with or impede traffic.
H. Improper conduct. No person, while operating or attending a vehicle
for hire, shall:
(1) Use indecent or profane language;
(2) Be guilty of disorderly conduct;
(3) Purposely annoy any travelers or citizens;
(4) Obstruct any sidewalk;
(5) Knowingly misinform or mislead any person as to time or place of
the arrival or departure of any train or as to the location of any
hotel, public place or private residence within the Township; or
(6) Permit persons to loiter in or around the vehicle for hire.
I. Accepting multiple passengers.
(1) If the driver of the vehicle for hire has accepted other passengers
to travel in the same vehicle to diverse locations, then the driver
shall so inform each passenger and shall notify each passenger of
the order in which each passenger will reach his or her respective
destination.
(2) When the driver of a vehicle for hire has accepted multiple
passengers who are traveling to the same or diverse locations, the
driver shall notify each of the passengers what the fee
arrangements will be, before the start of the trip.
(3) No taxicab driver shall deny an immediate departure or otherwise
accommodate additional passengers without the permission of the
first passenger to hire the taxicab.
J. Report of any accidents. Any motor vehicle accident involving a vehicle
for hire and causing injury to a person or damage to property in excess
of $500 shall be reported immediately by the driver to the Police
Division, who will assure that the information will be placed in the
Township record of the vehicle-for-hire owner and driver.
K. Trip records and receipt books. All operators shall keep trip records
and receipt books, which shall be kept current and shall be displayed
when so requested by authorized Township officials. Trip records shall
show, at a minimum, the trip designation, time and fare charged.
§ 165-8 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 165-8
1:458
L. Vehicles must be kept clean. Each licensed driver, while on duty, shall
be clean in person and shall maintain the vehicle in a repaired condition
free of debris and safe for the transportation of passengers.
M. Smoke-free environment. Operators and passengers shall refrain from
smoking while transporting passengers.
N. Lost or misplaced items. Every driver of a taxicab shall, immediately
after termination of employment, carefully search the taxicab for any
property lost or left therein, and shall, within 24 hours after finding any
property, advise the West Windsor Township Traffic Bureau of the
nature of property and where it may be collected.
O. Response of taxicab service.
(1) All taxicab licensees or their representatives shall respond to all
calls received for taxi service inside the Township limits without
unreasonable delay. If such service cannot be rendered within a
reasonable time, they shall notify the prospective passenger as to
how long it will be before the call can be answered and give the
reason.
(2) All taxicab licensees shall maintain either an answering machine or
a voicemail facility that contains a greeting specifying the amount
of time the caller can expect to wait for a return phone call.
(3) All taxicab licensees shall respond to an inquiry from West Windsor
Township by the end of the next following business day. A charge in
the amount of $25 shall be levied for each calendar day after one
business day that any such response is not made to the Township.
P. Maintenance of vehicles. The owner and driver of a taxicab shall
maintain such vehicle in a safe and clean condition and shall maintain
such vehicle in a good appearance, including proper painting and the
prompt repair of dents. Any taxicab which has sustained damage to the
vehicle, such as dents, or is in need of painting shall be repaired within
eight weeks after the date of the accident.
Q. Taxicab overcharges. No person shall charge or attempt to charge any
taxicab passenger a greater rate of fare than that to which the operator
is entitled under the provisions of this chapter.
R. Receipts.
(1) The driver of any taxicab shall render to all passengers a receipt
which shall be in the form of a postcard addressed to West Windsor
Police Division, 20 Municipal Drive, West Windsor, NJ 08550.
Receipts can be acquired through the Township Clerk's office at
cost or driver and/or owners can purchase receipts in the same
form as below which need to be approved by the Township Clerk.
(2) The receipt shall contain the information in the format as follows:
§ 165-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-8
1:459
§ 165-9. Revocations and suspensions.
PASSENGER NOTICE: This is your receipt for cab fare in West
Windsor, NJ. West Windsor wants your cab ride to be a good one
and wants you to be charged no more than the amount stated in
the West Windsor rate sheet. If you feel that your fare was not
right or if you have a compliment or complaint about your cab ride,
complete the information below, make a copy of this receipt for
your records, affix a stamp to the other side, and drop this card in
the mail to West Windsor Township.
Received From: (Name of Taxicab Business)
Fare: $ Tip: $ Date:
From: To:
Comments:
Name: Phone #:
Address:
Email:
(3) All taxicab licensees who are found to not give a receipt to a
passenger shall be charged in the amount of $100 per reported
incident to West Windsor Township.
(4) A notice shall be prominently displayed either in or on the vehicle
containing the statement that "the receipt specified by § 165-8R(4)
of the West Windsor Township Ordinances must be provided to
patrons" and such other information as may be required by the
West Windsor Clerk's Office. The form of notice shall either be
provided by West Windsor Township or shall be obtained by the taxi
owner, as directed by West Windsor Township.
A. Revocation or suspension for cause. Any license issued under this
chapter may be revoked or suspended at any time for cause or if the
vehicle for hire shall be found to be unfit or unsuited for public
patronage. Such license when so suspended or revoked shall not be
reissued except for good reasons shown. Any violation of this chapter
shall be considered good cause for suspension or revocation of a
license.
B. Revocation after hearing. Licenses may be suspended by the Director of
Public Safety (or the Director's designee) after notice to the licensee
and the opportunity for a hearing before the Director.
C. Owner's license. Owner's licenses may be suspended or revoked if the
vehicle for hire is not in a safe condition for the transportation of
passengers, not kept in conformity with the terms of this chapter, if
used or permitted to be used for any improper, immoral or illegal
§ 165-8 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 165-9
1:460
§ 165-10. Rates.
Rates, including but not limited to minimum allowable fees, shall be
determined by the Council by resolution and upon notice to all licensees.
The Council shall not amend rates more than once each year.
§ 165-11. Complaints and enforcement.
§ 165-12. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-23-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-15]
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty stated in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, § 1-3.
Chapter 168
TRAFFIC AND PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking Authority — See Ch. 4, § 4-64.
Public emergencies — See Ch. 9.
Parking lots — See Ch. 118.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 122,
Art. II.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 152.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 165.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 179.
business or purpose or for the violation of any federal or state statute
or for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
D. License suspensions based on insurance cancellation or non-renewal.
All notices of cancellation or non-renewal received from insurance
companies and not reinstated by the cancellation date shall be subject
to the following penalties:
(1) First notice: license to operate suspended for 30 days.
(2) Second notice: license to operate suspended for the remainder of
the licensing year.
(3) Third notice: license to operate rescinded permanently.
A. All complaints are to be made to the Traffic Bureau of the West Windsor
Police Division.
B. The Division of Police shall enforce this chapter.
C. Except as otherwise provided, a charge for West Windsor Township taxi
drivers and owners of $100 shall be levied for the first violation; $250
for the second violation; and $500 for the third violation of any
provision of this chapter. [Amended 12-23-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-15]
§ 165-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-12
1:461

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 168-1. Definitions.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq. shall be deemed to
apply to such words and phrases used herein.
§ 168-2. Official time standard.
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern standard time or Eastern daylight saving time, as may be in current
use in the Township.
§ 168-3. Holidays. [Amended 12-8-1980 by Ord. No. 81-01;
4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
Holidays, as used in this chapter, are the holidays designated annually by
resolution of the Township Council.
§ 168-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-8-1980 by Ord. No.
81-01; 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3.
§ 168-5. Effect on prior ordinances.
All former traffic ordinances of the Township of West Windsor covered in
this traffic chapter are hereby repealed, except that this repeal shall not
affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any act
done or committed in violation of any ordinance hereby repealed prior to
the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 168-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-5
1:463

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 168-6. Trucks over four tons excluded from certain streets.
Trucks over four tons registered gross weight are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule I (§ 168-56), except for the
pickup and delivery of materials on such streets, Schedule I being attached
to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 168-6.1. Low-speed vehicles. [Added 6-22-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-13]
A low-speed vehicle, being defined as "a four-wheeled vehicle with an
attainable speed of more than 20 miles per hour but no more than 25
miles per hour on a paved surface, not powered by gasoline or diesel fuel,
complying with federal safety standards as noted in 49 CFR 571.500 and
titled, registered and insured in the State of New Jersey," may operate on
Alexander Road in both directions between the West Windsor Township-
Princeton Township corporate line and Canal Pointe Boulevard and on Canal
Pointe Boulevard in both directions for its entire length.
§ 168-7. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule II (§ 168-57) attached
to and made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated.
§ 168-8. Through streets.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule III (§ 168-58) attached to and made a part of
this chapter are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through street
except where yield signs are provided for in the designations.
§ 168-9. Stop intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule IV (§ 168-59) attached to and made a part of this chapter are
hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
§ 168-10. Yield intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule V (§ 168-60) attached to and made a part of this chapter are
hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
§ 168-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-11
1:465
§ 168-11. Left turn prohibition.
No person shall make a left turn at any of the locations described in
Schedule VI (§ 168-61) attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 168-12. U-turn prohibition.
No person shall make a U-turn at any of the locations described in Schedule
VII (§ 168-62) attached and made a part of this chapter.
§ 168-13. No turns.
No person shall make a turn at any of the locations described in Schedule
VIII (§ 168-63) attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 168-14. Right turn on red traffic signal prohibited.
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop)
indication whenever an official sign is present prohibiting such turn on the
red signal as described in Schedule IX (§ 168-64).
§ 168-15. Right turn prohibition.
No person shall make a right turn at any of the locations described in
Schedule X (§ 168-65) attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 168-16. Speed limits.
§ 168-17. Lane use reservations.
The lane locations described in Schedule XII (§ 168-67) attached to and
made a part of this chapter are designated as lane use reservations, and
traffic shall move only as indicated.
§ 168-18. No-passing zones.
The locations described in Schedule XIII (§ 168-68) attached to and made a
part of this chapter are hereby designated as no-passing zones.
§ 168-18.1. Midblock crosswalks. [Added 12-20-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-37; amended 2-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-02]
Midblock crosswalks shall be established as follows:
A. The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XI (§ 168-66)
attached to and made a part of this chapter shall have the speed limits
designated in such schedule.
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits as authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 168-11 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 168-18.1
1:466
Name of Street Location
Alexander Road From a point 273 feet west of the most
westerly curbline of Princeton Hightstown
Road (CR #571) to a point 10 feet westerly
therefrom
Wallace Road From a point 540 feet west of the most
westerly curbline of Princeton-Hightstown
Road (CR 571) to a point six feet westerly
therefrom
§ 168-18.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-18.1
1:467

ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 168-19. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 168-20. Parking prohibited during state of emergency.
§ 168-21. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XIV (§ 168-69) attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 168-22. Parking of trucks weighing in excess of four tons
prohibited.
No person shall park a truck, tractor, trailer or semitrailer having registered
gross weight in excess of four tons upon any street between the hours
specified as listed in Schedule XV (§ 168-70) attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary emergency no-parking
signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in the Chief of Police's
absence, the ranking police officer is authorized to declare an
emergency and to direct the posting of emergency no-parking signs
when weather conditions, accidents, fires and public celebration dictate
or require the avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere
with the free flow of traffic. Notification the emergency no-parking
signs are being or will be posted shall be given to the operator or owner
of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
B. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this section
shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper
regulation of traffic and any police officer may provide for the removal
of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of removal
and storage which may result from such removal before regaining
possession of the vehicle.
C. The effectiveness of this section is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
§ 168-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-23
1:469
§ 168-23. Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain
streets.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule XVI
(§ 168-71) of any day (except Sundays, Saturdays and public holidays) upon
any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XVI attached to
and made a part of this chapter.
§ 168-24. Stopping or standing prohibited during certain hours on
certain streets.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified in
Schedule XVII (§ 168-72) of any day (except Sundays, Saturdays and public
holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule
XVII attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 168-25. Parking time limited on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule XVIII (§ 168-73) at any time between the hours listed in Schedule
XVIII of any day (except Sundays, Saturdays and public holidays) upon any
of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XVIII attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
§ 168-26. Loading zones.
The locations described in Schedule XIX (§ 168-74) attached to and made a
part of this chapter are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 168-27. Taxi stands.
The locations described in Schedule XX (§ 168-75) attached to and made a
part of this chapter are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 168-28. Bus stops.
The locations described in Schedule XXI (§ 168-76) attached to and made a
part of this chapter are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 168-29. Tow-away zones. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
A. The locations described in § 168-37 and Schedules XXII (§ 168-77),
XXIII (§ 168-78), XXV (§ 168-80) and XXVI (§ 168-81) attached to and
made a part of this chapter are hereby designated as tow-away zones.
B. Towing of vehicles. Any vehicle parked or standing so as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entranceways or exitways, block
dempsey dumpsters, loading zones, fire hydrants, oil fills, any grass
area or pedestrian walkway, parked or standing in violation of these
regulations or any vehicle which in any way presents a safety or traffic
hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle. The owner or operator
§ 168-23 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 168-29
1:470
shall pay the reasonable cost of the removal and storage which may
result from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 168-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-29
1:471

ARTICLE IV
Handicapped Parking Regulations
§ 168-30. Handicapped parking in municipal parking lots and
Board of Education property.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following offstreet
municipal parking yards and Board of Education property as shown
in Schedule XXIII (§ 168-78) attached to and made part of this chapter
are designated as handicapped parking areas. Such spaces are for use
by persons who have been issued special identification cards, plates or
placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles or a temporary placard issued by
the Chief of Police in accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-205 and 39:4-206. No
other person shall be permitted to park a vehicle in these spaces.
§ 168-31. Handicapped parking on street. [Amended 4-19-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-07]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following onstreet
locations as shown in Schedule XXIV (§ 168-79) attached to and made
part of this chapter are designed as handicapped parking spaces. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards or plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
§ 168-32. Handicapped parking on private property open to the
public.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the following offstreet
parking yards as shown in Schedule XXV (§ 168-80) attached to
and made a part of this chapter are designated as handicapped parking
areas. Such spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special
identification cards, plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles or a
temporary placard issued by the Chief of Police in accordance with N.J.S.A.
39:4-205 and 39:4-206. No other person shall be permitted to park a vehicle
in these spaces.
§ 168-33. Handicapped parking on all other private property.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the following offstreet
parking yards as shown in Schedule XXVI (§ 168-81) attached to
and made part of this chapter are designated as handicapped parking
areas. Such spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special
identification cards, plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles or a
temporary placard issued by the Chief of Police in accordance with N.J.S.A.
39:4-205 and 39:4-206. No other person shall be permitted to park a vehicle
in these areas.
§ 168-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-34
1:473
§ 168-34. Signs, pavement markings, installation and maintenance.
[Amended 4-30-1990 by Ord. No. 90-17; 2-16-1993 by Ord. No.
93-01]
§ 168-35. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-30-1990 by Ord. No.
90-17155]
Penalties for violation of this article shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3.
A. The owners of the premises referred to in §§ 168-32 and 168-33 shall
provide and install signs and pavement markings for each parking
space reserved for use by handicapped persons, which signing and
markings shall be in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and the Americans with Disabilities
Act of 1990. The cost of procurement and installation of the signs and
pavement markings shall be the responsibility of the owner of said
property. The owner shall, subsequent to initial procurement and
installation, maintain such signs and pavement markings in good
condition at no cost or expense to the Township. The owner shall be
responsible for the repair and restoration or replacement of the same.
B. The Township and the Board of Education, respectively, shall provide
and install signs for the premises referred to in § 168-30 and signs and
pavement markings for each parking space reserved for use by
handicapped persons, which signing and markings shall be in
accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Devices, N.J.S.A.
39:4-198 and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. The cost of
procurement and installation of the signs and pavement markings shall
be the responsibility of the Township and the Board of Education,
respectively. The Board of Education shall, subsequent to initial
procurement and installation, maintain such signs and pavement
markings in good condition at no cost or expense to the Township. The
Township and the Board of Education, respectively, shall be responsible
for the repair and restoration or replacement of the same. All signs and
pavement markings shall be in accordance with the requirements of the
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
C. At each designated handicapped parking space there shall be installed
a handicapped sign, which may be wall or post mounted or in the
ground. View of the sign shall not be obstructed when a vehicle is
parking in the space. Van accessible parking spaces shall have an
additional sign mounted below the handicapped sign, stating "van
accessible."
155. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 168-34 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 168-35
1:474
ARTICLE V
Traffic and Parking Regulations on Private Property
[Added 9-8-1987 by Ord. No. 87-34]
§ 168-36. Traffic regulations for West Windsor - Plainsboro High
School.
A. Prohibited parking. The provisions of this section shall not relieve any
person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles as
set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as
hereinafter provided.156
B. Towing of illegally parked vehicles. Any vehicle parking or standing as
to obstruct or impede a normal flow of traffic, block entranceways or
exitways, block dempsey dumpsters, loading zones, fire hydrants, oil
fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, parked or standing in
violation of these regulations or any vehicle which in any way presents
a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle. The
owner or operator shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and
storage which may result from such removal before regaining
possession of the vehicle.
C. Vehicle identification. All vehicles on the West Windsor - Plainsboro
High School grounds must be properly identified.
D. No stopping or standing. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle on any
roadway or in any parking lot except in designated stalls.
E. Time limit parking. No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the
time limit shown upon any of the following streets or driveways or
parking lots:
Name of Street Side Time Limit Hours Location
Main driveway South 15 minutes All times In areas and
in such
manner as
designated
by signs and
within the
markings on
the surface
of the area
F. Handicapped parking. [Amended 2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 93-01]
156. Editor's Note: Former Section 7-16.1, Definitions, which immediately preceded this
subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 168-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-36
1:475
§ 168-37. Control of movement and parking on public and private
property. [Added 10-2-1989 by Ord. No. 89-46; amended 10-24-1994
by Ord. No. 94-49]
(1) All handicapped parking stalls and vehicles must be properly
identified in accordance with the requirements of the Americans
with Disabilities Act of 1990.
(2) All angle handicapped stalls shall be a minimum of 22 feet long and
a minimum of eight feet wide with a minimum five foot adjacent
access aisle.
(3) All parallel handicapped stalls shall be 22 feet long and a minimum
of eight feet wide with a minimum five foot adjacent access aisle.
G. Reserved school bus parking. (Reserved).
H. Reserved parking. All reserved stalls and vehicles must be properly
identified.
I. One-way streets. The streets or parts of streets or driveways or parking
lots described below are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Circle in rear of
school from Penn Lyle
Road to Penn Lyle
Road
Counterclockwise Entire length
Main driveway Counterclockwise Entire length
Parking Lot 1 Counterclockwise Entire length
J. Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections: Unnamed roadway to Princeton
Hightstown Road and the most southerly driveway from the rear
parking lot.
K. Speed limits. The speed limits for both directions of traffic along the
following roadways are hereby established for all roadways and
driveways and parking areas: 15 miles per hour, entire length.
L. Parking prohibited certain hours. No person shall park a vehicle upon
any of the following streets or parts of streets or driveways or parking
lots during the hours listed:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Circle rear of
school
North 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
A. Regulation for the movement and the parking of traffic on municipal
property. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the
§ 168-36 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 168-37
1:476
following municipal properties shall have the movement of traffic
controlled by the type of regulation indicated. No person shall operate
or park a vehicle in violation of the regulation indicated.
Property Regulation Movement
Maurice Hawk School
[Added 2-6-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-09]
No parking anytime As shown on sketch on
file with Township
Police Department
No stopping or
standing
Municipal Complex No right turn As shown on sketch on
file with Township
Police Department and
NJDOT
One way
No stopping or
standing
Visitor parking 9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Municipal vehicles
parking only
Municipal Complex
[Added 6-26-1995
by Ord. No. 95-25]
Stop intersection As shown on sketch on
file with Township
Police Department
West Windsor
Community Park
15 mph Entire length
No passing zones As shown on sketch on
file with Township
Police Department and
NJDOT
Yield sign
Parking in designated
area between painted
lines
B. Regulation for the movement and the parking of traffic on private
property open to the public. In accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the following private property that is open to the
public and to which the public is invited shall have the movement of
traffic controlled by the type of regulations indicated. No person shall
operate or park a vehicle in violation of the regulations.
Property Regulation Movement
(Reserved)
§ 168-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-37
1:477
C. Regulation for the movement and the parking of traffic on all other
private property. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1,
the regulations of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 are hereby made applicable to
the properties listed.157
(1) Schedule A.
Property Regulation Movement
Avalon Watch 10 mph As shown on sketch
on file with Township
Police Division and
NJDOT
No parking anytime
Parking in
designated area
between the painted
lines
Carnegie Center 25 mph As shown on sketch
on file with Township
Police Division and
NJDOT
15 mph
Stop signs
No parking anytime
Market Fair Stop signs As shown on sketch
on file with Township
Police Division and
NJDOT
Yield signs
Lane designations
No stopping or
standing
Parking in
designated area
between painted
lines
No parking anytime
Bicycle parking
Princeton Arms Stop signs As shown on sketch
on file with Township
Police Division and
NJDOT
157. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 168-37 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 168-37
1:478
Property Regulation Movement
No stopping or
standing
Bicycle parking
Stop signs
Village Square Stop signs As shown on sketch
on file with Township
Police Division and
NJDOT
Do not enter
One way
No stopping or
standing
Windsor Greens Stop signs As shown on sketch
on file with Township
Police Division and
NJDOT
No stopping or
standing
No parking anytime
Do not enter
Parking in
designated area
between the painted
lines
Windsor Haven
[Added 9-14-2009
by Ord. No.
2009-19]
Parking in
designated areas
between the painted
lines only
As shown on sketch
on file with Township
Police Division
No parking anytime
in designated fire
lanes
As shown on sketch
on file with Township
Police Division
Windsor Plaza Stop signs As shown on sketch
on file with Township
No stopping or
standing
Police Division and
NJDOT
Parking in
designated area
between the painted
lines
Bicycle parking
§ 168-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-37
1:479
(2) Schedule B. [Added 5-30-1995 by Ord. No. 95-22; amended
6-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-10]
(a) Nassau Park Retail Center.
[1] Through streets. The following street or parts of streets
are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the through street.
Name of Street Location
Nassau Park Boulevard Entire length
McClain Way Entire length
Road C Entire length
[2] Stop intersections. The following intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections:
Intersection Stop Sign On
Pavilion Way and Road C Road C
Pavilion Way and Road D Road D
Nassau Park Boulevard and
Gateway Drive
Gateway Drive
[3] Speed limits.
[a] The speed limits for both directions of travel in the
parking lots and roadway shall be 15 miles per hour.
[b] The speed limits for both directions of travel on the
following roads are:
Name of Road
Speed limit
(mph) Location
Nassau Park
Boulevard
35 Entire length
Pavilion Way 15 Entire length
McClain Way 15 Entire length
[4] Lane use reservation. Traffic shall move only as indicated
below:
[a] Nassau Park Boulevard:
[i] As indicated on site plan.
[ii] As approved in traffic signal plan.
§ 168-37 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 168-37
1:480
[5] Weight limitations. Trucks over four tons gross weight are
hereby excluded from the main parking area, except for
pickup and delivery of materials in the area.
[6] 158 Loading zones: as designated as per site plan.
[7] Restricted parking.
[a] No person shall stop or stand a vehicle anytime upon
any of the following described roadways or parts of
roadways:
Name of Street Side Location
Road D Both Entire length
[b] All vehicles must park only in designated areas and
between the lines provided.
[8] Reserved parking. All vehicles that are granted special
parking in this section, such as police vehicles,
ambulances, teachers, etc., must be properly identified,
and the reserved parking spaces must be shown on the
attached site plan.
[9] Loading zone(s). The locations described are hereby
designated as loading zones. No person shall park a
vehicle in said location during the times indicated other
than for the loading and unloading of goods and materials.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Road E South All As indicated on
site plan
[10] Tow away. Any vehicle parking or standing as to obstruct
or impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or
exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area or
pedestrian walkway or present in any way a safety or
traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the
owner's or operator's expense.
(b) Nassau Park Pavilion.
[1] Stop intersections. The following intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections:
Intersection Stop Sign On
Nassau Park Boulevard and
Houston Street
Houston Street
Nassau Park Boulevard and T Main T Main
158. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(2)(a)[6], regarding bus stops on Nassau Park
Boulevard, was repealed 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04. See now § 168-76.
§ 168-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-37
1:481
[2] Speed limits: The speed limits for both directions of travel
in the parking lots and roadway shall be 15 miles per hour.
[3] Lane use reservation: as shown on sketch on file with
Police Division.
[4] Weight limitations: Trucks over four tons gross weight are
hereby excluded from the Main Parking Area, except for
pickup and delivery of materials in the area.
[5] No stopping or standing: as shown on sketch on file with
Police Division.
[6] General parking: All vehicles must park only in designated
area and between the painted lines.
[7] Reserved parking. (Reserved).
[8] Loading zones: as shown on sketch on file with Police
Division.
(3) Schedule C: The Southfield Retail Center [Added 11-25-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-31; amended 8-11-1997 by Ord. No. 97-05]
(a) Through streets; stop and yield intersections.
[1] Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near side of each street intersecting the
through street except where yield signs are provided for in
the designation:
Name of Street Limits
Road A Entire length
Road C Entire length
Road D Entire length
Road F Entire length
[2] Stop intersections. The following described intersections
are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs
shall be installed as provided therein.
Intersection Stop Signs On
Lot A and Road B Lot A
Lot F and Teller Drive Lot F
(b) One-way streets. The following described streets or parts of
streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated.
§ 168-37 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 168-37
1:482
Name of Street Direction Limits
Teller Drive East Entire length
(c) Turn prohibitions. No person shall make a turn at any location
listed below and only in the manner described.
Intersection
Turn
Prohibited
Movement
Prohibited
Road A and Princeton -
Hightstown Road
(County Road 571)
Left From Southbound on
Road A to eastbound
on Princeton -
Hightstown Road
(County Road 571)
Road E and Southfield Left From eastbound on
Road E to northbound
on Southfield Road
(d) Lane use reservations. The lane locations described below are
designated as lane use reservations and traffic shall move as
indicated.
Intersection Movement
Road A and Southfield Road Eastbound left lane of Road A
reserved for left turn only
Eastbound right lane of Road A reserved for right turn only
(e) Vehicles over designated weight excluded from certain streets.
Vehicles over the registered gross weight are hereby excluded
from the streets or parts of streets described.
Name of Street Weight Location
Road A 4 tons Entire length
(f) Speed limits
[1] The speed limit for both directions in the parking lot(s)
shall be 15 miles per hour.
[2] The speed limit for both directions of travel on the
following roadways are:
Name of Roadway Speed Limits
All roads 15 mph Entire length
(g) General parking.
[1] All vehicles must park in designated areas and between
the lines provided.
§ 168-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-37
1:483
[2] No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
All roads Both All Entire length
[3] Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be twelve-foot wide
as shown on the attached site plan and signed with R7-8
and R7-8P (Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty Plate), in
the designated parking areas for persons who have been
issued the handicapped parking permits by the Division of
Motor Vehicles.
D. Towing of illegally parked vehicles. Any vehicle parked or standing as to
obstruct or impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exitways,
loading zones, oil fills, any grass area or pedestrian walkway or present
in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the
vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
E. Installation and maintenance. All signs, posts, bolts or other necessary
materials shall be installed and paid for by the applicant. Work shall be
checked by the Police Division to ensure installations meet state and
federal specifications, and all signing shall conform to the current
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
F. Penalty for bicycles. For any violation of this section relating to the
parking of bicycles, the maximum penalty, upon conviction, shall be a
fine not exceeding $10.
§ 168-37 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 168-37
1:484
ARTICLE VI
Parking Authority Property
§ 168-38. Parking allowed in accordance with regulations.
Lawful parking on premises owned, leased or operated by the Parking
Authority of the Township of West Windsor shall be allowed in accordance
with the regulations prescribed herein.
§ 168-39. General regulations.
§ 168-40. Definitions. [Amended 6-26-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-24]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LICENSE PLATE RECOGNITION (LRP) — Scanning device used by
authorized parking enforcement officers to read license plates on vehicles
that are parked on premises owned and/or managed by the West Windsor
Parking Authority. A database of information is created based on the
information provided by parking customers when registering vehicles, and
LPR allows enforcement officers to quickly identify unauthorized and/or
unregistered vehicles on these premises.
PERMIT PARKING — The West Windsor Parking Authority has completely
phased out window decals and is in the process of phasing out all mirror
hang-tag permits. Instead the WWPA will rely upon a customer's
registration of his or her vehicle, including license plate number and other
identifiers. Parking enforcement officers shall use LPR scanning to
determine whether cars parked in "permit parking only" areas are
authorized and registered to do so.
§ 168-41. Permit parking. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07;
10-29-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-18]
A. Parking shall be permitted only in those areas designated for parking by
appropriate lines identifying the spaces and/or within a designated
space or stall. Parking shall be prohibited in all other areas.
B. Parking shall require either an unexpired permit, decal or other type of
marking duly issued by the Parking Authority or payment of a daily fee
as prescribed by the West Windsor Parking Authority through local
ordinance.
A. Permit parking area(s) established. There shall be various permit areas
established by the West Windsor Parking Authority. These permit areas
shall consist of the areas, streets or parts of streets and municipal
parking lots described in the plan on file in the West Windsor Township
Clerk’s Office, with the West Windsor Parking Authority and with the
West Windsor Police and New Jersey Department of Transportation,
which shall include all parking permit areas owned and/or managed by
the West Windsor Parking Authority which are hereby made a part of
§ 168-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-41
1:485
§ 168-42. (Reserved)159
§ 168-43. Time limit parking. [Amended 6-26-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-24]
The time limit on parking is 20 minutes, maximum, at Wallace Circle and
Station Circle parking spaces.
§ 168-44. Handicapped parking.
Handicapped parking spaces are those shown on the plan (Exhibit A) on file
as noted above in § 168-41A.
this chapter and incorporated herein by reference; provided, however,
where an emergency or temporary condition is declared by the
Township, all rules and regulations set forth hereinafter shall be subject
to such changes as shall be provided.
B. Operation and use; permit area. No person shall park a vehicle in any
space in the areas established by this article unless: [Amended
6-26-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-24]
(1) A parking permit has been issued by the West Windsor Parking
Authority for the designated vehicle whose designation shall be by
motor vehicle registration and is kept on file with the West Windsor
Parking Authority; or
(2) The desginated vehicle has been properly registered with the West
Windsor Parking Authority such that the vehicle can be positively
identified as "permitted" or authorized to park in certain areas
using LPR scanning.
C. Persons who are authorized to park in designated off-street parking
facilities owned and/or managed by the West Windsor Parking Authority
shall park "head-first" to allow for effective scanning and identification
by the LPR technology. Parking permits are not transferable to other
motor vehicles unless authorized, in writing, by the West Windsor
Parking Authority. [Amended 6-26-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-24]
D. A person accepting parking privileges for a motor vehicle on property
owned and/or managed by the West Windsor Parking Authority shall be
subject to all rules, regulations, amendments and decisions issued or
promulgated by the West Windsor Parking Authority and/or the
Township of West Windsor. Parking on premises owned and/or managed
by the West Windsor Parking Authority by an unauthorized or
unregistered motor vehicle in violation of the rules and regulations or
amendments hereunder shall be in violation of this article and shall be
subject to fines and/or penalties promulgated by the West Windsor
Parking Authority and/or the Township of West Windsor.
159. Editor’s Note: Former § 168-42, Slot box parking, as amended, was repealed 6-26-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-24.
§ 168-41 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 168-45
1:486
§ 168-45. Employee parking.
Employee parking areas are established and located as shown on the plan
(Exhibit A) on file as noted above in § 168-41A.
§ 168-46. Taxi stand.
Taxi stand areas are established and located as shown on the plan (Exhibit
A) on file as noted above in § 168-41A.
§ 168-47. Bus stop.
Bus stops are established and located as shown on the plan (Exhibit A) on
file as noted above in § 168-41A.
§ 168-48. Stop intersections.
Stop intersections are established and located as shown on the plan
(Exhibit) A on file as noted above in § 168-41A.
§ 168-49. One-way directions.
One-way directions are established and located as shown on the plan
(Exhibit A) on file as noted above in § 168-41A.
§ 168-50. Speed limits. [Added 12-27-1988 by Ord. No. 88-48]
§ 168-51. Enforcement.160
This article shall be enforced by the Township Police Division and such
other persons as may be appointed by the Mayor to issue summonses for
violations of this article.
§ 168-52. Form of summonses.
The summonses issued under this article shall be in the form of the uniform
traffic ticket or such other summonses as may be designated by the Director
of the Division of Motor Vehicles of the State of New Jersey as the uniform
traffic ticket.
A. The speed limits for both directions of traffic along the following
roadways are hereby established:
Name of Street Direction
Speed
(mph) Location
Vaughn Drive Both 30 Entire length
B. All other roadways and parking areas: 15 miles per hour, entire length.
160. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 168-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-53
1:487
§ 168-53. Removal of vehicles.161
In addition to the issuance of summonses as provided herein for the
violation of this article, the Township Police Division and such persons as
are designated special policemen to enforce the terms of this article shall
have the right to have automobiles parking in violation of this article towed
from the off-street parking facilities operated by the Parking Authority of
the Township, with the costs of towing and storage thereafter to be the sole
responsibility of the owner of the vehicle.
§ 168-54. Parking enforcement officers.162
The Mayor may appoint such persons designated by the Parking Authority
of West Windsor for such purpose as special police officers in the Township,
whose powers and authority shall be confined exclusively to the off-street
parking premises owned and operated by the Parking Authority of the
Township, with full power and authority to issue summonses for violations
of this article. Such appointments shall conform to the requirements, terms
and conditions of N.J.S.A. 40:11A-22 et seq.
§ 168-55. Permitted parking.
Parking shall be permitted only in those areas designated for parking by
appropriate lines identifying the spaces and within a designated space or
stall. Parking shall be prohibited in all other areas.
161. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
162. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 168-53 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 168-55
1:488
ARTICLE VII
Schedules
§ 168-56. Schedule I: Trucks Over Four Tons Excluded. [Last
amended 11-18-1991 by Ord. No. 91-25]
In accordance with the provisions of § 168-6, trucks over four tons' gross
weight are excluded from the following described streets or parts of streets,
except for the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets:
Name of Street Location
Alexander Road From County Road 571 to North
Post Road
Benford Drive Entire length
Conover Road Entire length
Fairview Avenue Entire length
Fisher Place From U.S. Route 1 to Fairview
Avenue
Galston Drive Entire length
Harris Road From Clarksville Road to Alexander
Road
Hickory Corner Road From Old Trenton Road to South
Lane
Mather Avenue Entire length
Meadow Road From N.J. Route 1 to Bear Brook
Road
North Post Road From Clarksville Road to Alexander
Road
Penn-Lyle Road From Clarksville Road to Village
Road West
Pierson Avenue Entire length
South Lane From Windsor Road to Village Road
East
South Post Road From Village Road West to Conover
Road
Varsity Avenue Entire length
Wallace Road From County Road 571 to Alexander
Road
Wallingford Drive Entire length
Wilder Avenue Entire length
§ 168-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-57
1:489
§ 168-57. Schedule II: One-Way Streets. [Last amended 9-5-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-40]
In accordance with the provisions of § 168-7, the following described streets
or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Alexander Road Extension Westbound From Bearbrook Road to
Alexander Road
Deerfield Drive Northbound Entire length of east side
of center island
Deerfield Drive Southbound Entire length of west side
of center island
Lanwin Boulevard Northbound Entire length of east side
of center island
Lanwin Boulevard Southbound Entire length of west side
of center island
Logan Drive Westbound Between U.S. Route 1 and
Harrison Street
McGetrick Lane Eastbound Between Southfield Road
and Princeton-Hightstown
Road (County Road 571)
Millbrook Drive Northbound Entire length of east side
of center island
Millbrook Drive Southbound Entire length of west side
of center island
§ 168-58. Schedule III: Through Streets. [Last amended 10-19-1998
by Ord. No. 98-25163]
In accordance with the provisions of § 168-8, the following described streets
or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Alexander Road From N.J. Route 1 to North Post-Alexander Road
Alexander Road From the West Windsor Township -Princeton
Township corporate line to N.J. Route 1
Amherst Way From Cambridge Way to Woodmere Way
Amherst Way From Woodmere Way to its northerly terminus
Bennington Drive Entire length
163. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 168-57 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 168-58
1:490
Name of Street Limits
Berkshire Drive From Sherbrooke Drive to a point 50 feet East of
Suffolk Lane
Briarwood Drive From 100 feet north of Briarwood Court to New
South Mill Road
Bridgewater Drive From the northerly intersection with Lanwin
Boulevard to the southerly intersection with
Lanwin Boulevard.
Brookfield Way Between the most southerly intersection with
Greenfield Drive to 100 feet east of Pinewood
Court
Cambridge Way From Woodmere Way to its easterly terminus
Canal Pointe
Boulevard
Between Alexander Road and Emmons Drive
Candlewood Drive Entire length
Cartwright Drive East Entire length
Cartwright Drive West Entire length
Colonial Avenue From Penn-Lyle Road to Windsor Drive
Conover Road Entire length. A yield sign shall be installed on
Galston Drive.
Danville Drive Entire length
Davenport Drive Entire length
Dutch Neck Road From Old Trenton Road to Dutch Neck Road-South
Lane
Eastern Drive Entire length
Ellsworth Drive Entire length
Ginnie Lane Between its most westerly intersection with
Conover Road and its easterly intersection with
Conover Road
Glacier Drive Entire length
Glengarry Way Entire length
Greenfield Drive From New Village Road to the northern
intersection of Brookfield Way
Greenfield Drive From Yorkville Road to New Village Road
Hamilton Drive Entire length
Hathaway Drive From Windsor Drive to Windsor Drive (a loop)
Heather Drive From the intersection of County Road 638 to its
southerly terminus
Heritage Boulevard Entire length
Highpoint Place Entire length
§ 168-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-58
1:491
Name of Street Limits
Lanwin Boulevard From the Princeton-Hightstown Road to New
South Mill Road
Le Parc Drive Entire length
Lexington Circle Entire length
Mayfair Drive Entire length
Meadow Road Entire length
Millbrook Drive Entire length
Monterey Drive Entire length
Nassau Place From Colonial Avenue to its northerly terminus
New South Mill Road From Village Road east to 100 feet north of Lanwin
Boulevard
New Village Road Entire length
Norchester Drive From Sherbrooke Drive and Clarksville Road
(County Road 638)
North Post Road -
Alexander Road
From Village Road West and Clarksville Road
Oakwood Way Entire length
Park Hill Terrace From Slayback Drive to Braemar Drive
Penn-Lyle Road Entire length
Quaker Road From Van Wyck Drive to Colonial Avenue
Sapphire Drive Entire length
Saratoga Drive From Bennington Drive to its easterly terminus
Sherbrooke Drive A yield sign shall be installed on Berkshire Drive.
Sherbrooke Drive From Princeton-Hightstown Road (County Road
571) to Suffolk Lane
Slayback Drive From Princeton-Hightstown Road (County Road
571) to 185 feet past the southern curbline of
Woodmere Way
Southfield Road From New Village Road to Princeton-Hightstown
Road
Southfield Road From Princeton-Hightstown Road to the Township
of Plainsboro corporate line
South Post Road From Conover Road to Village Road West
Springhill Drive Entire length
Suffolk Lane From Berkshire Drive to its southerly terminus
Van Wyck Drive From and including Quaker Road to Windsor Drive
Varsity Avenue Entire length
§ 168-58 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 168-58
1:492
Name of Street Limits
Village Road East From Old Trenton Road (County Road 535) to the
West Windsor Township - Washington Township
corporate line
Village Road West From Quaker Bridge Road (County Road 533) to
South Mill Road (County Road 526)-Village Road
East
West Kincaid Drive Entire length
West Winds Drive Entire length
Windsor Drive From Princeton-Hightstown Road to Quaker Road
Windsor Haven Drive Entire length
Wood Hollow Road Entire length
Woodmere Way From South Mill Road (County Road 571) to Penn-
Lyle Road
Zeloof Drive Entire length
§ 168-59. Schedule IV: Stop Intersections. [Last amended 6-23-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-08]
In accordance with the provisions of § 168-9, the following intersections are
hereby designated as stop intersections.
Intersection Stop Sign On
Aldrich Way and Beardsly Court Beardsly Court
Alexander Road Extension and
Bearbrook Road
Alexander Road Extension
Almond Circle and Almond Court Almond Court
Argyle Way and Meridan Court Meridan Court
Auburn Place and Oxford Court Oxford Court
Bearbrook Road and Old Bearbrook
Road
Old Bearbrook Road
Bearbrook Road and Windsor Haven
Drive
Windsor Haven Drive
Benford Drive and Lillie Street Lillie Street
Benford Drive and Monterey Drive
(northern intersection)
Monterey Drive
Benford Drive and Monterey Drive
(southern intersection)
Monterey Drive
Berkshire Drive and Wycombe Way Wycombe Way
Berrien Avenue and Montgomery
Street
Montgomery Street
Birchwood Court and Lorrie Lane Lorrie Lane
§ 168-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-59
1:493
Intersection Stop Sign On
Braemar Drive and Park Hill Terrace Park Hill Terrace
Briarwood Court - Briarwood Drive
at Briarwood Drive
Briarwood Drive
Canoe Brook Drive and Princeton
Place
Princeton Place
Cartwright Drive East/West and
Bentley Drive
Bentley Drive
Cartwright Drive East/West and
Candlewood Drive
Candlewood Drive
Deerfield Drive and Ann's Court Ann's Court
Edith Court and Zeloof Drive Zeloof Drive
Emmons Drive and Wheeler Way Wheeler Way
Fisher Place and Manor Avenue Manor Avenue
Glacier Drive and Emerald Court Emerald Court
Glacier Drive and Sapphire Drive
(southern intersection)
Sapphire Drive
Greene Drive and Greene Court Greene Court
Greenfield Drive and Highmont
Drive at Yorkville Road
Yorkville Road
Harris Road and Lillie Street Lillie Street
Harris Road and Springwood Drive Springwood Drive
Haskel Drive and Springhill Drive Springhill Drive
Heather Drive and Clarksville Road
(County Road 638) entrance/exit
intersection
Heather Drive
Highpoint Place and Sapphire Drive Sapphire Drive
Jacob Drive and Birchwood Court Birchwood Court
Jacob Drive and Meadow Run Road Meadow Run Road
Jamieson Drive and Jamieson Place Jamieson Place
Lake Shore Drive and Lake View
Court
Lake View Court
Landing Lane and Sarah Drive Sarah Drive
Le Parc Court and Eastern Drive Eastern Drive
Line Road and Cubberly Road Cubberly Road
Lorrie Lane and Jill Drive Jill Drive
Madison Road and Hunt Court Hunt Court
Manor Ridge Drive and Stonelea
Drive
Stonelea Drive
§ 168-59 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 168-59
1:494
Intersection Stop Sign On
Marble Head Drive at Marble Head
Court
Marble Head Court and the
northeast corner of Marble Head
Drive facing westbound traffic
Meadow Road and Carnegie Center
Drive
Carnegie Center Drive
Millbrook Drive and Millbrook Drive Millbrook Drive facing southbound
traffic
New Village Road at Greenfield
Drive
Greenfield Drive
North Mill Road and Piedmont Drive Piedmont Drive
Oakwood Way and Oakwood Way Oakwood Way facing southbound
traffic
Parkhill Terrace and Candlewood
Drive
Candlewood Drive
Penrose Lane and Argyle Way Argyle Way
Perry Drive and Dean Court Dean Court
Princeton Place and Ziff Lane Ziff Lane
Reed Drive North and Rosewood
Court
Rosewood Court facing westbound
traffic
Reed Drive North and Woodbury
Court
Woodbury Court
Rider Place and Penbrook Court Penbrook Court
Rosewood Court and Reed Drive
North
Reed Drive North facing northbound
traffic
Sarah Drive and Sarah Court Sarah Court
Saratoga Drive and Madison Road Madison Road
Scott Avenue and Montgomery
Street
Montgomery Street
Southfield Road and McGetrick Lane The westerly approach of McGetrick
Lane facing eastbound traffic
South Lane Road and Dutch Neck
Road
Dutch Neck Road
South Post Road and Conover Road Conover Road
University Way and Jeffrey Lane Jeffrey Lane
Victoria Place and Zeloof Drive Zeloof Drive
Villa Drive and Sarah Drive Sarah Drive
Wallace Road and Scott Avenue Scott Avenue
§ 168-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-59
1:495
Intersection Stop Sign On
Westminister Drive at Westminister
Court
Westminister Court and the
northeast corner of Westminister
Drive facing southbound traffic
§ 168-60. Schedule V: Yield Intersections. [Last amended 6-23-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-08]
In accordance with the provisions of § 168-10, the following intersections
are designated as yield intersections:
Intersection Yield Sign On
Mather Avenue and Wilder Avenue Wilder Avenue
Olympic Court and Lassen Court Lassen Court
Olympic Court and Sequoia Court Sequoia Court
Sherbrooke Drive and Berkshire
Drive
Berkshire Drive
§ 168-61. Schedule VI: No Left Turn. [Last amended 8-13-1984 by
Ord. No. 84-27]
In accordance with the provisions of § 168-11, no person shall make a left
turn at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Wallace Road From the westerly southbound lane of Wallace Road
to east on Alexander Road
§ 168-62. Schedule VII: No U-Turn. [Last amended 9-8-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-21]
In accordance with the provisions of § 168-12, no person shall make a Uturn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Vaughn Drive Entire length
§ 168-63. Schedule VIII: No Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 168-13, no person shall make a turn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 168-59 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 168-64
1:496
§ 168-64. Schedule IX: No Right Turn on Red Signal. [Last amended
6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-08]
In accordance with § 168-14, no person shall make a right turn when facing
a steady red signal (stop) indication at any of the following locations during
the period the restriction is in effect:
Name of Street Restriction In Effect
Prohibited Right Turn
on Red Signal Onto
Alexander Road Between the hours of 7:00
a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00
p.m. to 7:00 p.m.; Monday
through Friday
Vaughn Drive
Bear Brook Road Between the hours of 7:00
a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00
p.m. to 7:00 p.m.; Monday
through Friday
Alexander Road
§ 168-65. Schedule X: No Right Turn. [Last amended 8-13-1984 by
Ord. No. 84-27]
In accordance with the provisions of § 168-15, no person shall make a right
turn at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Wallace Road From the easterly southbound lane of Wallace Road
to west on Alexander Road
§ 168-66. Schedule XI: Speed Limits. [Last amended 2-8-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-01]
In accordance with the provisions of § 168-16, the following speed limits
shall be established on the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Direction
Speed
(mph) Location
Alexander Road Both 30 Zone 1 between
Princeton-Hightstown
Road (County Road 571)
and Vaughn Drive-
Bearbrook Road
Alexander Road Both 35 Zone 1 between the West
Windsor Township
corporate Line-Princeton
Township corporate and
Canal Pointe Boulevard
§ 168-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-66
1:497
Name of Street Direction
Speed
(mph) Location
Alexander Road Both 40 Zone 2 between Canal
Pointe Boulevard and
Bear Brook Road-Vaughn
Drive
Alexander Road Both 40 Zone 2 between Vaughn
Drive - Bearbrook Road
and Canal Pointe
Boulevard
Alexander Road Both 30 Zone 3 between Bear
Brook Road-Vaughn Drive
and Wallace Road
Alexander Road Both 35 Zone 3 between Canal
Pointe Boulevard and the
Princeton Township -
West Windsor Township
corporate line
Alexander Road Both 25 Zone 4 between Wallace
Road and 320 feet east of
Scott Avenue
Alexander Road Both 30 Zone 5 between 320 feet
east of Scott Avenue and
Princeton-Hightstown
Road (County Road #571)
Auburn Place Both 25 Entire length
Barnard Place Both 25 Entire length
Baylor Place Both 25 Entire length
Bear Brook Road Both 35 Zone 1 between Meadow
Road and Alexander Road
Bennington Drive Both 30 Entire length
Birdsall Lane Both 25 Entire length
Cambridge Way Both 25 Entire length
Canal Pointe
Boulevard
Both 35 Entire length
Canoe Brook
Drive
Both 25 Entire length
Colgate Circle Both 25 Entire length
Colonial Avenue Both 25 Entire length
Columbia Place Both 25 Entire length
§ 168-66 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 168-66
1:498
Name of Street Direction
Speed
(mph) Location
Conover Road Both 45 From South Post Road to
4,400 feet east of South
Post Road
30 From 4,400 feet east of
South Post Road to
Edinburg Road
Craddock Road Both 25 Entire length
Deerfield Drive Both 30 Entire length
Dorchester Drive Both 35 From Old Trenton Road to
the West Windsor
Township border
Edinburg Road Both 35 From Village Road East to
Woodmere Way
Harrison Lane Both 25 Entire length
Hathaway Drive Both 25 Entire length
Heather Drive Both 10 Entire length
Heritage
Boulevard
Both 25 Entire length
Jamie Brooks
Lane
Both 10 Entire length
Jeffrey Lane Both 25 Entire length
Lanwin
Boulevard
Both 35 Entire length
Line Road Both 35 Entire length
Logan Drive Both 20 From Harrison Street to
U.S. Route 1
Mayfair Drive Both 20 Entire length
Meadow Road Both 40 From Clarksville Road to
Bear Brook Road
Nassau Place Both 25 Entire length
New Village Road Both 35 From Dutch Neck
Edinburg Road to 100
feet west of Greenfield
Drive
North Post Road Both 40 Zone 1 between Village
Road West and Indian
Run Road
§ 168-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-66
1:499
Name of Street Direction
Speed
(mph) Location
35 Zone 2 between Indian
Run Road and Alexander
Road
Oxford Court Both 25 Entire length
Penbrook Court Both 25 Entire length
Penn Lyle Road Both 40 From Village Road West
to Clarksville Road,
except 25 mph in the
West Windsor - Plainsboro
High School zone during
recess when the presence
of children is clearly
visible from the roadway
or while children are
coming to or leaving
school during opening or
closing hours
Princeton Place Both 25 Entire length
Quaker Road Both 25 Entire length
Rider Place Both 25 Entire length
Roszel Road Both 35 Entire length
Rumford Way Both 25 Entire length
Southfield Road Both 35 From a point 2,700 feet
northerly of the
intersection of Village
Road and Southfield Road
to the Big Bear Brook
South Lane Both 40 Entire length
Stranford Place Both 25 Entire length
Strathmore Place Both 25 Entire length
Terry Lane Both 25 Entire length
University Way Both 25 Entire length
Van Wyck Drive Both 25 Entire length
Village Road
West/East
Both 40 Zone 1 from Quaker
Bridge Road to the center
of Baxter Place, thence
35 Zone 2 to 1,187 feet east
of Edinburg Road, thence
45 Zone 3 to the center of
South Lane
§ 168-66 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 168-66
1:500
Name of Street Direction
Speed
(mph) Location
Wellesley Court Both 25 Entire length
West Winds Drive Both 20 Entire length
Whitney Place Both 20 Entire length
Windsor Drive Both 25 Entire length
Woodmere Way Both 30 Entire length
Wright Place Both 20 Entire length
Ziff Lane Both 25 Entire length
§ 168-67. Schedule XII: Lane Use Reservations. [Last amended
9-30-1996 by Ord. No. 96-23]
In accordance with the provisions of § 168-17, the following lane use
reservations shall be established on the following streets or parts of streets:
Intersection Movement
Alexander Road Center lane from U.S. Route 1 to
Roszel Road reserved for left turns
only
Alexander Road and Canal Pointe
Boulevard
Right lane of the easterly approach
of Alexander Road reserved for right
turns only
Alexander Road and Vaughn Drive Left lane of the easterly approach of
Alexander Road reserved for left
turns only
Canal Pointe Boulevard and
Alexander Road
Right lane of the northerly approach
of Canal Pointe Boulevard reserved
for right turns only
Carnegie Boulevard and Canal
Pointe Boulevard
Left lane of the westerly approach of
Carnegie Boulevard reserved for left
turns only
Edinburg Road and Briarwood Drive Northbound left lane of Edinburg
Road reserved for left turn only
Edinburg Road and Hawthorne
Drive
Southbound left lane of Edinburg
Road reserved for left turn only
Edinburg Road and Huntington
Drive
Southbound left lane of Edinburg
Road reserved for left turn only
Edinburg Road and Lanwin
Boulevard
Southbound left lane of Edinburg
Road reserved for left turn only
Edinburg Road and South Mill Road Northbound left lane of Edinburg
Road reserved for left turn only
§ 168-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-67
1:501
Intersection Movement
Edinburg Road and Spruce Street Northbound left lane of Edinburg
Road reserved for left turn only
Edinburg Road and Westminster
Drive
Southbound left lane of Edinburg
Road reserved for left turn only
New Village Road and Akron Lane The eastbound left lane of New
Village Road reserved for left turn
only
The westbound left lane of New
Village Road reserved for left turn
only
New Village Road and Greenfield
Drive North/Greenfield Drive South
The eastbound left lane of New
Village Road reserved for left turn
only
The westbound left lane of New
Village Road reserved for left turn
only
New Village Road and Longfellow
Drive
The eastbound left lane of New
Village Road reserved for left turn
only
The westbound left lane of New
Village Road reserved for left turn
only
New Village Road and Stockton
Lane
The eastbound left lane of New
Village Road reserved for left turn
only
The westbound left lane of New
Village Road reserved for left turn
only
New Village Road and the entrance
to St. David's the King Church
parking lot
The eastbound left lane of New
Village Road at the entrance to St.
David's the King Church reserved
for left turn only
New Village Road and Tiffany Court The eastbound left lane of New
Village Road reserved for left turn
only
New Village Road and Yellowstone
Drive
The eastbound left lane of New
Village Road reserved for left turn
only
Village Road West and Eastern Drive The eastbound left lane of Village
Road West reserved for left turn
only
§ 168-67 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 168-67
1:502
Intersection Movement
Village Road West and North Post/
South Post Road
The eastbound left lane of Village
Road West reserved for left turn
only
The westbound left lane of Village
Road West reserved for left turn
only
The southbound right lane of North
Post Road reserved for right turn
only
Village Road West - New Village
Road and Baxter Place - Village
Road West
The eastbound left lane of Village
Road West to northbound on Village
Road West reserved for left turn
only
The westbound left lane of New
Village Road to southbound on
Baxter Place reserved for left turn
only
The southbound left lane of Village
Road West to eastbound on New
Village Road reserved for left turn
only
Wallace Road From County Road 571 to Wallace
Circle, right lane reserved for right
turns only
§ 168-68. Schedule XIII: No-Passing Zone. [Last amended
2-20-1996 by Ord. No. 96-04]
In accordance with the provisions of § 168-18, the following described
locations are hereby designated as no-passing zones:
Name of Street Direction Location
Bearbrook Road Both As per Drawing #NPZ-457
Canal Pointe Boulevard Both Entire roadway
Conover Road Both Entire length
Edinburg Road Both From Village Road East to
Woodmere Way
Millstone Road Both From County Road 615 to Mercer
County Bridge 760
New Village Road From Dutch Neck - Edinburg Road
to 100 feet west of Greenfield
Drive
§ 168-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-68
1:503
Name of Street Direction Location
North Post Road
[Amended 6-16-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-17]
Both From Alexander Road to Village
Road West
Old Bearbrook Road Both Between Alexander Road and
Bearbrook Road
Rabbit Hill Road Both Entire length
Southfield Road
[Added 8-9-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-17]
Both As per drawing #NPZ-590B
South Mill Road Both From Village Road East to
Edinburg Road
South Post Road Both From Conover Road to Village
Road West
Vaughn Drive Both Entire length
Wallace Road [Added
12-15-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-29]
Both Entire length
Woodmere Way Both Entire length
§ 168-69. Schedule XIV: No Parking Anytime. [Last amended
2-8-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02]
In accordance with the provisions of § 168-21, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Sides Location
Alexander Road Both From Hightstown Road and North
Post Road
Alexander Road Both From N.J. State Highway to Route 1
to Delaware-Raritan Canal
Alexander Road Both From Canal Pointe Boulevard to
Township border with Princeton
Ascot Crescent Both Entire length
Bear Brook Road Both From Meadow Road to Windsor
Haven Drive
Bennington Drive Both From Southfield Road to Rabbit Hill
Road
Berrien Avenue East Entire length
Borosko Street North Entire length
Carlton Place South Entire length
§ 168-68 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 168-69
1:504
Name of Street Sides Location
Casselberry Way East
(odd
number
side)
From Ascot Crescent to Hastings
Lane
Conover Road Both From South Post Road to Ginnie
Lane
Edinburg Road Both From South Mill Road to Village
Road East
Emmons Drive North From U.S. Route 1 to Wheeler Way
Emmons Drive South From U.S. Route 1 to Wheeler Way
Farber Road Northeast Entire length
Farber Road Southwest From Wheeler Way to U.S. Route 1
Harris Avenue East Entire length
Heather Drive Both Entire length
Heritage Boulevard Both Entire length
Jamie Brooks Drive Both Entire length
Lanwin Boulevard Both From County Route 571 (Hightstown
Road) to Edinburg Road
Lillie Street North Entire length
Loetscher Place Southeast Entire length
Meadow Road Both From U.S. Route One to
approximately 1,000 feet southeast
of Tollhouse Drive
Meadow Road Both From Clarksville Road to
approximately 1,000 feet southeast
of Tollhouse Drive
Montgomery Street North Entire length
Nestlewood Way Interior
(odd
number
side)
Entire length
New Village Road Both From Village Road West to County
Route 535 (Old Trenton Road)
North Post Road East From a point 913 feet north of
LeParc Drive to a point 177 feet
south of Ward Road
North Post Road East From Village Road West to a point
1,122 feet north thereof
§ 168-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-69
1:505
Name of Street Sides Location
North Post Road East From a point 232 feet north of Ward
Road to a point 119 feet north of
Indian Run Road
North Post Road East From Woodmeadow Lane to a point
96 feet north thereof
North Post Road West From a point 580 feet south of CR
638 (Clarksville Road) to a point 575
feet north of Woodhollow Road
North Post Road West From Village Road West to a point
1,122 feet north thereof
Old Bear Brook Road Both Entire length
Penn Lyle Road Both From Clarksville Road to Village
Road West
Penn Lyle Road West Entire length
Rabbit Hill Road Both From Bennington Drive to the
Trolley Line Trail
Renfield Drive South and
east
(odd
number
side)
From Ascot Crescent to Tollhouse
Drive
Scott Avenue East Entire length
Scott Avenue West From Lillie Street to its southerly
terminus
Southfield Road Both From New Village Road to the
Township border with Plainsboro
Township
South Mill Road Both From the Trolley Line Trail to
Edinburg Road
South Post Road Both From Conover Road to Lake Mercer
South Post Road Both From Village Road West to Conover
Road
Tree Swallow Drive North
(even
number
side)
Entire length
Vaughn Drive North Within 185 feet of the intersection of
the prolongation of the northerly
curb with the center line of
Alexander Road
§ 168-69 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 168-69
1:506
Name of Street Sides Location
Vaughn Drive North From a point 470 feet north of
Alexander Road to a point 960 feet
north thereof
Vaughn Drive South From a point 220 feet north of
Alexander Road to a point 500 feet
north of Alexander Road
Village Road West Both From New Village Road to Penn Lyle
Road
Village Road West Both From Stirling Road to New Village
Road
Wallace Road Both From Scott Avenue to County Route
571 (Hightstown Road)
Washington Road Both Entire length
Wedgewood Court Both Entire length
Wheeler Way Northwest From Emmons Drive to cul-de-sac
Windsor Drive Northeast From Princeton-Hightstown Road to
a point 100 feet southerly thereof
Woodmere Way Both From South Mill Road to Penn Lyle
Road
§ 168-70. Schedule XV: Parking of Trucks Weighing in Excess of
Four Tons. [Last amended 11-18-1991 by Ord. No. 91-25]
In accordance with the provisions of § 168-22, no person shall park a truck,
tractor, trailer or semitrailer having registered gross weight in excess of
four tons upon any street between the hours specified upon any of the
following streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Sides Hours Locations
Benford Drive Both All Entire length
Conover Road Both All Entire length
Fairview Avenue Both All Entire length
Fisher Place Both All Entire length
Galston Drive Both All Entire length
Harris Road Both All Entire length
Hickory Corner
Road
Both All Entire length
Mather Avenue Both All Entire length
Meadow Road Both All Entire length
North Post Road Both All From Clarksville Road to
Alexander Road
§ 168-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-70
1:507
Name of Street Sides Hours Locations
Penn Lyle Road Both All Entire length
Pierson Avenue Both All Entire length
South Lane Both All Entire length
South Post Road Both All Entire length
Varsity Avenue Both All Entire length
Wallace Road Both All Entire length
Wallingford Drive Both All Entire length
Wilder Avenue Both All Entire length
§ 168-71. Schedule XVI: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours. [Last
amended 4-17-1995 by Ord. No. 95-18]
In accordance with the provisions of § 168-23, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours specified upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Berkshire Drive Both 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From Sherbrooke Drive to end
of cul-de-sac
Berrien Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Entire length
Borosko Street South 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Entire length
Canoe Brook
Drive
North 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From a point 480 feet east to
Nassau Place
Canoe Brook
Drive
North 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From Penn Lyle Road to a point
480 feet east
Carlton Place Both 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From the southerly curbline of
Cranbury Road to the southerly
terminus of Carlton Place,
except for the portion along
the east curbline from 160 feet
to 200 feet from the center line
of Cranbury Road
Harris Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Entire length
Lillie Street South 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Entire length
Montgomery
Street
South 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Entire length
Nassau Place West 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From Ziff Lane north to end of
Nassau Place
§ 168-70 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 168-71
1:508
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Norchester Drive Both 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From Sherbrooke Drive to
Clarksville Road
Penn Lyle Road East 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
From Clarksville Road to a
point 1,600 feet south of
Colonial Avenue
Princeton Place East 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From Canoe Brook to Ziff Lane
Scott Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
From Wallace Road to Lillie
Street
Sherbrooke Drive Both 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Monday
through
Friday
From Princeton-Hightstown
Road to Norchester Drive
Sherbrooke Drive Both 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From Berkshire Drive to
Suffolk Lane
Springwood Drive Both 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Entire length
Suffolk Lane Both 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From Berkshire Drive to its
terminus
Sunnydale Way Both 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From Berkshire Drive to
Cranbury Road
Vaughn Drive East 3:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
From a point 450 feet north of
the intersection of Alexander
Road
Woodmeadow
Lane
Both 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
From North Post Road to
Monterey Drive
Wycombe Way Both 9:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From Berkshire Drive to
Suffolk Lane
Ziff Lane South 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
From Ziff Lane north to end of
Nassau Place
§ 168-72. Schedule XVII: No Stopping or Standing. [Last amended
6-17-1991 by Ord. No. 91-15]
In accordance with the provisions of § 168-24, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle between the hours specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
§ 168-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-72
1:509
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Bearbrook Road Both All From Alexander Road to the
southerly intersection of
Windsor Haven Drive
Canal Pointe
Boulevard
Both All Entire length
Carnegie
Boulevard
Both All From U.S. Route 1 to Canal
Pointe Boulevard
Harrison Street Both All Entire length
Lanwin
Boulevard
Both All Entire length
New South Mill
Road
Both All Entire length
New Village Road Both All Entire length
Station Drive Both All Entire length
Wallace Road North All Entire length
Wallace Road North 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
except
Saturday,
Sunday and
holidays
From a point 100 feet easterly
from the intersection of the
northerly line of Wallace Road
and the easterly line of
Alexander Road for a distance
of 750 feet measured easterly
Wallace Road South All Entire length
Wheeler Way West All From Farber Road to a point
170 feet southerly thereof.
§ 168-73. Schedule XVIII: Time Limit Parking. [Last amended
6-26-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-24]
In accordance with the provisions of § 168-25, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown on any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Time Limit; Hours/Days
Station Circle Both 20 min. limit; effective at all times
Wallace Circle Both 20 min. limit; effective at all times
§ 168-74. Schedule XIX: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 168-26, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Street Time Sides Location
(Reserved)
§ 168-72 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 168-75
1:510
§ 168-75. Schedule XX: Taxi Stands. [Last amended 6-26-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-24]
In accordance with the provisions of § 168-27, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
Name of Street Location
Station Circle Southeast side, beginning at a point 40 feet
northwesterly from a point that is 95 feet
northwesterly from the building for southbound trains
(the 95 feet is measured on a prolongation of the
northeasterly wall of said building) and extending 25
feet northeasterly therefrom
§ 168-76. Schedule XXI: Bus Stops. [Last amended 9-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-26]
In accordance with the provisions of § 168-28, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
Street and Location Hours
1. Vaughn Drive, southbound on the easterly side
at Alexander Road, beginning at the easterly
curbline of Alexander Road and extending 120
feet southerly therefrom
5:00 a.m. to 8:30 p.m.
2. Along Clarksville Road (County Road 638),
eastbound on the southerly side thereof at:
5:00 a.m. to 8:30 p.m.
a. Avalon Watch, east entrance, near side:
beginning at the easterly curbline of the
Avalon Watch east entrance and extending
105 feet easterly therefrom
b. Raven Boulevard, far side: beginning at the
easterly curbline of Raven Boulevard and
extending 150 feet easterly therefrom (in
front of Princeton Terrace at West Windsor)
3. Along Clarksville Road (County Road 638),
westbound on the westerly side thereof at:
5:00 a.m. to 8:30 p.m.
a. Village Square entrance, near side:
beginning at the northerly curbline of the
entrance to Village Square and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom
b. Raven Boulevard, far side (prolongation):
beginning at the prolongation of westerly
curbline of Raven Boulevard and extending
150 feet westerly therefrom (across from
Princeton Terrace at West Windsor)
§ 168-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-76
1:511
Street and Location Hours
4. Along Princeton-Hightstown Road (County
Road 571), eastbound on the southerly side
thereof at:
5:00 a.m. to 8:30 p.m.
a. Between Sherbrooke Drive and Alexander
Road, mid-block: beginning 60 feet east of
the prolongation of the easterly curbline of
Sherbrooke Drive and extending 135 feet
easterly therefrom
b. Slayback Drive, near side: beginning at the
westerly curbline of Slayback Drive and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom
c. Lanwin Boulevard, near side: beginning at
the westerly curbline of Lanwin Boulevard
and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom
d. Southfield Road, far side: beginning at the
easterly curbline of Southfield Road and
extending 100 feet easterly therefrom
5. Along Princeton-Hightstown Road (County
Road 571), westbound on the northerly side
thereof at:
5:00 a.m. to 8:30 p.m.
a. Alexander Road, near side: beginning at the
prolongation of the easterly curbline of
Alexander Road and extending 105 feet
easterly therefrom
b. Bernt Midland Boulevard, far side:
beginning at the westerly curbline of Bernt
Midland Boulevard and extending 100 feet
westerly therefrom
c. Rabbit Hill Road, far side: beginning at the
westerly curbline of Rabbit Hill Road and
extending 100 feet westerly therefrom
d. Between Southfield Road and Glen Garry
Way, mid-block: beginning 546 feet west of
the westerly curbline of Southfield Road
and extending 135 feet westerly therefrom
6. Along Washington Road (County Road 526),
eastbound on the southerly side thereof at:
5:00 a.m. to 8:30 p.m.
a. Wilder Avenue, far side: beginning at the
easterly curbline of Wilder Avenue and
extending 100 feet easterly therefrom
7. Along Washington Road (County Road 526),
westbound on the northerly side thereof at:
5:00 a.m. to 8:30 p.m.
§ 168-76 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 168-76
1:512
Street and Location Hours
a. Fairview Avenue, near side: beginning at
the easterly curbline of Fairview Avenue
and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom
8. Along Alexander Road, eastbound on the
southerly side thereof at:
5:00 a.m. to 8:30 p.m.
a. Roszel Road, far side: beginning at the
easterly curbline of Roszel Road and
extending 100 feet easterly therefrom
9. Along Alexander Road, westbound on the
northerly side thereof at:
5:00 a.m. to 8:30 p.m.
a. Bohrens Way, far side: beginning at the
westerly curbline of Bohrens Way and
extending 100 feet westerly therefrom
10. Along Canal Pointe Boulevard, northbound on
the easterly side thereof at:
5:00 a.m. to 8:30 p.m.
a. Carillon Boulevard, near side: beginning at
the southerly curbline of Carillon Boulevard
and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom
b. Heritage Boulevard, north end, near side:
beginning at the prolongation of the
southerly curbline of Heritage Boulevard,
north end, and extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom
11. Along Canal Pointe Boulevard, southbound on
the westerly side thereof at:
5:00 a.m. to 8:30 p.m.
a. Carillon Boulevard, far side: beginning at a
point 240 feet south of the southerly
curbline of Carillon Boulevard and
extending 160 feet southerly therefrom
b. Heritage Boulevard, north end, near side:
beginning at a point 100 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Heritage Boulevard,
north end, and extending 160 feet northerly
therefrom
12. Along Carnegie Center Drive, northbound on
the easterly side thereof at:
5:00 a.m. to 8:30 p.m.
a. Roszel Road, far side: beginning at the
northerly curbline of Roszel Road and
extending 100 feet northerly therefrom
13. Along Carnegie Center Drive, southbound on
the westerly side thereof at:
5:00 a.m. to 8:30 p.m.
§ 168-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-76
1:513
Street and Location Hours
a. Roszel Road, near side: beginning at the
prolongation of the northerly curbline of
Roszel Road and extending 105 feet
northerly therefrom
14. Along Carnegie Way, northbound on the
easterly side thereof at:
5:00 a.m. to 8:30 p.m.
a. Between Alexander Road and Carnegie Way,
mid-block: beginning 1,039 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Alexander Road and
extending 135 feet southerly therefrom (at
circle at Carnegie Center)
15. Along Carnegie Way, southbound on the
westerly side thereof at:
5:00 a.m. to 8:30 p.m.
a. Between Alexander Road and Carnegie Way,
mid-block: beginning 1,234 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Alexander Road and
extending 135 feet southerly therefrom (at
circle at Hyatt)
16. Along Municipal Drive, eastbound on the
southerly side thereof at:
5:00 a.m. to 8:30 p.m.
a. Between North Post Road and Everett
Drive, mid-block: beginning 341 feet west of
the westerly curbline of North Post Road
and extending 135 feet westerly therefrom
(opposite municipal complex)
17. Along Municipal Drive, westbound on the
northerly side thereof at:
5:00 a.m. to 8:30 p.m.
a. Between North Post Road and Everett
Drive, mid-block: beginning 241 feet west of
the westerly curbline of North Post Road
and extending 135 feet westerly therefrom
(at municipal complex)
18. Along Nassau Park Boulevard, northbound on
the westerly side thereof at:
5:00 a.m. to 8:30 p.m.
a. McClain Avenue, far side: beginning at the
northerly curbline of McClain Avenue and
extending 100 feet northerly therefrom (at
shelter near Best Buy anchor store)
b. Pavilion Way, near side: beginning at the
southerly curbline of Pavilion Way and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom (at
shelter near Wal-Mart anchor store)
§ 168-76 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 168-76
1:514
Street and Location Hours
19. Along Nassau Park Boulevard, southbound on
the easterly side thereof at:
5:00 a.m. to 8:30 p.m.
a. Houston Street, far side: beginning at the
southerly curbline of Houston Street and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom
b. Pavilion Way, far side: beginning at the
southerly curbline of Pavilion Way and
extending 100 feet southerly therefrom (at
shelter near Kohl's anchor store)
§ 168-77. Schedule XXII: Tow-Away Zones. [Last amended
4-30-1990 by Ord. No. 90-17]
In accordance with the provisions of § 168-29, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as tow-away zones:
Name of Street Location
Heritage Boulevard Entire length
Station Circle Entire roadway
Station Drive Entire roadway
Vaughn Drive Entire roadway
Wallace Circle Entire roadway
Wallace Road From Alexander Road to Princeton-
Hightstown Road
§ 168-78. Schedule XXIII: Handicapped Parking in Municipal
Parking Lots and Board of Education. [Last amended 10-24-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-50]
In accordance with the provisions of § 168-30, Handicapped parking in
municipal parking lots and Board of Education property, the following areas
are designated as handicapped parking areas.
Property
Number of
Spaces Location
Dutch Neck School 2 As per sketch on file in Police
Division
Maurice Hawk School 2 As per sketch on file in Police
Division
West Windsor
Community Park
5 As per sketch on file in Police
Division and NJDOT
West Windsor -
Plainsboro High School
4 As per sketch on file in Police
Division
§ 168-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-78
1:515
Property
Number of
Spaces Location
West Windsor Township
Municipal Complex
9 As per sketch on file in Police
Division
§ 168-79. Schedule XXIV: Handicapped Parking on Street. [Last
amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 92-39]
In accordance with the provisions of § 168-31, the following street locations
are designated as handicapped parking spaces:
Street Location
Morning Sun Avenue Begin 30 feet northeast of the
northeasterly edge of Washington
Road (County Road 571) then 22
feet northeast thereof
Varsity Avenue Begin 30 feet southeast of the
southeasterly edge of Pierson
Avenue then 75 feet southeast
thereof
§ 168-80. Schedule XXV: Handicapped Parking on Private Property
Open to the Public. [Last amended 2-6-1995 by Ord. No. 95-08]
In accordance with the provisions of § 168-32, the following areas are
designated as handicapped parking areas on private property open to the
public:
Property
Number of
Spaces Location
Carnegie Bank
619 Alexander Road
2 As per sketch on file in
Police Division
Chili's 5 As per sketch on file in
Police Division
CoreStates
682 Alexander Road
2 As per sketch on file in
Police Division
First National Bank of Central
Jersey
774 Alexander Road
1 As per sketch on file in
Police Division
Hyatt Regency
U.S. Route 1
6 As per sketch on file in
Police Division
Lucar Hardware
Princeton-Hightstown Road
1 As per sketch on file in
Police Division
§ 168-78 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 168-80
1:516
Property
Number of
Spaces Location
Nassau Saving and Loan
44 Princeton-Hightstown Road
1 As per sketch on file in
Police Division
Palmer Inn
U.S. Route 1
3 As per sketch on file in
Police Division
Pep Boys
U.S. Route 1
4 As per sketch on file in
Police Division and
NJDOT
Prince Theater
U.S. Route 1
1 As per sketch on file in
Police Division
41 Princeton-Hightstown Road
(Gourmet Deli, Post Office,
Chicken Holiday, West Coast
Video)
1 As per sketch on file in
Police Division
Princetonian Diner
U.S. Route 1
2 As per sketch on file in
Police Division
Sunny Garden 2 As per sketch on file in
Police Division
United Jersey Bank
310 Carnegie Center
5 As per sketch on file in
Police Division
United Jersey Bank
40 Washington Road
1 As per sketch on file in
Police Division
§ 168-81. Schedule XXVI: Handicapped Parking on All Other Private
Property. [Last amended 6-26-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-24]
In accordance with the provisions of § 168-33, the following areas are
designated as handicapped parking areas:
Property Number of Spaces Location
Avalon Watch
(Jamie Brooks Lane)
As per sketch on file in
Police Division
Marketfair
(U.S. Route 1 and Meadow
Road)
18 As per sketch on file in
Police Division
Nassau Park Pavilion
(Nassau Park Boulevard)
61 As per sketch on file in
Police Division
§ 168-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-81
1:517
Property Number of Spaces Location
Princeton Arms
(Dorchester Drive)
2 As per sketch on file in
Police Division
Princeton Junction Train
Station
Township lots 9
State lots 38
As per sketch on file in
Police Division
Village Square
(Clarksville Road)
4 As per sketch on file in
Police Division and
NJDOT
Windsor Greens
(U.S. Route 1)
8 As per sketch on file
in Police Division and
NJDOT
Windsor Plaza
(Princeton-Hightstown
Road)
4 As per sketch on file in
Police Division
§ 168-81 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 168-81
1:518
Chapter 170
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Care and planting of shade trees — See Ch. 4,
§ 4-58D.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 48.
Trimming of trees by CATV franchisee — See
Ch. 59, § 59-8.
Dead trees as nuisances — See Ch. 115,
§ 115-3.
Planting of trees to prevent erosion — See Ch.
143, § 143-13C.
Excavations which damage trees — See Ch.
152, § 152-10C.
Land use — See Ch. 200.
§ 170-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL FARM — [Added 2-27-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-02]
DRIPLINE — The line formed by water dripping from the outermost
circumference of the branches of the tree.
HOMESITE — The land under the dwelling and such additional land actually
used in connection with a single-family dwelling, such as land used for
lawns, flower gardens, shrubs, swimming pools, tennis courts and similar
uses customarily accessory and appurtenant to the use of a dwelling, but
in no event more than the amount of land equal to the minimum lot size
provided for the zoning district in which the property is located, subject
to any other restrictions or easements which may apply to the planting or
removal of trees.[Amended 7-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-15]
MERCER COUNTY AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT BOARD or BOARD —
A board established to regulate commercial farm practices and to consider
any application by commercial farm owners or operators to conduct
permissible farming activities, pursuant to the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A.
4:1/C-1 et seq.[Added 2-27-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-02]
A farm management unit of no less than five acres producing
agricultural or horticultural products worth $2,500 or more annually
and satisfying the eligibility criteria for differential property taxation
pursuant to the Farmland Assessment Act of 1964, P.L. 1964, c. 48
(N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq.); or
A.
A farm management unit less than five acres producing agricultural or
horticultural products worth $50,000 or more annually and otherwise
satisfying the eligibility criteria for differential property taxation
pursuant to the Farmland Assessment Act of 1964, P.L. 1964, c. 48
(N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq.).
B.
§ 168-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1
1:519
OWNER — Any person as defined herein having title to or lawful possession
of any lot, plot or parcel of land within the Township.
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership, company, corporation,
agency or combination thereof.
PRIVATE TREE — Any living tree having a trunk diameter of five inches
or more as measured at a point 4 1/2 feet above the ground within the
Township of West Windsor and located on private land.[Amended
6-22-1981 by Ord. No. 81-24]
PUBLIC TREE — Any living tree or shrubbery located on lands owned by
the Township of West Windsor or any other governmental body.[Amended
6-22-1981 by Ord. No. 81-24]
STATE AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE — A committee
established to regulate commercial farm practices and to advance and
regulate farmland preservation pursuant to the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A.
4:1C-1 et seq.[Added 2-27-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-02]
§ 170-2. Permit required for certain acts.
The following acts are prohibited except upon issuance of a permit by the
Township of West Windsor:
A. No person shall injure, girdle, remove, destroy or cause or allow to be
removed or destroyed any living tree.
B. No person shall place salt, brine, oil, chemicals or other substances
injurious to plant growth within the dripline or in any other place or
manner as to injure any tree growing thereon or nearby.
C. It shall be unlawful to operate or park heavy machinery, e.g., trucks,
bulldozers, graders, etc., within the dripline of any tree as defined
above, or to carry out scraping or excavation in any such manner as to
expose or endanger the roots of such trees, except for approved
alteration of grade as in Subsection G of this section.
D. No fill, gravel, sand or other such material shall be dumped, deposited
or stored within the dripline of any tree.
E. No person shall build a fire or station any tar kettle or engine in such a
manner that heat or noxious fumes will penetrate the dripline of any
nearby tree.
F. No person shall dam or obstruct any watercourse so as to result in
flooding of adjacent wooded areas and thereby cause damage to trees
therein.
G. Existing grade surrounding a tree may not be altered by more than six
inches without construction of an appropriate masonry well or wall to
provide retention of original grade around the tree. Such masonry
structure shall encircle the tree at a distance of at least three feet from
the trunk at any point.
§ 170-1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 170-2
1:520
§ 170-3. Application for permit; issuance. [Amended 4-19-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-07; 2-27-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-02; 4-7-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-02]
H. No person shall cause to occur any disturbance to land or vegetation,
including the injuring, girdling, removing and destroying of living trees,
in any area designated for conservation by an approval of a Township
land use board, whether such area is established by specific delineation
or by application of principles and processees set forth in the approval
and application documents, and in any other area for which
conservation restrictions are in place by virtue of easements, deed
restrictions, or other instruments. Conservation areas created by land
use board approvals may be established by Greenbelt or other
easement or deed restriction, but shall also be subject to this chapter
and to § 200-254 if no deed restrictions or easements are recorded,
whether or not the intent of the approval was to have such instruments
recorded. [Added 7-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-15]
A. Any person, including the owner or operator of a commercial farm,
desiring to remove, injure, girdle or destroy one or more trees defined
in § 170-1 shall file an application therefor with the Manager, Division
of Land Use (Manager), on a form to be provided for this purpose. The
owner or operator of a commercial farm is not exempt from making
such an application. The application shall identify the lot or tract of land
upon which the tree or trees are located, shall disclose the name and
address of the owner and/or tenant or duly authorized agent of the
owner or shall show the actual location, species and diameter of the
tree or trees sought to be destroyed, as well as the location of any
existing buildings or proposed construction.
B. If the applicant is the owner or operator of a commercial farm, then the
Manager shall refer the application, together with any previous
applications for removal of trees from the tract of land, to the Mercer
County Agriculture Development Board (Board) with the Manager's
recommendations. If the Manager determines that the application is
made to benefit a land developer, then the application shall be denied,
subject to review by the Board.
C. The Manager shall refer all other applications, together with any
previous application for removal of trees from the tract of land, to the
Township Shade Tree Commission for consideration as detailed below.
D. Upon referral of an application from the Manager, Shade Tree
Commission or its authorized representatives shall examine the
premises referred to in the application and inspect the trees referred to
therein and the physical condition of the lands and the vicinity thereof.
E. After completing the examination, the Shade Tree Commission or its
representatives shall make a determination with respect to whether or
not the permit should be granted in accordance with the standards
provided for herein. If this determination is to grant the permit, it shall
§ 170-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3
1:521
§ 170-4. Appeal. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07; 2-27-2006
by Ord. No. 2006-02]
If the applicant is a commercial farm owner or operator, then any appeal
from a permit denial by the Manager should be made to the Board in
accordance with the rules and resolutions of the State Agriculture
Development Committee. All other applicants are hereby granted the right
to appeal the aforesaid determination by the Manager to the Business
Administrator, in which event the applicant must file a written notice of
appeal with the Manager within 10 days after receipt of the Manager's
notification to the applicant. Thereupon, the Business Administrator will,
upon notice to the applicant, proceed to hear the matter within 30 days
after the filing of the appeal. The decision of the Business Administrator
may affirm, reverse or modify the aforesaid determination and shall
constitute the final administrative determination of the application.
§ 170-5. Exceptions.
be endorsed upon the application and returned to the Manager, who
shall either issue or deny the permit within one week thereafter.
Issuance of permits shall not be approved for trees within Township
land use board-created conservation areas set forth in § 170-2H unless
such trees are dead or diseased and in the opinion of the Shade Tree
Commission should be removed or unless the Township land use board
that established such areas has agreed that the acts for which the
filed application seeks approval may be undertaken by approving an
amendment to the prior land use approval barring such acts. Issuance
of permits shall not be approved for trees within such other
conservation areas as are set forth in § 170-2H unless permits for tree
removal, pruning, or trimming are permitted by the instrument creating
such conservation areas. Issuance of permits shall not be approved for
trees outside of the conservation areas set forth in § 170-2C unless
one or more of the following conditions is found to exist: [Amended
7-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-15]
(1) The tree or trees in question are in areas to be occupied by
buildings, driveways, recreation areas, streets or drainage or
underground utility easements as determined from plat maps for
site construction as approved by the Township Planning Board.
(2) The tree or trees are located within 15 feet of any of the aforesaid
structures or are within utility easements.
(3) The area requires an approved cut or fill of land deemed injurious
or dangerous to the trees in question and no alternative grading
methods arc available.
(4) Presence of the tree shall in any way constitute a danger to the
property owner or the public.
(5) Other adequate and special reason within the intent of this chapter.
§ 170-3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 170-5
1:522
§ 170-6. Dangerous trees and shrubs.
A. This chapter shall not apply to the homesite of any resident owner
except as provided in § 170-2H and § 170-6. [Amended 6-22-1981 by
Ord. No. 81-24; 7-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-15]
B. This chapter shall not apply to normal operations in commercial
orchards or tree nurseries as carried out by the owners or their
employees.
C. This chapter shall not apply to a public utility company when that
company performs routine line clearance for overhead utility wires.
[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
D. This chapter shall not apply to standard selective forestry practices
which will benefit both the owner and the intent of this chapter, such as
pruning and trimming to enhance growth. Any such activity, however,
which entails injury to or destruction of trees shall require an
application and permit as provided for herein and shall be in
accordance with a management plan developed by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Forestry or other
professional forester.
E. This chapter shall not apply to any tree cut on any homesite for
personal use as firewood by the owner. [Amended 6-22-1981 by Ord.
No. 81-24]
F. This chapter shall not apply to any person who, on or prior to the
effective date hereof, was engaged in the bona fide business of cutting
and selling firewood from lands within the township, provided that the
lands so used for such purposes shall not be extended or enlarged
except upon issuance of a permit as provided for herein.
A. Removal required; notice. If a tree or any part thereof along a street
becomes dangerous or a hazard to public safety, the owner of the
property on which the tree stands shall remove the tree or the required
part thereof on receipt of written notice to that effect from the
Township Administrator. [Amended 6-22-1981 by Ord. No. 81-24]
B. Standard established; clear vision at intersection. The owner or tenant
of any lands lying within the township shall keep all brush, hedges and
other plant life, growing within 10 feet of any street and within 25 feet
of the intersection of two streets cut to a height of not more than 2 1/2
feet, as deemed necessary and expedient for the preservation of public
safety after a determination by the Chief of Police or any subordinates
acting under the Chief's direction.
C. Removal by township. If the owner fails to remove the tree or portion
thereof within 10 days after receipt of written notice to do so, the work
shall be performed by the township under the supervision of the
Administrator who shall certify the cost to the Township Council.
§ 170-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-6
1:523
§ 170-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be liable to the penalty established in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3. Each day any violation of this chapter
continues shall constitute a separate offense, as shall injury to or
destruction of each tree without a permit.164
Chapter 179
VEHICLES, STORAGE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 115. Traffic and parking — See Ch. 168.
§ 179-1. Storage of inoperable or unlicensed vehicles on public
property; emergency provision.
No person shall park, leave or store any inoperable, unlicensed or
uninspected motor vehicle, truck trailer or automotive parts on any public
lands or premises except in case of emergency, and then for a period of not
more than 48 hours.
§ 179-2. Storage of inoperable or unlicensed vehicles on private
property.
No person shall park, leave, store or maintain any inoperable, unlicensed
or uninspected motor vehicle, truck trailer or automotive parts, except
vehicles used for farming or agricultural purposes, for a period of more than
30 days upon any private lands or premises.
§ 179-3. Time limit on storage.
No owner or occupier of any private lands or premises shall permit or suffer
any inoperable, unlicensed or uninspected motor vehicle, truck trailer or
automotive parts, except vehicles used for farming or agricultural purposes,
D. Costs charged against land; lien established. Upon determining the
certified costs, the Mayor or designee shall examine them and shall
cause the reasonable cost to be charged against the lands. The amount
so charged shall become a lien upon the lands and shall be added to and
become part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied on the lands,
the same to bear interest at the same rate as other taxes and be
collected and enforced by the same officer and in the same manner as
taxes. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
164. Editor's Note: Former Section 16-7, Administration, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07.
§ 170-6 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 179-3
1:524
to be parked, left, stored or maintained on his or her lands or premises for
more than 30 days.
§ 179-4. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to motor vehicles, truck trailers or automotive
parts located or stored in garages or other buildings or to commercial
garage operations, provided that such motor vehicles, truck trailers or
automotive parts shall be stored or located within an area enclosed by
fence, hedge or evergreens, screening the area from the public highways
and surrounding property owners.
§ 179-5. Violations and penalties.165
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3.
Chapter 183
VENDING MACHINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 82. Retail food establishments — See Ch. 96.
165. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 179-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-5
1:525

ARTICLE I
Food and Beverage Vending Machines
[Adopted 12-20-1983 (Secs. BH:2-6 through BH:2-12 of the Revised
General Ordinances); readopted by the Township Council at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III)]
§ 183-1. Prohibited acts. [Amended 2-17-1988 by Ord. No.
BH88-2166]
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent, clerk
or employee either for said person or any other person or for any body
corporate or as an officer of any corporation otherwise, to:
§ 183-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COIN-OPERATED VENDING MACHINE — Any device offered for public use
which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or token or other means, dispenses
unit servings of food or beverage, either in bulk or package, without the
necessity of replenishing the devices between each vending operation.
PREMISES — The land and building and contiguous lands and buildings
comprising the entire establishment of the owner or lessee thereof on which
the coin-operated vending machine is located.
A. Engage in the operation of one or more machines or devices offered for
public use which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or token or by other
means, dispenses unit servings of food or beverages, either in bulk or
package, without the necessity of replenishing the devices between
each vending operation, without first having applied to and procured a
permit from the Township Health Officer and displaying the permit in a
prominent location and without complying with any and all of the
provisions of Chapter XII of the State Sanitary Code (1983),167 as
adopted or amended by the Township Council.
B. Maintain or permit to be maintained on or in any location in this
township one or more machines or devices offered for public use which,
upon insertion of a coin, coins or token or by other means, dispenses
unit servings of food or beverages, either in bulk or package, without
the necessity of replenishing the devices between each vending
operation, without first having applied to and procured a license for
each such machine or device from the Township Division of Health and
displaying the permit in a prominent location or without complying with
any and all of the provisions of Chapter XII of the State Sanitary Code
(1983), as adopted or amended by the Township Council.
166. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
167. Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq.
§ 183-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-3
1:527
§ 183-3. Application for vending machine license.168
Application for and issuance of the licenses referred to in § 183-1 shall be
made in conformity with the provisions of Chapter XII of the State Sanitary
Code (1983), as adopted or amended by the township. Such licenses are not
transferable.
§ 183-4. Suspension of vending machine license.169
Licenses issued under authority of this article may be suspended, revoked
or reinstated by the township pursuant to the provisions of Chapter XII of
the State Sanitary Code (1983), as adopted or amended.
§ 183-5. Inspections by Division of Health.170
The Division of Health shall supervise and arrange such inspections of coinoperated
vending machines and maintain such records as are required by
N.J.A.C. 8:24-1 et seq. and Chapter XII of State Sanitary Code (1983).
§ 183-6. Nonapplicability to interstate commerce and federal or
state activities.
No provision of this article shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or federal
government.
§ 183-7. Violations and penalties.171
Penalties for violation of this article shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-4.
168. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
169. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
170. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
171. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 183-3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 183-7
1:528
ARTICLE II
Newspaper Vending Machines
[Adopted 11-18-1985 by Ord. No. 85-35 (Sec. 3-11 of the Revised
General Ordinances); amended in its entirety 12-27-1988 by Ord.
No. 88-47]
§ 183-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HONOR BOX — A vending machine from which it is intended that single
copies of a publication or printed matter may be purchased.
PUBLICATION DISPENSING MACHINE — Any dispensing machine from
which it is intended that single copies of printed material (such as
newspapers, magazines, booklets, etc.) may be dispensed.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street improved, designated or ordinarily
used for vehicular traffic.
SHOULDER — That portion of a street bordering the roadway and not
ordinarily intended to be used for vehicular traffic, whether improved or
unimproved.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — That area of street intersections as defined in
§ 200-57E of Chapter 200, Land Use.
§ 183-9. Location of vending machines.
Honor boxes or publication dispensing machines may be placed within the
Township of West Windsor, subject to the restrictions contained in § 183-10
below.
§ 183-10. Placement restrictions.
A. Location. No honor boxes or publication dispensing machines shall be
erected, placed or maintained in any of the following locations within
the township:
(1) Locations for which the placement of an honor box or publication
dispensing machine will create an imminent, unreasonable hazard
to pedestrians or traffic or interfere with the response to an
emergency situation by a public officer, fire fighter, ambulance
corps or medic. Such locations shall be limited to areas adjacent to
the roadways of Alexander Road, Canal Point Boulevard, Conover
Road and Village Road East and West; and those which, in the
judgment of the Chief of Police, will create such a hazard or
interference. The Chief of Police, in making such determinations,
shall consider posted speed limits, sight distances, peak hour
traffic volumes and the availability of shoulders or parking areas in
which vehicles may be parked in order for the operator or
passenger to use the box or machine without blocking a travel lane
§ 183-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-10
1:529
in whole or in part. The Police Department may summarily relocate
to the nearest location not creating such hazard or interference
honor boxes or publication dispensing machines located in the
public right-of-way in locations prohibited by this section and shall
report the relocation to the owner of the box or machine as soon as
reasonably possible. The owner may thereafter relocate the box or
machine to any location which is in compliance with this article.
(2) Sight triangles.
B. Other locational criteria. Any honor box or publication dispensing
machine which rests in whole or in part upon or on any portion of a
public right-of-way or which projects onto, into or over any part of a
public right-of-way shall be located in accordance with the following:
(1) No honor box or publication dispensing machine shall be used or
maintained which projects onto, into or over any part of the
roadway of any public street or sight triangle or which rests wholly
or in part upon, along or over any portion of the roadway of any
public street.
(2) No honor box or publication dispensing machine shall be permitted
to rest upon, in or over any public sidewalk when such installation,
use or maintenance:
(a) Endangers the safety of persons or property.
(b) Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of
pedestrians or vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or
stopped vehicle.
(c) Unreasonably interferes with the ingress or egress from any
residence or place of business.
(d) Unreasonably interferes with the use of traffic signs or signals,
hydrants or mailboxes permitted at or near said location.
(3) Honor boxes or publication dispensing machines may be placed
next to each other, provided that no group of honor boxes shall
extend for a distance of more than four feet along a curb.
(4) No honor box or publication dispensing machine shall be placed,
installed, used or maintained:
(a) Within three feet of any marked crosswalk.
(b) Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box
or other emergency facility.
(c) Within five feet of any driveway.
(d) Within three feet of or on any public area improved with lawn,
flowers, shrubs, trees or other landscaping.
§ 183-10 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 183-10
1:530
(e) In locations which block display windows.
C. Prohibited locations. Honor boxes or publication dispensing machines
may not be affixed or attached in any manner whatsoever to any of the
following:
(1) Fire hydrants.
(2) Traffic signals.
(3) Township-owned traffic control and road signs or poles.
(4) Mail boxes.
D. Maintenance of machines. Honor boxes or publication dispensing
machines shall be maintained in clean condition and in good repair at
all times. Each machine shall be serviced or maintained so that the
following standards are satisfied:
(1) It is reasonably free of dirt and grease.
(2) It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in
the visible painted areas thereof.
(3) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted
metal areas thereof.
(4) The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, through which the
publications are viewed, are unbroken and reasonably free of
cracks.
(5) The structural parts thereof are not broken or deformed.
(6) The coin-return mechanism is in good working order.
(7) A metal plate or other type of weatherproof notice is affixed in a
readily visible place on the machine, setting forth the name,
address and telephone number of the distributor, so that someone
using the machine can report a malfunction or secure a refund in
the event of a malfunction of the coin-return mechanism.
(8) Grass, weeds and other vegetation in the vicinity of the machine
are maintained to a level consistent with that of the adjacent
property.
(9) It is chained, bolted or otherwise secured so as to prevent its being
blown down or around the public right-of-way, or from tilting,
tipping or overturning.
(10) It is not used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than
that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of a newspaper or
periodical sold therein.
§ 183-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-11
1:531
§ 183-11. Violations and penalties.172
Penalties for violation of this article shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3.
172. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 183-11 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 183-11
1:532
ARTICLE III
Cigarette Vending Machines and Self-Service Tobacco Displays
[Adopted 3-23-1998 by Ord. No. 98-07]
§ 183-12. Vending machines prohibited.
All vending machines dispensing cigarettes are hereby prohibited in the
Township of West Windsor.
§ 183-13. Self-service cigarette displays.
Self-service cigarette displays, that is, any racks, stands or other display
devices from which a customer may take cigarettes directly with only
payment to be made to the tobacco retailer, are prohibited.
§ 183-14. Violations and penalties.173
Penalties for violation of this article shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-4.
173. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 183-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-14
1:533
Chapter 190
WELLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 82.
§ 190-1. Purpose.
The Township of West Windsor deems it necessary in regard to the public
health within the municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-31a to protect the
citizens of the Township of West Windsor from any abuses relating to
the drilling and inspection of water from wells and to prevent the use
of or to close any well the water of which is polluted or detrimental to
the public health. Reference is also made to N.J.S.A. 58:1A-6, 58:1A-7 and
58:1A-15 and N.J.A.C. 7:10-12.1 et seq., which contain the applicable state
regulations and requirements.
§ 190-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HEALTH OFFICER — The West Windsor Township Health Officer, any and
all deputies under his or her supervision or control and/or any designees
acting on behalf of the West Windsor Township Health Officer or West
Windsor Township Health Division.
§ 190-3. Permit required.
Every property owner and every well driller licensed to drill wells in the
State of New Jersey shall, prior to the drilling of the same, file an application
with the Health Division of the Township of West Windsor for a permit to
drill said well, showing the names of the owners of the property, the name
of the licensed well driller proposing to drill the well, the street address and
tax map lot and block of the property in question and an informal sketch
showing as accurately as possible the location of the proposed well upon the
property, as well as the location of any existing or proposed septic systems
and laterals thereof located on the property and/or adjacent properties
within 100 feet.
§ 190-4. Issuance of permit.
Permits will be granted to all applicants when located in accordance with
the distance requirements set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:10-12.13, unless it appears
that the location of the well is so close to an existing or proposed septic
system or laterals thereof or is in some other way likely to cause a potential
health hazard. If a public water supply is available to the property, a new
§ 183-14 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 190-4
1:534
private water well may be drilled or the existing one kept, provided that no
cross-connection possibility exists and that compliance with state and local
laws relating thereto is assured.
§ 190-5. Notice; inspection of well casing insertion and grouting
procedure.
Notwithstanding anything set forth above, any person proposing to
commence work on a well must give at least 48 hours' written notice to the
Health Division of the Township of West Windsor before commencing any
such work. In addition, the Township's Health Officer must be allowed to
be present during any and all phases of construction that said individual
chooses to be present at up to and through completion.
§ 190-6. Water sampling. [Amended 7-17-1985 by Ord. No. BH85-2]
Upon attaining a permit, the well driller in charge, before completion of
the well, must notify the Health Officer and arrange a date when the water
sample will be taken by a New Jersey Certified Testing Laboratory for
potability, as required by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection and/or the West Windsor Township, so that the Health Officer,
if said Health Officer so chooses, may be present at the time the sample
is to be taken. Each sample taken must be placed in an approved closed
container and labeled with a label noting the date the sample was taken
and the permit number under which it was taken. The Health Officer may
require a second sample be taken at the same time and labeled in the same
manner for use by the West Windsor Township Health Division as a control
or check sample.
§ 190-7. Filing of certification of potability with Health Division.
Upon completion of the well, the well driller must present to the Township
Health Division a copy of the results by a New Jersey State Certified Testing
Laboratory of the water sample and provide an additional copy for filing
with the Health Officer.
§ 190-8. Fees.
For information relating to fees, see Chapter 82, Fees, § 82-12E.
§ 190-9. Access by Health Officer.
The West Windsor Township Health Officer may have access and entry to
any property upon which there is located a private well to inspect the same
and/or take samples of the water therefrom at any time.
§ 190-10. Stop-work or stop-use order.
The Health Officer may order any well which is determined to be polluted or
detrimental to the public health closed until and unless the water is made
potable. Such order shall notify the well driller or property owner that a
§ 190-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-10
1:535
hearing may be held on five business days' notice before the Board of Health
of the Township of West Windsor, upon written request made by the owner
or the well driller. In the event that such written request is made and no
hearing is held or the owner or well driller is successful in said hearing,
the order of closure shall be immediately and automatically voided. In the
event that no hearing is requested or the well driller or property owner is
unsuccessful after a hearing demanded, the order of closure shall remain in
full force and effect until the well water is determined to be safe for human
consumption by the Health Officer. Said notice shall be in writing, delivered
to the premises in question or the licensed driller by regular mail and shall
state the reason for the proposed order to close the well.
§ 190-11. Sealing of abandoned wells required.
Any well declared abandoned must be sealed in accordance with N.J.S.A.
58:1A-6, 58:1A-7 and 58:1A-15.
§ 190-12. Violations and penalties.
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-4.
Chapter 200
LAND USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 51.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 63.
Development names — See Ch. 70.
Fees — See Ch. 82.
Temporary real estate signs — See Ch. 136.
Soil removal — See Ch. 143.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 162.
Trees — See Ch. 170.
Wells — See Ch. 190.
§ 190-10 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 190-12
1:536
Part 1
[Adopted 12-27-1979 By SOirtde .P Nlaon. 7R9e-v3i9e wA1s7 4Ch. XXIII Of The Revised
General Ordinances]
ARTICLE I
Title, Purpose and Approving Authority
§ 200-1. Title.
This Part 1 shall be known and may be cited as the "Site Plan Ordinance of
the Township of West Windsor, New Jersey."
§ 200-2. Purpose.
This Part 1 is adopted pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.) and subsequent amendments and supplements thereto in
order to establish rules, regulations, standards and procedures for approval
of all development other than single-family detached dwellings or uses
accessory thereto in order to:
A. Preserve existing natural resources and give proper consideration to
the physical constraints of the land.
B. Provide for safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
C. Provide for screening, landscaping, signing and lighting.
D. Ensure efficient, safe and aesthetic land development.
E. Provide for compliance with appropriate design standards to ensure
adequate light and air, proper building arrangements and minimum
adverse effect on surrounding property.
F. Develop proper safeguards to minimize the impact on the environment
including but not limited to soil erosion and sedimentation and air and
water pollution.
G. Ensure the provision of adequate water supply, drainage and
stormwater management, sanitary facilities and other utilities and
services.
H. Provide for recreation, open space and public use areas.
I. Encourage cost-performance methods and designs to enable the
construction of low and moderate impact without creating an adverse
impact on the public health, safety and general welfare of the Township
or for the future residents of the development. [Added 2-25-1985 by
Ord. No. 85-1]
174. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 84-30 Adopted The Site Plan Checklist And Subdivision Checklist.
Copies Of The Checklists Are On File And Available For Public Inspection In The Division
Of Land Use And Shall Be Provided Upon Request.
§ 200-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-3
1:537
§ 200-3. Approving authority.
A. Planning Board. The provisions of this Part 1 shall be administered by
the Planning Board of the Township of West Windsor, except as set forth
in Subsection B of this section.
B. Zoning Board of Adjustment. The provisions of this Part 1 shall be
administered by the Zoning Board of Adjustment in applications before
the Zoning Board of Adjustment involving variances provided for in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d on which site plan review would be required. For
such applications, any reference in this Part 1 to the Planning Board
shall be considered to refer to the Zoning Board of Adjustment where
applicable.
§ 200-3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-3
1:538
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 200-4. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated herein.
B. Where certain words or phrases are not defined below, their meanings
shall be as defined in the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.).
A ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by the one-percent-annualchance
flood event generally determined using approximate
methodologies. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been
performed, no base flood elevations (BFEs) or flood depths are
determined, as designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM).[Added 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15]
AE ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by the one-percent-annualchance
flood event determined by detailed methods. Base flood
elevations (BFEs) are determined, as designated on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).[Added 7-18-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-15]
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are
between one and three feet, as designated on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM). Base flood elevations (BFEs) derived from detailed
hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone.[Added 7-18-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-15]
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average
depths are between one and three feet, as designated on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). Average flood depths derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone.[Added 7-18-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-15]
ACCESSORY BUILDING or USE — A building or use subordinate to the
principal use of a building or structure on the same zone lot and serving
a purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal building.
ACCESSWAY — A single vehicular entrance and/or exit combination
between a street and a lot.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering
the affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing
program for West Windsor to ensure that the restricted units under
administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as
applicable, only to low- and moderate-income households.[Added
10-15-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Zoning Officer of the Township.
§ 200-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-4
1:539
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included
in the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is
not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal construction
project or a one-hundred-percent-affordable development.[Added
1-20-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-52]
AGENT — One or more persons designated to represent the applicant
before the Planning Board.
ALLEY — A minor way which is used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a
street.
ALTERATIONS — A change or rearrangement in the structural parts or
in the existing facilities or an enlargement, whether by extension of a
side or by increasing in height or by moves from one location or position
to another.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the (local administrator's)
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a site
plan and subdivision plat, planned development, conditional use or
zoning variance or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or 40:55D-36.[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-07]
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH Zone on the
Township of West Windsor's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a
one-percent annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth
of one to three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist,
where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow
may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet
flow.[Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15]
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in
any given year. It is shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as
Zone A, AO, AE, or AH. [Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15]
AUTOMOBILE SALES LOT or BUILDING — A lot or building used for
the sale or hire of automotive equipment. This shall be interpreted to
include new and used car dealerships and auto accessory salesrooms,
but not the sale of junked automotive equipment.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION or GASOLINE STATION — A
structure and surrounding land used for the storage and sale of
petroleum fuel primarily to motor vehicles and for accessory uses such
as the sale of lubricants, accessories or supplies, the incidental washing
of motor vehicles and the performing of minor repairs. A service station
is not a repair garage nor a body shop.
§ 200-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-4
1:540
AWNING — A roof-like covering of canvas, aluminum or other material
attached to a metal or other frame and supported entirely from a
building or other structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year.[Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-15]
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS) including the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM). For Zones AE, AH, and AO the elevation represents
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a onepercent
or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year.[Added 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15]
BASEMENT — The portion of a building that is partly below-grade,
which has more than 1/2 of its height, measured from floor to ceiling,
above the average finished grade of the ground adjoining the building
for more than 50% of the total building perimeter and with a floor-toceiling
height of not less than seven feet. For floodplain management
purposes only, the term " basement" shall be defined as any area of
the building having its floor below ground level on all sides.[Amended
12-2-1991 by Ord. No. 91-31; 8-29-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-18]
BILLBOARD — A sign which directs attention to and/or provides
advertising for a business, commodity, service or entertainment which
is conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises
on which the sign is located. A billboard may also direct attention
to and provide information regarding noncommercial and/or nonprofit
organizations or messages where the noncommercial and/or nonprofit
organization is not located on the premises on which the sign is
located.[Added 10-15-1996 by Ord. No. 96-25; amended
12-23-1996 by Ord. No. 96-33; 12-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-27175]
BLOCK — The area bounded by one or more streets or a municipal
boundary and of sufficient size to accommodate a lot or lots of the
minimum size required in Part 4, Zoning, of this chapter, and as further
specified herein.
BOARDING, LODGING or ROOMING HOUSE — A building in which
at least three but not more than six rooms are offered for rent for
compensation, whether or not table board is furnished to lodgers, and
in which no transients are accommodated and no public restaurant is
maintained.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage
to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation
system.[Added 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 87-7]
175. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 97-27 combined the definitions for commercial and noncommercial
billboards.
§ 200-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-4
1:541
BUILDABLE AREA — That portion of a lot lying between required yards
and/or setback lines.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction
adapted to a permanent temporary or continuous occupancy and having
a roof.
BUILDING AREA — The horizontal plan projection taken at grade
level of all covered or roofed areas on a lot, whether permanent or
temporary. In computing building area, cornices, eaves, gutters, steps
and balconies are excluded.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The building area covered by all buildings on
a lot, including all roofed areas on a lot, fixed or temporary, expressed
as a percentage of the total lot area.[Added 9-20-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-21]
BUILDING HEIGHT [Amended 12-27-1988 by Ord. No. 88-51] —
BUILDING LINE — A line formed by the intersection of a horizontal
plane at average grade level and a vertical plane that coincides with the
exterior surface of the building on any side. In case of a cantilevered
section of a building, the vertical plane will coincide with the most
projected surface. All yard requirements shall be measured to the
building line.
BUILD-TO LINE — A line appearing graphically on the approved plan
or stated as a setback dimension, along which a specified portion of
the facade must be placed. It shall be measured from the right-of-way
unless otherwise noted. When the build-to line conflicts with the front
yard setback, the build-to line governs.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-22]
The vertical distance between the average level of grade along
all exterior foundation walls of a building, which grade shall be
substantially unchanged from the natural grade existing at the time
of a development application submission, and each of the following:
(a) The highest parapet or cornice level, in the case of a flat roof.
The mean level between the eaves and the highest ridge point,
in the case of a pitched roof.
(b)
(1)
Finished grade and/or berms at the foundation wall shall be
disregarded in building height calculations.
(2)
In this chapter, height limitation references to footage and number
of stories are intended to limit building height to the specified
maximum footage and number of stories within said footage.
Building height calculations, unless otherwise excepted in this
chapter, shall exclude building service equipment (e.g., mechanical
services, elevator penthouses, condensers, exhaust fans, airconditioning
and similar equipment) and all appurtenant
enclosures.
(3)
§ 200-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-4
1:542
CAFE — A small restaurant primarily serving coffee, drinks, light meals,
sandwiches, and/or desserts. A cafe may include an outdoor seating
area.[Added 3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — A governmental acquisition of real
property or major construction project.
CAR SHARE VEHICLE — A vehicle owned by a private entity made
accessible through a car sharing membership for use by its
members.[Added 3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-04]
CAR SHARING SERVICE — A membership-based service, available to
all qualified drivers in a defined community, that allows members to
reserve a vehicle to make vehicle trips.[Added 3-18-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-04]
CELLAR — The portion of a building that is partly or entirely below
grade, which has more than 1/2 of its height, measured from floor
to ceiling, below the average finished grade of the ground adjoining
the building. [A cellar shall be counted in floor area ratio (FAR) and
maximum improvement coverage (MIC) computations if used for
business or industrial purposes other than for ancillary storage.]
CHANNEL — The bed and banks of a river, stream, brook or spring
which convey the normal flow of the watercourse.
CHILD-CARE CENTER — Any facility which is maintained for the care,
development or supervision of six or more children under six years of
age who attend for less than 24 hours per day and which is licensed
by the New Jersey Department of Human Services. For a facility that is
located in a sponsor's home, the children permanently residing in the
sponsor's home shall not count in determining the number of children
served by the center.[Added 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 91-34]
CIRCULATION — Systems, structures and physical improvements for
the movement of people, goods, water, air, sewage or power by such
means as streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers, airways,
pipes and conduits, and the handling of people and goods by such
means as terminals, stations, warehouses and other storage buildings
or transshipment points.
CLUB, SOCIAL — A private or nonprofit organization for social
purposes in which the principal use is in enclosed buildings and no
outdoor sports are involved.
COAH or THE COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing established under the Act, which has primary jurisdiction for
the administration of housing obligations in accordance with sound
regional planning consideration in the state.[Amended 1-20-2009 by
Ord. No. 2008-52]
COMMERCIAL RECREATION FACILITY — A structure or place
designed for the conduct of sports and leisure-time activities which is
operated as a business and open to the public. Such activities may be
conducted either partially or entirely within the confines of a building
§ 200-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-4
1:543
or partially to entirely out-of-doors and shall include uses such as, but
not limited to, the following: skating rinks, ice rinks, fitness/health
clubs, sports courts, children's play and entertainment facilities, and
accessory retail uses.[Added 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-19]
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to
a site designated as a development and designed and intended for
the use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
Common open space may contain such complementary structures and
improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the use or
enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
COMMUNICATION TOWER — Any tower on which wireless
communications equipment is located or to which it can be
attached.[Added 4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-07]
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED
— Any community residential facility licensed pursuant to P.L. 1977
c. 448 (N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et seq.) providing food, shelter and personal
guidance, under such supervision as required, to not more than 15
developmentally disabled or mentally ill persons, who require
assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order to live in the
community and shall include but not be limited to group homes, halfway
houses, intermediate care facilities, supervised apartment living
arrangements and hostels. Such a residence shall not be considered
a health care facility, within the meaning of the Health Care Facilities
Planning Act (P.L. 1971, c. 136: N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et seq.). In the case
of such a community residence housing mentally ill persons, such
residence shall have been approved for a purchase of service contract
or an affiliation agreement pursuant to such procedures as shall be
established by regulation of the Division of Mental Health and Hospitals
of the Department of Human Services. As used in this chapter,
"developmentally disabled person" means a person who is
developmentally disabled as defined in Section 2 of P.L. 1977, c. 448
(N.J.S.A. 30:11B-2), and "mentally ill person" means a person who is
afflicted with a mental illness as defined in N.J.S.A. 30:4-27.2, but shall
not include a person who has been committed after having been found
not guilty of a criminal offense by reason of insanity or having been
found unfit to be tried on a criminal charge.176[Amended 4-19-1999
by Ord. No. 99-07]
COMPOSTING, COMMERCIAL — The on-site conversion of organic
waste matter into compost which is used off-site, except where such
compost is used on noncontiguous tracts under common
ownership.[Added 11-30-1992 by Ord. No. 92-35; amended
12-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-38]
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply
176. Editor's Note: The definition of "complete application," which immediately followed this
definition, was deleted 8-13-1984 by Ord. No. 84-24.
§ 200-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-4
1:544
with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such
use as contained in Part 4 of this chapter and upon the issuance of an
authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
CONFERENCE CENTER — A facility for business or professional
conferences and seminars, which may contain accommodations for
sleeping, eating,and recreation primarily supporting the conference
use.[Added 8-12-1991 by Ord. No. 91-18]
CONGREGATE HOUSING — Specifically designed multiunit housing for
independent to semi independent older persons in which there may be
meal service; if meal service is not provided, the facility shall include
a restaurant and/or cafe open to residents, guests of residents, and
employees of Block 33 Lot 1.01 and Block 33 Lot 1.02. Such restaurant
or cafe shall be located within the congregate housing building or the
community building within the complex. Living units shall include at
least a living room, bathroom, kitchen, and no more than two bedrooms,
except that studio apartments are permitted. All of the affordable units
must have one or two bedrooms. Access by residents of Block 33
Lot 1.01 and Block 33 Lot 1.02 to an on-site wellness center offering
health and fitness services and/or equipment is required. Personal care
service, housekeeping services, and transportation may also be
available by arrangement.[Added 10-24-1994 by Ord. No. 94-54;
amended 3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — The municipal official specified in the
Building Code and designated as such by the Mayor as responsible for
the enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code.177[Amended
10-25-1982 by Ord. No. 82-50; 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
CONTIGUOUS PARCEL — Tracts of land which share a common
boundary of at least 100 feet.
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — A development other than
planned development.
CORPORATE OFFICE — A building comprised of more than 10,000
square feet in which at least half are rented or occupied by a single
corporation or firm and whose primary business is to serve as a regional
or national center.
COUNTY MASTER PLAN — A composite of the Master Plan for the
physical development of the county in which the Township is located,
with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive and
explanatory matter adopted by the County Planning Board pursuant to
N.J.S.A 40:27-2 and 40:27-4.
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the county in
which the land or development is located.
COURT — Any area bounded by three or more attached building walls.
177. Editor's Note: See Ch. 63, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 200-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-4
1:545
COVERAGE —
CUL-DE-SAC or DEAD-END-STREET — A street or portion of a street
in which accessibility is limited to only one single means of ingress and
egress.
CURB — The average level of the curb in front of the lot.
DAYS — Calendar days.
DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility duly licensed by the New Jersey State
Department of Institutions and Agencies for the daytime
accommodation of children.
DEDICATION — An appropriation or giving up of property to public use
which precludes the owner or others under him or her from asserting
any right of ownership inconsistent with the use for which the property
is dedicated.
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per gross acre of land,
including streets, easements and open space portions of a development.
DENSITY, GROSS — The number of dwelling units per acre in a
development as determined by calculation outlined in § 200-238
herein.[Amended 12-15-1986 by Ord. No. 86-35]
DENSITY, NET — The total number of dwelling units of a particular
dwelling type to be located in a residential designated use parcel
divided by the net area of the parcel (e.g., land area within a designated
use parcel excluding areas proposed as common open space or
development collector streets).
DESIGNATED USE AREA — An area shown on a plan of a planned
development wherein particular types of dwellings units, commercial,
industrial and/or common open space is situated and that is employed
for the purpose of calculating the maximum net density and/or area
requirements applicable to the designated use. Such designated use
area shall include land covered by particular uses, internal local streets
or minor accessways, pedestrianways and all private yards, but not
development collector streets. The boundaries of such areas may but
need not be the same with any existing or proposed record lot lines.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
BUILDING COVERAGE — The building area covered by all
buildings on a lot, including all roofed areas on a lot, fixed or
temporary, expressed as a percentage of the total lot area.
(1)
IMPROVEMENT COVERAGE — The building coverage plus the
area of all paved surfaces, both impervious and pervious, which
cover a lot, such as required parking spaces, including necessary
maneuvering areas, passageways and driveways giving access
thereto, service areas, accessways, streets, walkways, patios and
plazas. [Amended 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-21]
(2)
§ 200-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-4
1:546
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure
or of any mining, excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the
use of any building or other structure or land or extension of use of land
for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.[Added
10-12-1993 by Ord. No. 93-30; amended 1-20-2009 by Ord. No.
2008-52]
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — A zoning ordinance, subdivision
ordinance, site plan ordinance or other Township regulation of the use
and development of land, or amendment thereto adopted pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map
on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.[Added 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15]
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from the
land by drains, grading or other means, such as retention or detention
basins, including control of runoff to minimize erosion and
sedimentation during and after construction or development and means
necessary for water supply preservation or prevention or alleviation of
flooding.
DRIVE-IN — Premises constructed to cater primarily to the motoring
public, whether or not serving pedestrians as well as the automobile
trade, and used for the sale to the public of any produce and providing
curb and/or window counter service.
DWELLING — Any permanent building or portion thereof designed or
used exclusively as the residence or sleeping place of one or more
persons. Dwellings may include but not be limited to the following
types:
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A freestanding detached building
on one lot, or within a lot held in common ownership, serving one
family.
(1)
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A freestanding detached building on
one lot, or within a lot held in common ownership serving two
families, with private exterior entrances to each dwelling.
(2)
DWELLING, SEMIDETACHED — A freestanding detached building
on one lot, or within a lot held in common ownership serving up
to four families, with private exterior entrances to each dwelling
(3)
§ 200-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-4
1:547
DWELLING UNIT — A group of interrelated rooms or structures,
intended or designed for nontransient residential use of one family,
and, in general, having the exterior appearance of a single-family
dwelling (e.g., duplex, triplex or quadraplex dwelling types).
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building or portion thereof used or
designed as a residence for three or more dwelling units, including
garden apartment and mid-rise apartment projects.
(4)
DWELLING, MAISONETTE — A multifamily building in which a
single dwelling unit of one story is beneath or above a single
dwelling unit of two stories, with an entrance to each dwelling unit
by direct access to the outside or through a common hall.
(5)
DWELLING, PATIO HOME — A building which contains one to four
attached single-family dwelling units, each dwelling unit having as
a major design feature an outdoor living space contiguous to and
structurally contained by that dwelling unit, and which is joined to
other similar units which have blank walls with no windows facing
the patio of the adjoining dwelling unit.
(6)
DWELLING, ZERO LOT LINE — A freestanding detached building
on one lot, or within a lot held in common ownership, serving one
family, with one wall of the building located on a side property
line, including atrium houses. Side, rear or front yards may be
enclosed to form common-walled, open courtyards or patios for
each dwelling.
(7)
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A building containing at least four
connected dwelling units divided by common party walls, with
private entrances to each dwelling. For purposes of this chapter, a
townhouse may include dwelling units with simple, condominium
or cooperative ownership, or any combination thereof.
(8)
DWELLING, GARDEN APARTMENT — Three or more dwellings
located within a single building, with an entrance to each dwelling
by direct access from the outside or through a common hall.
Garden apartments may include buildings in cooperative or
condominium ownership.
(9)
DWELLING, MID-RISE APARTMENT — Three or more dwellings
located within a single building more than four stories high with
direct access to a common hallway served by elevators from the
ground level.
(10)
DWELLING, ZERO LOT LINE, SEMIDETACHED — A freestanding
building on one lot, serving one family, with one wall of an attached
garage located on a side property line. The garage building wall
located on the property line will serve as a common wall for an
adjacent attached garage on the adjoining lot. [Added 9-26-1994
by Ord. No. 94-44]
(11)
§ 200-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-4
1:548
separated from other dwelling units by lockable doors, having access
to the outside without crossing another dwelling and having living and
sleeping facilities, cooking facilities, fixed or portable, and complete
sanitary facilities for the exclusive use of the occupants thereof.
EASEMENT — An interest in land owned by another that entitles its
owner to specific limited use or enjoyment.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION — Any public or private educational
institution normally subject to regulations prescribed by the State of
New Jersey.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of
a building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the
elevated floor elevated above the base flood elevation plus freeboard
by means of piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to
the flow of the water, and adequately anchored so as not to impair the
structural integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude
of the base flood. In an area of special flood hazard elevated buildings
shall also include a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of floodwaters.[Added 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 87-7;
amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15]
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — A Township advisory body created
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.178
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property
divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for
the municipality in which the property is situated, as determined in
accordance with Sections 1, 5, and 6 of P.L.1973, c.123 (N.J.S.A.
54:1-35a through 54:1-35c).[Added 10-12-1993 by Ord. No. 93-30;
amended 1-20-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-52]
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments
by water, wind, ice and gravity.
ESTABLISHMENT — One place of business or one permanent usage.
FAMILY — One or more persons customarily living as a single
housekeeping unit.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — Any private residence approved by the
Division of Youth and Family Services or an organization with which the
Division contracts for family day-care in which child-care services are
regularly provided to no less than three and no more than five children
for no less than 15 hours per week. Family day-care services shall
be considered a home occupation. A child being cared for under the
following circumstances is not included in the total number of children
receiving child-care services:[Added 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 91-34]
(1) The child being cared for is legally related to the provider.
178. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 4, § 4-61.
§ 200-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-4
1:549
FARM — A tract of land of five acres or greater used for agriculture, the
raising of crops or animal husbandry for consumption other than on the
premises.
FARMING — Agriculture, including the raising and harvesting of crops
or trees and the feeding, breeding and managing of livestock, as a
major source of income conducted upon a lot of not less than five acres
in area. The existence of a vegetable garden for home consumption or
the presence of not to exceed three animals as pets is not construed as
farming.
FAST-FOOD OPERATIONS — A business establishment where food and
drink are sold ready for consumption and where customers consume
the food and drink either inside or outside the confines of the
establishment.
FENCE — A vertical enclosure, solid or partially open, to prevent
straying from within or intrusion from without. A fence over seven feet
high is also considered a "structure" for purposes of this chapter.
FILLING STATION — Any establishment servicing motor vehicles with
fuel, supplies and accessories, but not major repairs, including
establishments designated as automobile service stations or gasoline
stations.[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Planning Board taken on
a preliminary approved plat/site plan after all conditions, engineering
plans and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled and
the required improvements have been installed or guaranties properly
posted for their completion or approval conditioned upon the posting of
such guaranties.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS — Any structure wherein business of
primarily a financial nature is transacted, such as banks, savings and
loans, mortgage companies and similar institutions.
FLAG — A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other support
that is made of cloth, canvas, fabric or like material designed or
intended to advertise, identify or attract attention to a business
organization. National, state, county or municipal flags are not
considered flag signs and are not prohibited by this ordinance.[Added
10-6-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-28]
FLAG LOT — A lot having less than the required frontage and
configured so that a stem provides access to the buildable portion of
the lot, which is in back of another lot.[Added 9-15-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-20]
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the unusual and
rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
The child is being cared for as part of a cooperative agreement
between the parents for the care of their children by one or more
of the parents, where no payment for the care is being provided.
(2)
§ 200-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-4
1:550
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.[Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15]
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report provided in which
the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as
well as the Flood Boundary - Floodway Map and the water surface
elevation of the base flood.[Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-15]
FLOODPLAIN — The relatively flat area or lowlands adjoining the
channel of a river, stream, watercourse, canal or any body of standing
water which has been or may be covered by floodwater.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance
and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of the police
power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood
damage prevention and reduction.[Added 7-18-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-15]
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.[Added
7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15]
FLOODWAY — The channel and portions of the adjacent floodplain that
carry the greater part of the flood flow at greater depths and velocities
than do the other parts of the floodplain, that constitute the minimum
area required for the passage of flood flows without aggravating flood
conditions upstream and downstream, that are necessary to preserve
the natural regimen of the stream for the reasonable passage of the
design flood and that are delineated on the Flood Boundary-Floodway
Map as floodways in the Township and that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than 0.2 foot.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of a building or group of buildings on a lot, measured from the
exterior faces of exterior walls or from the center line of party walls
separating two buildings. Floor area shall not include roof overhangs
less than three feet or any floors or portions thereof contained on
terraces or balconies projecting beyond the exterior face of the
building, areas occupied permanently by mechanical equipment,) any
space where the floor-to-ceiling height shall be less than seven feet,
provided that such space shall be used only for storage, building
maintenance and operation activities, and roofed or enclosed areas
devoted exclusively to off-street parking and loading spaces in excess of
the number required by ordinance. Basements which satisfy applicable
§ 200-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-4
1:551
construction code definitions of habitable space, whether finished or
unfinished, are included in floor area calculations for residential
purposes.[Amended 12-2-1990 by Ord. No. 91-31]
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The aggregate floor area, in square feet,
of a building or group of buildings on a lot divided by the area, in square
feet, of the lot.[Amended 7-27-1987 by Ord. No. 87-20; 4-19-1999
by Ord. No. 99-07]
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a
flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends
to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to
flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size
flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings,
and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.[Added
7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15]
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building or enclosed space used as an
accessory to the main building which provides the storage of motor
vehicles and in which no occupation, business or service for profit is
carried on.
GARAGE, PUBLIC OR COMMERCIAL — A building or enclosed space
other than a private garage for the storage of motor vehicles exclusively
or for the storage of motor vehicles at which filling station service,
sales of accessories or repairs, other than body and collision repairs
and painting and refinishing, are permitted. This term does not include
motor vehicle showrooms for new or used motor vehicles.
GENERAL OFFICE — A building comprised of more than 10,000 square
feet in which at least 1/2 are rented or occupied by noncorporate or
nonprofessional service-oriented business concerns.
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment, and enhance the health,
safety and well-being of residents by producing durable, lowmaintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of
existing infrastructure and community services.[Added 1-20-2009 by
Ord. No. 2008-52]
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed or existing
walls of a structure.[Added 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15]
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:[Added 7-18-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-15]
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
§ 200-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-4
1:552
HOME OCCUPATION — A professional office, individual instruction
and provision of services conducted in a dwelling unit and subordinate
to the residential use and meeting the criteria established for home
occupations in Article XXIX of Part 4, Zoning.[Amended 8-22-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-15]
HOTEL — Any building, including but not limited to any related
structure, accessory building, and land appurtenant thereto, and any
part thereof, which contained 10 or more units of dwelling space or has
sleeping facilities for 25 or more persons and is kept, used, maintained,
advertised as, or held out to be a place where sleeping or dwelling
accommodations are available to transient or permanent guests. This
definition shall also mean and include any hotel, motor hotel, motel,
corporate suite or established guesthouse.[Amended 3-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-01; 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-22]
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — One or more persons living together in one
dwelling unit on a nonseasonal basis and sharing living, sleeping,
cooking and sanitary facilities on a nonprofit basis.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.[Added
9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-21]
IMPROVEMENT COVERAGE — The building coverage plus the area
of all paved surfaces, both impervious and pervious, which cover a
lot, such as required parking spaces, including necessary maneuvering
areas, passageways and driveways giving access thereto, service areas,
accessways, streets, walkways, patios and plazas but excluding
walkways, impervious or pervious materials used as landscape
elements, such as fish ponds, birdbaths, stone/wood mulch used as a
landscape feature in flower areas, walls made of wood, stone, pavers
or similar materials enclosing flower or vegetable gardens, bark mulch,
crushed stone, blue stone or similar materials used in flower or
vegetable gardens for weed control and/or the appearance of the
materials.[Added 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-21]
INCINERATOR — A furnace for reducing waste material to ashes.
INTERESTED PARTY — In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding,
any citizen of the State of New Jersey and, in the case of a civil
proceeding in any court or in an administrative proceeding before a
municipal agency, any person, whether residing within or without the
municipality, whose right to use, acquire or enjoy property is or may be
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on the State of New Jersey inventory of historic
places if the state has an historic preservation program which has
been approved by the Secretary of the Interior.
(3)
§ 200-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-4
1:553
affected by any action taken under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. or under
any other law of this state or of the United States have been denied,
violated or infringed by an action or a failure to act under N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
JUNKYARD — The use of any space, whether inside or outside a
building, for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including
scrap metals or other scrap materials, or for the dismantling,
demolition, salvage, resale or abandonment of automobiles or other
vehicles or machinery or parts thereof.
KENNEL — Any structure, premises or refuge wherein or whereon the
business of boarding or selling or breeding of small animals is carried
on; included shall be such establishments as animal shelters and animal
hospitals.
LAND — Improvements and fixtures on, above or below the surface.
LANDFILL — A lot or part thereof used for disposal by abandonment,
dumping, burial, burning or any other means and for whatever purpose
of garbage, offal, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded machinery,
vehicles or parts thereof or standardized products.
LANDSCAPING — An area of land restricted to landscape items which
may also include such element as natural features, earth berms,
sculpture, signs, lighting, accessways, bikeways and pedestrianways,
but not including motor vehicle parking, extending along the entire lot
line where they are required. The width of a landscape area shall be
measured as right angles to the lot line.
LANDSCAPE SCREEN/STRIP — A completely planted visual barrier (or
having equivalent natural growth) composed of evergreen plants and
trees and/or shrubs arranged to form both a low-level and a high-level
screen.
LANDSCAPE TRANSITION BUFFER — An area of land restricted to
landscape elements, which may include lawns, plantings, natural
features, earth berms, sculpture, lighting, bikeways and pedestrian
pathways, but not including motor vehicle parking extending along the
entire lot line(s) where they are required. The width of a landscape
buffer shall be measured at right angles to the lot line.
LIVE/WORK UNIT — A building that provides both residential and work
space on a single property, some of whose residents might work there
and some of which might accommodate nonresident employees.[Added
11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-22]
LIVING SPACE — The net square footage inside the unit, but excluding,
stairways, garages, balconies and porches.[Added 12-23-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-35]
LOGO — Any symbol, shape, graphic or picture that a company uses
to represent itself as a branding tool.[Added 10-6-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-28]
§ 200-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-4
1:554
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit.179
LOT AREA — The area of a lot taken at its perimeter, exclusive of any
portion within a public or private street right-of-way.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and abutting on two or more
intersecting streets, where the interior angle of intersection does not
exceed 135º.
LOT DEPTH — The length of a line, lying midway between and parallel
to side lines or midway between and making equal angles with two
converging side lines, between the point of its intersection with the
street line and the point of its intersection with a rear lot line.
LOT, FLAG — A lot having its full size and area behind another lot
and having access to a street by a right-of-way not less than 50 feet
wide. Such lots known as "pork chop," "rear" or "L" shaped shall also
be defined as herein.
LOT FRONTAGE — The straight line distance measured between points
where side lines meet street lines: e.g., the chord of a circle in a cul-desac.
LOT, FRONT OF — In the case of a lot abutting one street only, the edge
of the lot which abuts the street. When a lot abuts two or more streets,
the front of the lot is that abutting side which is so designated on the lot
plan by the owner, and abutting edges adjacent to the designated front
shall be considered as sides of the lot. Any other edge abutting a street
which is not a front or side as above defined shall also be considered a
front.
LOT LINE — Any boundary of a lot other than a street line.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot, other than a corner lot, which extends from
one street to another, having frontage on both streets.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between the side lines measured parallel
to the front lot line at the minimum front yard setback line.
LOW- AND MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING — Dwelling units
developed pursuant to § 200-237 herein.[Amended 2-25-1985 by
Ord. No. 85-1]
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of other applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44
CFR 60.3.[Added 6-11-1984 by Ord. No. 84-16; amended 4-6-1987
by Ord. No. 87-7; 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15]
179. Editor's Note: See the Lot Definitions Diagram, which is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 200-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-4
1:555
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household earning between 0% and
50% of the median income established and adjusted from time to time
for the geographic area in which the Township is located by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
LOW-INCOME HOUSING — Housing which, with the appropriate
purchase or rental subsidy, is constructed and kept available for
families or individuals, including senior citizens whose incomes do
not exceed low-income levels as defined, from time to time, for the
Township by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development.[Amended 2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1]
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted
by the Township for the maintenance of any improvements required
by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., including but not limited to surety bonds,
letters of credit under the circumstances specified in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.5 and cash.[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term
"manufactured home" shall also include park trailers, travel trailers and
other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive
days. For insurance purposes, the term "manufactured home" does not
include park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.[Added
4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 87-7; amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-15]
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into
two or more manufacturer home lots for rent or sale.[Added 4-6-1987
by Ord. No. 87-7]
MANUFACTURING, LIMITED — An activity which involves the
fabrication, reshaping, reworking, assembly or combining of products
from previously prepared materials and which does not involve the
synthesis of chemical or chemical products or the processing of any raw
materials. Limited manufacturing includes light industrial operations
such as electronic, machine parts and small component assembly, as
opposed to heavy industrial operations such as automobile assembly or
milling activities.
MARQUEE — Any hood, canopy, awning or permanent construction
which projects from the wall of a building, usually above an entrance.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic
proposals for the development of the Township as set forth in and
adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28 et seq.
§ 200-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-4
1:556
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision of land that does not involve
more than two lots fronting on an existing street or road, provided
that such subdivision does not involve a planned development, any new
street or the extension of any off-tract improvement, the cost of which
is to be prorated pursuant to Article XVIII. No minor subdivision shall
be approved by the Planning Board if any earlier minor subdivision has
already been made from the same original parcel after August 15, 1975.
Parcels resulting from such or future minor subdivision actions shall not
be decreed to constitute a new original parcel.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household earning between
50% and 80% of the median income established and adjusted from
time to time for the geographic area in which the Township is located
by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development.[Amended 2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1]
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING — Housing which, with the
appropriate purchase or rental subsidy, is constructed and kept
available for families or individuals, including senior citizens whose
incomes do not exceed moderate-income levels as defined, from time to
time, for the Township by the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development.
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings containing rented rooms for
transients and having access either directly to the outside or through a
common lobby or corridor.
MULTIPURPOSE SPORTS PATIO — A combination of materials
providing for an exclusive and separate playing surface, constructed
on a stabilized base of compact crushed rock, concrete, asphalt, wood
decking or safety tiles, for the playing of such activities as basketball,
volleyball, badminton, shuffleboard, hopscotch, roller-skating or
racquetball.[Added 12-19-1994 by Ord. No. 94-62]
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The Planning Board, Board of Adjustment
or Township Council or any agency created by or responsible to the
municipality when acting pursuant to Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan
Procedures.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the
Township Council with the responsibility for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for West
Windsor.[Added 10-15-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18]
MUNICIPALITY — Township of West Windsor.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain regulations
adopted by the Township of West Windsor, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.[Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-15]
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — For
floodplain management purposes only, the term " new manufactured
§ 200-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-4
1:557
home park or subdivision" shall be defined as a manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including,
at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets,
and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality. It should be noted that
manufactured home parks are not presently zoned for in the Township,
but this definition will apply if such zoning should be put into
place.[Added 8-29-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-18]
NONCOMMERCIAL SIGN — A sign not larger than 16 square feet
for residential districts and 32 square feet for nonresidential districts
which directs attention to and/or reports or comments or editorializes
on matters of public interest and/or presents or promotes an opinion,
viewpoint or belief on a social, cultural, philosophical, political,
religious or other subject.[Added 12-23-1996 by Ord. No. 96-33]
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area, dimension or location of
which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of a
zoning ordinance, but fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure the size, dimension
or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or
amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to conform to the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reasons of
such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to
the adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which
fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located by reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NURSING HOME — A facility operated for the purpose of providing
therein lodging, board and nursing care to sick, invalid, infirm, disabled
or convalescent persons for compensation and duly licensed by all
governmental agencies.
OFFICIAL COUNTY MAP — The map, with changes and additions
thereto, adopted and established, from time to time, by resolution of the
Board of Chosen Freeholders of the county pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-5.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-32 to 40:55D-36.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot or portions of a lot
but within the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject
of a development application or contiguous portion of a street or rightof-
way.
§ 200-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-4
1:558
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of
a development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or
right-of-way.
ON-SITE — Located on a lot or portion of a lot which is the subject of a
development application.
ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public
or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and
occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided
that such areas may be improved with only those buildings, structures,
streets and off-street parking and other improvements that are
designed to be incidental to the natural openness of the land.
OWNER — The duly authorized agent, attorney, purchaser, devisee,
fiduciary or any person having vested or contingent interest in the
property in question.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted
by the Township, including but not limited to surety bonds, letters
of credit under circumstances specified in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.5, and
cash.[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
PERSON — Any association, partnership, corporation, cooperative
group, trust or other entity, as well as an individual.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — Any paved surface, including porous pavement
and environmental pavers, that permits the percolation of surface
water through it, but which does not permit normal landscape
treatment.[Added 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-21]
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Planned unit development, planned unit
residential development, residential cluster, planned commercial
development or planned industrial development. For purposes of Part
4, Zoning, the following types of planned development are utilized:
PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT, PLANNED
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT or PLANNED RESIDENTIAL
NEIGHBORHOOD — An area with a specified minimum contiguous
acreage as specified by ordinance to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing one or more residential clusters,
which may include appropriate public or quasi-public uses all
primarily for the benefit of the residential development.
(1)
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER or OPEN SPACE CLUSTER
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area to be developed as a
single entity according to a plan containing residential housing
units in which the individual lots have a common or public open
(2)
§ 200-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-4
1:559
PLAT — The map of a subdivision.
PLAT, FINAL — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision which
is presented to the Planning Board for final approval in accordance with
Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures, and which, if approved,
shall be filed with the Clerk of the County of Mercer for recording in
accordance with law.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — The preliminary map indicating the proposed
layout of the subdivision, which is submitted to the Planning Board for
consideration and preliminary approval and meeting the requirements
of Article XVII, Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures.
PLAT, SKETCH — The sketch map of a subdivision of sufficient accuracy
to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification and meeting
the requirements of Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures.
space area as an appurtenance. Open space cluster development
pertains only to single-family detached dwelling units.
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a
minimum contiguous size as specified by ordinance to be developed
according to a plan as a single entity containing one or more
structures with appurtenant common areas to accommodate
commercial or office uses or both and any residential and other
uses incidental to the predominant use as may be permitted by
ordinance.
(3)
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT or RESEARCH OFFICE
LIMITED MANUFACTURING PARK DEVELOPMENT — An area
of a minimum contiguous size as specified by ordinance to be
developed according to a plan as a single entity containing one or
more structures with appurtenant common areas to accommodate
industrial uses and any other uses incidental to the predominant
use as may be permitted by ordinance.
(4)
MIXED USE CENTER PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — An area of a
minimum contiguous size as specified by ordinance to be developed
according to a plan as a single entity containing one or more
structures with appurtenant common areas to accommodate a mix
of office, hotel, recreational and convention uses and any specialty
retail or service and residential or other uses incidental to the
predominant uses as may be permitted by ordinance.
(5)
PLANNED EDUCATIONAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a
minimum contiguous size as specified by ordinance to be developed
according to a plan as a single entity containing one or more
structures with appurtenant common areas to accommodate
private educational facilities of higher learning and other uses
incidental to the predominant use as may be permitted by
ordinance.
(6)
§ 200-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-4
1:560
PLAZA — A continuous open area, accessible to the public at all times
and designed to receive maximum sunlight, containing but not limited
to trees and other landscaping, seating, decorative pavement, artwork
and kiosks.
PODIUM — A single or multistory parking structure that serves as the
base or ground level for one or more permitted uses, including, but not
limited to buildings, parking, and site amenities. Structures built on top
of a podium may cover all or part of the podium.[Added 3-18-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-04]
PORTE-COCHERE — A porch roof or canopy projecting over a driveway
at the entrance to a building and sheltering those entering or exiting
the building.[Added 6-8-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-18]
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights as set forth
in Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures, prior to final approval
and after specific elements of a development plan have been agreed
upon by the Planning Board and the applicant.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Architectural
drawings prepared during early and introductory stages of the design
of a project illustrating in a schematic form its scope, scale and
relationship to its site and immediate environs.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which said building is located.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a member of a recognized
profession or occupation, including architects, artists, authors,
dentists, doctors, lawyers, veterinarians, ministers, musicians,
optometrists, engineers, realtors and such other similar professions or
occupations which may be so designated by the Board of Adjustment
upon finding by such Board that such occupation is truly professional
in character by virtue of the need for similar training and experience
as a condition for the practice thereof, and that the practice of such
occupation shall in no way adversely affect the safe and comfortable
enjoyment of property rights in any zone in which it is located to a
greater extent than for the professional activities listed herein.
PUBLIC AREAS — Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other
recreational areas and other public open spaces, scenic and historic
sites and sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL — A master plan, capital
improvements program or other proposal for land development adopted
by the appropriate public body, or any amendment thereto.
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along
a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the biological as well
as drainage function of the channel and providing for the flow of
water to safeguard the public against flood damage, sedimentation and
erosion and to assure the adequacy of exiting and proposed culverts
§ 200-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-4
1:561
and bridges, to induce water recharge into the ground where practical
and to lessen nonpoint pollution.[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-07]
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to the Township, Township agency, the regional Board of
Education, a state or county agency or any other public body for
recreational or conservational uses.
PUBLIC WATER/PUBLIC SEWERAGE — Water supply and sewage
disposal systems that serve more than one dwelling or other building;
such systems may be either privately or publicly owned and operated.
QUORUM — The majority of the full authorized membership of the
municipal agency.[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:[Added 7-18-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-15]
RESEARCH — The act or enterprise of systematic search for,
acquisition of and practical application of scientific knowledge in the
biological, chemical, physical and engineering sciences, specifically
including, but not limited to:[Added 2-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-01;
amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; and
(3)
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
(4)
(1) Analytical, theoretical, experimental and scientific investigation.
Design, engineering and development of materials, products and
processes.
(2)
Assembly, fabrication, operation and processing of prototype
materials, processes and products as necessary for test and/or
evaluation.
(3)
Pilot plant manufacturing, operation and processing of prototype
materials, processes and products as necessary for test and/or
evaluation.
(4)
Distribution, sales and storage of materials, processes and
products as necessary for test and/or evaluation.
(5)
Direct administration, control, management and support of the
above activities and the personnel so employed, as necessary.
(6)
§ 200-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-4
1:562
RESEARCH LABORATORY — A facility housing research, as defined
herein. Research and research support uses include but are not limited
to the following:[Amended 2-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-01]
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — A contiguous area to be developed as a
single entity according to a plan containing residential housing units in
which the individual lots have a common or public open space area as
an appurtenance.[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per gross acre
of residential land area, including streets, easements and open space
portions of a development.
RESTAURANT — Any premises where food is commercially sold for
on-premises consumption to patrons seated at tables or counters. Any
facility making use of carhop or parking lot service to cars or for the
consumption of food to be eaten in said cars or outdoors shall not be
considered a restaurant for the purpose of this chapter and shall be
deemed to be a drive-in establishment.
RETAIL CONVENIENCE FOOD STORE — A retail establishment of
up to 5,000 square feet selling primarily food products, household
items, newspapers and magazines, candy and beverages, and a limited
amount of freshly prepared foods such as sandwiches and salads for offpremises
consumption.[Added 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-22]
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINES — The boundary lines of land used or intended
for use as streets, as shown on deeds, plats or the master plan, and
from which yard and other requirements shall begin.
SCHOOL — Any public or private institution offering instruction for
students up to and through the secondary level.
Laboratories devoted to experimentation in the biological,
chemical, physical and/or engineering sciences, including the
design, development, engineering and/or testing of materials,
processes and products and the assembly, fabrication operation,
and/or processing of prototype materials, processes and/or
products for test and/or evaluation.
(1)
Rooms housing equipment and/or materials actively and directly
used in research, including computer rooms, conference rooms,
libraries and demonstration rooms.
(2)
Office space for employees, consultants and/or visitors actively
participating in, supervising or supporting research uses.
(3)
Cafeteria/kitchen space for serving employees and guests;
shipping/receiving, stockroom and storage facilities; support
services; dispensary; and exercise, locker and shower rooms for
employees.
(4)
§ 200-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-4
1:563
SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of soil that has been transported
from its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means
as a product of erosion.
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING — Housing within which residency shall
be restricted to permanent residents of the age 62 years and over,
except for the spouse and one child 18 years or more of age of a
qualifying resident.
SETBACK — An area extending the full width of the lot between the
street right-of-way and the required yard within which no buildings or
parts of buildings may be erected.
SHARED CAR SERVICES — Car rental services whereby cars are
available for rental for short periods of time.[Added 3-7-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-5]
SHOPPING CENTER — A tract of land, with buildings or structures
planned as a whole and intended for three or more retail
establishments, with accessory parking and loading on the same site.
SIGN — Any structure or part thereof or any device attached to a
building or painted or represented thereon which shall display or
include any letter, word, model, banner, pennant, insignia, device, trade
flag, symbol or representation which is in the nature of or which is
used as an announcement, direction or advertisement, for commercial
purposes or otherwise. A sign includes any message, neon tube, string
of lights or similar device outlining, hung, painted upon or attached to
a part of a building or lot, but does not include the flag or insignia of
any nation or group of nations or of any governmental agency or of
any political, educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic, professional,
religious or like campaign, drive, movement, organization or event.
Excluded from this definition are signs which are solely devoted to
prohibiting trespassing, hunting or fishing.
SIGN AREA — The entire space within a single continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of a sign or, when a sign consists of
individual letters or logos, the space bounded by the largest vertical
height or the lettering/logo by the largest horizontal width. For doublesided
identical signs, only one side constitutes total sign area. For
monument signs, sign area includes only the area that encloses the
extreme limits of the lettering/logo. It does not include the base and/or
cap of the monument.[Amended 10-6-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-28]
SIGN BAND — The horizontal area on a building facade located
between the first floor elevation and the top of any door and windows
located on the first floor.[Added 10-6-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-28]
SIGN FUNCTIONS — May include, but not be limited to, the
following:[Amended 10-6-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-28]
ADVERTISING — A sign directing attention to a business
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered
elsewhere than upon the premises where the sign is maintained.
(1)
§ 200-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-4
1:564
SIGN HEIGHT — The greatest vertical dimension between the top of a
sign and the ground.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — Any sign illuminated by electricity, gas or other
artificial light, including reflective or phosphorescent light.
SIGN, INTERIOR — Any sign that is affixed to or painted on the interior
of a window or any sign located inside and within three feet of the face
of the window, which sign is designed to be visible from the exterior of
the window.
SIGN TYPES — May include, but not be limited to, the following
types:[Amended 10-15-1996 by Ord. No. 96-25; 10-6-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-28]
BUSINESS — A sign directing attention to a business, commodity,
service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered upon the same
premises as those upon which the sign is located.
(2)
DIRECTORY — A sign of permanent character that is attached
directly to the building and is parallel to the building, but with
interchangeable letters, words or numerals, indicating the names
of persons associated with or services offered upon the premises
whereon a sign is maintained.
(3)
INSTRUCTIONAL — A sign conveying instructions with respect
to the premises on which it is maintained, such as parking lot
entrance or exit signs and danger signs.
(4)
NAMEPLATE — A sign indicating the name, address and/or
profession or occupation of a person.
(5)
PUBLIC — Signs of a noncommercial nature and in the public
interest erected by or on the order of a public officer in the
performance of his or her duty, such as safety signs, danger signs,
memorial plaques or citations, official court and public notices,
signs of historical interest and the like.
(6)
TEMPORARY — A sign which is designed to advertise or announce,
for a limited period, a particular event or series of events, to
solicit political support or to announce the availability for sale of a
particular item or items.
(7)
GROUND — A freestanding sign supported by uprights or braces in
or upon the ground and not attached to any part of a building.
(1)
GROUND-MOUNTED PROJECT/TENANT IDENTIFICATION — A
freestanding sign that sits directly upon the ground and is not
attached to any part of a building that identifies the name of a
development and/or tenants of a particular development.
(2)
HANGING — A sign designed to project beyond the front face and
perpendicular to it over a public walkway.
(3)
§ 200-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-4
1:565
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is
shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but
not necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes and waterways; the location of all existing and proposed
buildings, drives, parking spaces, walkways, means of ingress and
egress, drainage facilities, utility services, landscaping, structures and
signs, lighting and screening devices; and any other information that
may be reasonably required in order to make an informed review and
determination as to approval of the plan by the Planning Board as
stipulated by Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures.
SITE PLAN, MAJOR — Any site plan involving 10 acres or more.
SITE PLAN, MINOR — A site plan involving fewer than 10 acres and
modification to existing buildings or structures, but not involving a
change in use, a planned development, any new street or extension
of any off-tract improvement and not affecting existing circulation,
drainage, building arrangements, landscaping, buffering and lighting
and not requiring a variance or waiver except as required to comply
with the Americans with Disabilities Act.[Amended 4-12-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-10]
STACKED TOWNHOUSE — A building containing two or more
connected dwelling units stacked one dwelling above another, which
can include shared floors divided by walls and shared common party
walls connected to other such building modules, with private entrances
to each dwelling. For purposes of this chapter, a townhouse may include
dwelling units in condominium or cooperative ownership or any
combination thereof.[Added 6-11-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-17;
amended 12-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-29]
INTEGRAL — A sign carved into stone, concrete or similar material
or made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent type construction
and made an integral part of the structure.
(4)
MARQUEE — A sign attached to or hung from a marquee, canopy
or other covered structure projecting from and supported by the
building.
(5)
MONUMENT — A low, freestanding sign that sits directly upon the
ground and is not attached to any part of a building.
(6)
ROOF — A sign which is erected, constructed or maintained on,
above or as part of the roof of any building.
(7)
WALL — A sign which is attached directly to the building and is
parallel to the building.
(8)
WINDOW — Any sign, pictures, symbol or combination thereof
displayed in a window.
(9)
(10)BILLBOARDS — See definition of "billboard."
§ 200-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-4
1:566
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Shall include substantial improvement
and shall mean the building permit was issued, provided that the actual
start of construction, repairs, reconstruction, placement or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit. The "actual start"
shall mean either the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond
the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
"actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.[Amended
4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 87-7; 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15]
STORY — That part of any building, exclusive of cellars but inclusive of
basements, comprised between the level of one finished floor and the
level of the next higher finished floor or, if there be no higher finished
floor, then that part of the building comprised between the level of the
highest finished floor and the top of the roof beams.
STORY, HALF — Any space partially within the roof framing where the
clear height of not more than 65% of such space between the top of the
floor beams and the structural ceiling level is seven feet or more.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway
or which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law
or which is approved by official action as provided by Part 4, Zoning,
or which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of
the county recording officer prior to the appointment of a Planning
Board and the grant to such Board of the power to review plats;
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and a street right-ofway.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction
for occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or
below the surface of a parcel of land. For floodplain management
purposes only, the term " structure" shall be defined as a walled and
roofed building, a manufactured home, or a gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally above ground.[Amended 8-29-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-18]
§ 200-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-4
1:567
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
copartnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing
proceedings under Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures, to
effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself or for another.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into
two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or
development. The following shall not be considered subdivisions within
the meaning of this chapter, if no new streets are created: divisions
of land found by the Planning Board or a committee thereof to be
for agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres
or larger in size; divisions of property by testamentary or intestate
provisions; divisions of property upon court order including but not
limited to judgments of foreclosure; consolidation of existing lots by
deed or other recorded instrument; and the conveyance of one or
more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land, owned by the same
person or persons and all of which are found and certified by the
administrative officer to conform to the requirements of the municipal
development regulations and are shown and designated as separate
lots, tracts or parcels on the Tax Map or atlas of the municipality.
The term "subdivision" shall also include the term
"resubdivision."[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT SIGN — A temporary sign used for the
purpose of advertising the sale of lots or other parcels of land.180
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its condition
before damage would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.[Added 7-18-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-15]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:[Amended
7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15]
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement officer and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.
(2)
180. Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Signs, Art. I, Off-Premises Temporary Real Estate Signs.
§ 200-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-4
1:568
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — An outdoor water pool which is not
operated for gain and which is intended to be used for swimming or
bathing by any family or persons residing on the premises and their
guests. An outdoor water pool shall, for the purposes of this chapter,
be construed to mean any swimming pool, tank, above or below grade,
depression or excavation in any material, dike or berm constructed,
erected, excavated or maintained which will cause the retaining of
water to a greater depth than 18 inches and having a plan surface of
water greater than 100 square feet.
TANDEM PARKING — A parking space that has access to a driveway
or aisle used for vehicular traffic only through another parking
space.[Added 6-8-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-18]
TAVERN — A business selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on
the premises.
THEATER, MOTION-PICTURE — An indoor facility designed and
intended for the showing of movies on a fixed screen.
THEATER, LEGITIMATE — An indoor facility designed and intended for
live dramatic, cultural or other similar events.181
TRACT — A parcel, property or area of land comprised of one or more
lots adjacent to one another, established by a plat or otherwise as
permitted by law, to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
USE — The purpose for which land or structure(s) is arranged,
designed or intended or for which either land or structure(s) is or may
be used, occupied or maintained.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main or primary purpose or purposes for
which land and/or structure(s) or use therefor is designed, arranged or
intended or for which they may be occupied or maintained under Part
4, Zoning. All other structures or uses on the same lot and incidental
or supplementary thereto and permitted under Part 4, Zoning, shall be
considered accessory uses.
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of a
zoning ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60, 40:55D-40b and/or
40:55D-70c and d.
VETERINARY CLINIC — A place where animals are given medical
care, and the overnight stay of animals is limited to short-term care
incidental to the veterinary use. Such facilities shall not include the
breeding or boarding of animals, pet store, pet grooming shops or pet
salons.[Added 5-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-08]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — Communication towers or
structures, whether existing or proposed to be built, and improvements
thereto, wireless communication antennas, associated equipment
181. Editor's Note: The definition of "Timed Growth District," which immediately followed this
definition, was deleted 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07.
§ 200-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-4
1:569
compounds, and other facilities designed to provide wireless
communication services.[Added 4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-07]
YARD — A ground area, unoccupied space open to the sky except for
permitted fences, garden walls, plantings and accessways, and that
portion of any lot extending inward from the lot or street line for the
distance required by the district within which the lot is located.182
YARD, FRONT — A ground area, unoccupied except for permitted
fences, garden walls, planting and/or accessways fully open to the sky,
between the street line and a line drawn parallel thereto along the front
of the building, extending from lot line to lot line.
YARD LINE — A line drawn parallel to a street or lot line at a distance
therefrom equal to the respective yard dimension required by Part 4,
Zoning.
YARD, REAR — A ground area, unoccupied except for permitted fences,
garden walls, planting and/or accessways, fully open to the sky,
between the rear lot line and a line drawn parallel thereto along the
rear of the buildings, extending from lot line to lot line.
YARD, REQUIRED — Any yard measured between a line drawn parallel
to a street or lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the respective
yard dimension required by Part 4, Zoning.
YARD, SIDE — A ground area, unoccupied except for permitted fences,
garden walls, planting and/or accessways, fully open to the sky,
between any lot line other than a street or rear lot line, and a line drawn
parallel thereto along the side of the building, between the front and
rear yards.
ZONING BOARD — The Zoning Board of Adjustment as established
under Part 4, Zoning.
ZONING DISTRICT — A finite area of land, as designated by its
boundaries on the Zoning Map, throughout which specific and uniform
regulations govern the use of land and/or the location, size and use of
buildings.
ZONING MAP — The map annexed to and made part of this chapter,
indicating zoning districts.
ZONING OFFICER — The municipal official appointed by the Township
Council to carry out the literal provisions of Part 4, Zoning.[Added
10-25-1982 by Ord. No. 82-48]
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the administrative officer
which either is required by ordinance as a condition precedent to the
commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or building or which
acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with the
provisions of the municipal zoning ordinance or variance therefrom
182. Editor's Note: See the Lot Definitions Diagram, which is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 200-4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-4
1:570
duly authorized by a municipal agency pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60
and 40:55D-70.
§ 200-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-4
1:571

ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 200-5. Application of requirements.
No development shall take place within the Township nor shall any land
be cleared or altered nor shall any watercourse be diverted or its channel
or floodplain dredged or filled nor shall any parking areas, accessory or
otherwise or accessways thereto be constructed, installed or enlarged nor
shall any building permit, certificate of occupancy or other required permit
be issued with respect to any such structure, land or parking area, except in
accordance with an approval of such development granted pursuant to this
Part 1, unless exempted in accordance with § 200-6.
§ 200-6. Exemptions.
Site plan approval shall not be required for any of the following:
§ 200-7. Waiver of site plan review requirements.
A. Detached single-family dwellings including accessory uses permitted as
of right under applicable zoning districts, but this shall not limit the
requirements for submission and approval of subdivision plats as
otherwise required by Township ordinances.
B. The one-time construction of a parking area for less than three vehicles.
C. Any structure or use for which a site plan review application was made
to the Planning Board prior to the effective date of this Part 1 under
municipal ordinances and regulations then in effect and superseded by
this Part 1 and that is developed in accordance with an approval of such
application heretofore given by the Planning Board pursuant to said
prior ordinances and regulations, provided that such approval is less
than two years old.
D. A proposed development not involving a change in use and not affecting
existing circulation, drainage, building arrangements, landscaping,
buffering, lighting and other considerations of site plan review.
A. The rules, regulations and standards set forth in this Part 1 shall be
considered the minimum requirements for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Township. However, if
the applicant can clearly demonstrate that because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the applicant's land the literal enforcement of
this Part 1 is impracticable or will exact undue hardship, the Planning
Board may permit such exemption(s) and waiver(s) as may be
reasonable, within the general purpose and intent of the rules,
regulations and standards established by this Part 1.
B. The Planning Board may also waive the requirements of this Part 1 if
the proposed development:
§ 200-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-7
1:573
(1) Secured previous site plan approval under the terms of this Part 1.
(2) Involves normal maintenance or replacement such as a new roof,
painting, new siding or similar activity.
C. The Planning Board, when acting upon an application which includes
provisions for low- and moderate-income housing, may waive those
portions of the design standards that do not create health and safety
concerns for the Township or for the future residents of a development,
based on waiver standards contained in Subsection A of this section. 183
[Added 2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-01]
183. Editor's Note: Original Section 23-3.3, as amended 12-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-42;
1-25-1982 by Ord. No. 82-05; 12-27-1982 by Ord. No. 82-53; 2-27-1984 by Ord. No. 84-02,
Site Plan Advisory Board, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed in its
entirety by Ord. No. 93-25. See now Ch. 4, Administration of Government, § 4-66, for these
provisions.
§ 200-7 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-7
1:574
ARTICLE IV
Procedures for Site Plan Approval
§ 200-8. General intent.
All site plans shall be formally reviewed, except as noted herein, in two
stages: preliminary and final. An informal discussion and review sketch
stage is encouraged of applicants seeking site plan approval. Preliminary
and final stages may be combined by the applicant. As a condition for
combined stage application, the time for approval by the Planning Board
shall be the total of the mandated approval time allowed to each review
stage, as noted herein.
§ 200-9. Filing, referral and classification procedures. [Amended
12-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-41]
A. Filing. Site plan applications shall be received for official processing by
the Township no sooner than the 16th and no later than the 12th day
before the fourth Wednesday of each month. The applicant shall submit
one copy of all required applications, plans and exhibits as set forth
under the appropriate site plan review stage of this article to the
administrative officer, who shall thereafter notify the applicant of
remaining completeness items, fees and of the required number of
copies of application documents, plans and exhibits to be submitted at
the scale required and in addition at a reduced size. The time for the
Board's review shall not begin to run until the submission of a complete
application with the required fee. [Amended 8-13-1984 by Ord. No.
84-24; 4-30-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-05]
B. Referral. [Amended 10-25-1982 by Ord. No. 82-49]
(1) The administrative officer shall forward, upon receipt of a site plan
application in proper form with requisite fees, one copy each of an
application to the planner, environmental consultant and Township
Engineer for their preliminary determination of completeness and
classification of an application. The planner, environmental
consultant and the Township Engineer shall report back to the
administrative officer within seven days of the filing date whether
the application is complete or noting items omitted or other
deviations of ordinances.
(2) If the application is deemed to be complete, the administrative
officer shall distribute copies as stipulated within this Part 1 for the
appropriate site plan review stage. The Planning Board may also
designate other local or higher governmental agencies to receive
copies of any application for review and recommendation beyond
those agencies stipulated in this Part 1. If the application is found
to be incomplete or in violation of any applicable codes and
ordinances, the applicant shall be notified by certified mail as to the
items omitted or other deviations of ordinance.
§ 200-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-9
1:575
§ 200-10. (Reserved)185
§ 200-11. Requirements common to preliminary and/or final site
plan stages.
C. Classification. The administrative officer shall determine whether the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment has approval
jurisdiction on the application. The Zoning Officer may confer with the
Township Attorney in making this determination.184 [Amended
10-25-1982 by Ord. No. 82-49]
A. Map details. All maps or other documents submitted for site plan review
shall contain the following information in addition to specific site plan
details as required for each review stage.
(1) The title and location of the property.
(2) The name and addresses of landowner and applicant. If a
corporation is landowner or applicant, the principal office and
name of the President and Secretary shall be included.
(3) The name, address and professional license number and seal of the
professional preparing the documents and drawings. All plans shall
be prepared, signed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer
or architect.
(4) A place for the signature of the Chair and Secretary of the Planning
Board and Health Officer.186
(5) The date of the plan and any modifications thereto.
(6) 187The following legends shall be on the site plan map:
(PRELIMINARY) or (FINAL)
1. SITE PLAN OF
LOT _____________ BLOCK ____________________ ZONE
DATE _____________________________ SCALE
APPLICANT
ADDRESS
SITE PLAN CONTROL NO.
184. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding review of minor site plans by the Planning
Board, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 7-30-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-20.
185. Editor's Note: Former § 200-10, Site Plan Review Advisory Board action; expedited review,
as amended, was repealed 7-30-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-20.
186. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
187. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 200-9 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-11
1:576
2. I CONSENT TO THE FILING OF THIS SITE PLAN WITH THE
PLANNING BOARD OF WEST WINDSOR TOWNSHIP.
(Owner) (Date)
3. To be signed before issuance of a building permit and
incorporated only on a final site plan (as applicable):
I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT A BOND HAS BEEN POSTED FOR
ALL THE REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS IN COMPLIANCE
WITH ALL APPLICABLE CODES AND ORDINANCES.
(Township Clerk) (Date)
4. To be incorporated only on final site plan and signed prior to
issuance of a building permit:
VERIFICATION THAT PAYMENT OF MUNICIPAL TAXES OR
ASSESSMENTS IS CURRENT
(Tax Collector) (Date)
5. APPROVED BY THE PLANNING BOARD (Preliminary
Approval Date) (Final Approval Date)
(Chair) (Date)
6. HEALTH OFFICER
(Date)
7. EXPIRATION OF APPROVAL (PRELIMINARY - 3 YEARS;
FINAL - 2 YEARS)
Date (Without Extensions)
B. Other information. The Planning Board may require such additional
information not specified in this Part 1 or any revisions in the
accompanying documents as are reasonably necessary to make an
informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for
approval of the application for development have been met. The
application shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of any such
additional information or any revisions in the accompanying documents
so required by the municipal agency. [Amended 12-22-1980 by Ord.
No. 80-41]
C. Compliance with other ordinances. Information and documents
required for other Township codes and ordinances such as soil erosion
and sedimentation plans or stormwater management plans shall be
submitted as part of an application for site plan approval and may be
§ 200-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-11
1:577
§ 200-12. Sketch site plan review.
§ 200-13. Preliminary site plan approval.
used to comply with site plan submission requirements for particular
stages, as applicable.
D. Waiver of information required. The Planning Board may waive
submission of any required exhibits in appropriate cases and for
specific site plans. Request for such waivers shall accompany a site plan
application, stating the reasons why such waiver(s) is being requested.
A. Objectives of review. Applicants for preliminary approval are
encouraged to submit for review by the board of jurisdiction sketch site
plans for informal discussions and recommendations. The sketch site
plan shall be reviewed to determine the proposal's compliance with
applicable Township ordinances and the general site design concept,
including use, location and bulk, building and improvements, density,
open space, traffic and pedestrian patterns and other general design
components. The sketch site plan shall be to scale, but detailed
dimensions need not be shown. Said sketch site plans shall be used as a
basis for changes and redesign so as to avoid undue expense and delay
in preparing more detailed plans and specifications in subsequent
review stages. The board of jurisdiction shall not be governed by any
statutory time limits in its review of sketch site plans, and it is expressly
understood that compliance with the board's recommendations shall
not bind the board in subsequent deliberations of a formal site plan
application. [Amended 7-30-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-20]
B. Sketch site plan details. The sketch site plan may be prepared by the
applicant and contain sufficient information for discussion by the
Advisory Board and the applicant.
A. Objectives of review. The preliminary site plan shall be reviewed to
determine the acceptability of the detailed design concept and shall be
in sufficient detail to enable the Board to ascertain compliance with the
performance standards and other standards of this Part 1, as well as
applicable Township ordinances.
B. Application. Two or more copies of the preliminary site plan, an
application in a form approved by the Planning Board and the requisite
fee shall be delivered to the administrative officer. [Amended
12-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-41]
C. Preliminary site plan details. The preliminary site plan application
technical materials, notwithstanding any other requirements of this or
other Township ordinances, shall contain the following: [Amended
12-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-41]
(1) Locator map at a scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet or larger scale,
showing the lot and block number of the parcel in question and the
§ 200-11 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-13
1:578
lot and block numbers of adjacent and opposite properties. This
map should also show any contiguous lot in which the applicant
has any direct or indirect interest and the nature of the applicant's
interest.
(2) An aerial photo superimposed upon the plans with the tract
boundaries outlined; also photographs of the property, where
necessary, to show any unusual topographic, environmental or
physical aspect of the site. This would include but not be limited to
rock outcroppings, vegetation, natural drainageways, wetlands and
existing structures and improvements. [Amended 8-21-1989 by
Ord. No. 89-34]
(3) A preliminary plan at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet or larger
scale and any supplemental plans that are necessary to properly
depict the project. In the case of a complex project, a scale other
than one inch equals 50 feet may be submitted, provided that one
copy of a photomechanical reduction to a scale of one inch equals
50 feet is submitted. The preliminary plan shall show at least the
following information:
(a) The North arrow, scale, graphic scale, date and notes and
dated revisions.
(b) The zoning district in which the parcel is located, together with
the district boundaries included within the boundaries of the
parcel or within 200 feet therefrom. All setback lines,
landscape strips, landscape buffers, building heights and other
bulk requirements shall be shown and dimensioned. Any
deviation from requirements of this Part 1 shall be specifically
shown.
(c) The survey map, prepared by a licensed surveyor of New
Jersey, showing boundaries of the properties, lines of all
existing streets and roads, easements, rights-of-way and areas
dedicated to public use within 200 feet of the development.
These shall be dimensioned and, where applicable, referenced
as to direction.
(d) Reference to any existing or proposed deed restrictions or
exceptions concerning all or any portion of the parcel. A copy
of such covenants, deed restrictions or exceptions shall be
submitted with the application.
(e) The existing and proposed contours, referred to United States
Coast and Geodetic Survey Datum, at a contour interval of not
less than two feet. Existing contours are to be indicated by
solid lines. Location of existing rock outcroppings, high points,
watercourses and drainageways, depressions, ponds, marshes,
vegetation, wooded areas and other significant existing
features including previous flood elevations of watercourses,
§ 200-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-13
1:579
ponds and areas as determined by survey shall be shown. Trees
of five inches or over in caliper shall be specifically located and
identified. Any proposed change of such natural features shall
be specifically noted.
(f) The location, size, elevation, slope and type of storm drainage
structures and other utility structures, above- and belowgrade,
whether publicly or privately owned. Design
calculations supporting the adequacy of proposed drainage
structures and/or surface drainage shall be submitted. The site
plan shall include existing ponds, streams and watercourses,
as well as the designated greenbelt, if applicable.
(g) The location of all existing buildings, bridges, culverts, paving,
lighting, signs or any other structures with grade elevations for
each structure. Grade elevations may be established from use
of Township topographical maps. [Amended 2-25-1985 by
Ord. No. 85-1]
(h) The distances measured along the right-of-way lines of existing
streets abutting the property, to the nearest intersection with
other streets.
(i) The proposed use or uses of the land, buildings and structures.
(j) The quantitative aspects of the proposal, such as improvement
coverage, number of units, square feet of construction, value of
construction, density, coverage, number of employees, number
of residents and area of land, etc. Specifically identified on the
site plan, in tabular form, shall be pertinent zoning data,
indicating the bulk/area requirements of the zone in which the
proposed development is located and how the proposed
development responds to the zoning requirements.
(k) The proposed buildings and structures and any existing
structures to remain, with dimensions, setbacks, heights (in
feet and stories) and first floor or grade elevations. Existing
buildings and structures to be removed shall be indicated;
sketch or typical building elevations indicating type of
materials to be used.
(l) The location and designs of any off-street parking areas,
bicycle parking, service, trash or loading areas, showing size
and location of bays, aisles, barriers, planters, maneuvering
areas and traffic patterns. Include manufacturer's cut or
illustration depicting the type of bicycle parking facility
proposed. Also provide the typical plan layout of the facility at
an appropriate scale to determine the location from walkways
and building lines.
§ 200-13 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-13
1:580
(m) The means of vehicular access for ingress to and egress from
the site, showing the proposed traffic channels, lanes and any
other structure or device intended to control traffic.
(n) The location, design, dimensions and materials details in the
form of construction documents for any on- or off-site
pedestrian parks, walkways and bicycle pathways, open space,
common open space, plazas, promenades and recreation areas
or any other public uses. [Amended 8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
89-34]
(o) The location and design of all proposed utility structures and
lines, stormwater drainage on-site and off-tract, with
manholes, inlets, pipe sizes, grades, inverts and directions of
flow, as well as telephone, power and light, water hydrant
locations, sewer and gas, whether publicly or privately owned.
Where on-site sewage disposal systems and/or potable water
wells are provided, these shall be located on the site plan,
indicating the size of the system and the distance between the
wells and septic fields. [Amended 7-25-1983 by Ord. No.
83-17]
(p) The location and design of the proposed screening,
landscaping and planting, including a planting plan and
schedule of plant materials.
(q) The location of all outdoor lighting (freestanding or on
building), the size, nature of construction, lumens, heights,
area and direction of illumination, footcandles produced,
typical manufacturer cuts illustrating style and time controls
proposed for outdoor lighting and display.
(r) The location and design of all signs, the size, nature of
construction, height and orientation, including all
identification signs, traffic and directional signs and arrows,
freestanding and facade signs and time controls for sign
lighting.
(s) The location and size of all proposed easements, rights-of-way,
public areas to be dedicated to the public or to be restricted or
defined by deed or any other arrangement. Also, the location of
any Master Plan proposals indicating roadway, greenbelt,
public area or facility shall be shown. [Amended 10-16-1989
by Ord. No. 89-39]
(t) A tabulation of a proposed building's perimeter that fronts on a
public or private street or on a fire apparatus space, expressed
in feet, as well as the percentage of total building perimeter
linear footage shall be indicated as part of site data
information contained on a site plan. [Added 12-27-1988 by
Ord. No. 88-51]
§ 200-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-13
1:581
(4) All items as required in the environmental impact statement, as
requirement as set forth in Article V, § 200-23, of this Part 1 or a
statement concerning such which does not apply.
(5) Where applicable, the method by which any common or public open
space or commonly held building or structure is to be owned and
maintained.
(6) Where warranted, such other material deemed necessary by the
Planning Board to evaluate the physical, fiscal or socioeconomic
impact of the proposed development upon the Township.
(7) A landscape plan, prepared by a certified or licensed landscape
architect, at a minimum scale of one inch equals 50 feet or larger.
Different graphic symbols shall be used to show the location and
spacing of shade trees, ornamental trees, evergreen trees, shrubs
and ground cover. The size of the symbol must be representative of
the size of the plant and shown to scale. The plan shall: [Added
5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 88-9]
(a) Illustrate the proposed site plan elements as they relate to
existing structures and site amenities, including existing
woodlands, isolated trees greater than five inches in caliper,
existing topographic contours and any and all other natural
environmental features.
(b) Show the intent, location and type of all existing and proposed
landscaping and buffering.
(c) Conceptually indicate plant types and general construction
materials to be used, as appropriate.
(d) Superimpose an aerial photograph on the drawings, with the
site boundaries outlined to evaluate the effects upon existing
vegetation and surrounding land uses.
(e) Provide on-site photographs of existing features and
topography, as appropriate.
(f) Contain a planting schedule, including specific plant botanical
and common names, sizes, root, spacing and comments.
(g) Indicate all existing vegetation to be saved or removed.
(h) Show the location, form, height and width of other landscape
architectural materials, such as berms, fences, walls, site
furniture, bridges and walks. When required, a section to show
the effective height of a proposed berm or fence in relation to
the height of the area being screened from should be provided
(i.e., center line of road to building).
(i) Show all open space areas in adjacent developments on the
project location map.
§ 200-13 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-13
1:582
(8) Soil survey map, prepared by a professional engineer, to indicate
the different types of soils that exist on the subject tract and within
200 feet of the extreme limits of the subject tract. This map shall be
in conformance with the soil survey of Mercer County, New Jersey,
published by the United States Department of Agriculture. Where
wetlands exist on or within 200 feet of the extreme limits of the
subject tract, as per N.J.A.C. 7:7A, the wetland's boundary shall be
superimposed on the soil survey map. [Added 8-21-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-34]
(9) If wetlands exist, as per N.J.A.C. 7:7A, the Freshwater Wetlands
Protection Act188 rules are to be complied with prior to the
submission of plans to the Township. All areas of wetlands shall be
depicted on plans with surveyor's metes and bounds information
for the outbounds of such areas. A letter of interpretation issued by
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Division
of Coastal Resources, shall be submitted, indicating the presence
or absence of freshwater wetlands on the parcel in question.
[Added 8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 89-34]
(10) A landscape plan, prepared by a certified or licensed landscape
architect, at a minimum scale of one inch equals 50 feet or larger,
including a planting schedule indicating specific botanical and
common plant names, sizes, root spacing and comments and
indicating the location, form, height and width of other landscape
architectural materials, such as berms, fences, walls, site
furnishings, bridges and walks, when required or appropriate, an
illustrative section drawing to show the effectiveness of landscape
buffers. [Added 8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 89-34]
(11) A traffic signage conforming to the requirements of § 200-91U of
Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures, of this chapter.
[Added 9-19-1988 by Ord. No. 88-26; amended 8-21-1989 by
Ord. No. 89-34]
D. Preliminary site plan review. [Amended 12-22-1980 by Ord. No.
80-41; 10-25-1982 by Ord. No. 82-49]
(1) Within 45 days of receipt by the administrative officer of a complete
site plan application for 10 acres of land or less and 10 dwelling
units or less; or within 95 days of receipt of a complete application
for a site plan of more than 10 acres or more than 10 dwelling
units; or within such further time as may be agreed upon by the
developer, the Planning Board shall act upon the application. Upon
receipt of a complete application, the administrative officer shall
submit one copy of the application to the following professionals
and boards: [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07;
7-30-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-20]
188. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.
§ 200-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-13
1:583
(a) The Township Engineer.
(b) The Township Planning Consultant.
(c) The Township Health Officer.
(d) The Township Environmental Consultant.
(e) The Township Forestry Committee.
(f) The Township Public Safety Officer.
(g) The Township Fire Marshal.
(h) The Township Local Fire Company.
(i) The Township First Aid Squad.
(j) The Township Traffic Engineering Consultant.
(k) The Township Landscape Architect.
(l) The Township Mayor.
(m) The Mercer County Planning Board and other agencies, where
applicable (e.g., New Jersey Department of Transportation, D
& R Canal Commission, the Clerk of the adjoining Township,
the Secretary of the School Board, etc.).
(n) Such other boards, agencies or professionals as the Planning
Board may deem necessary or which may be required to be
notified by law.
(o) The West Windsor Affordable Housing Committee, if the
application includes low- and moderate-income units, or if the
zoning includes low- and moderate-income units.
(2) The professionals and boards shall have a period of 30 days after
the filing date of the preliminary site plan on a minor site plan
application or 73 days on a major site plan application to make a
report and recommendations concerning the preliminary site plan.
The Planning Board shall take such recommendations into account,
but shall have the right to proceed in the absence of any such
recommendation.
E. Preliminary site plan hearing. All actions of the Planning Board on
preliminary site plans shall be at a public hearing. Public notice of an
application as provided in § 200-76 of Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan
Procedures, of this chapter, shall be required.
F. Preliminary site plan action. After the conclusion of the hearing, but in
no event later than the first regular meeting following the hearing, the
Planning Board shall by resolution approve, disapprove or conditionally
approve the preliminary site plan, stating reasons for any disapproval.
§ 200-13 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-13
1:584
G. Decisions of Planning Board. See § 200-77 of Part 3, Subdivision and
Site Plan Procedures, of this chapter, for decisions on site plan
applications under varying procedural conditions.
H. Effect of preliminary approval. Preliminary approval of a site plan shall,
except as provided in Subsection I below, confer upon the applicant the
following rights for a three-year period from the date of the preliminary
approval:
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks, lot size, yard dimensions and on-site
and off-tract improvements and any requirements peculiar to the
specific site plan. The Township may modify by ordinance such
general terms and conditions of preliminary approval as they relate
to public health and safety, provided that such modifications are in
accord with amendments adopted by ordinance subsequent to
approval.
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary site plan.
I. Extension of preliminary approval.
(1) The applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year, but not to exceed a total extension of two years,
provided that if the design standards have been revised by
ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
(2) In the case of a site plan for an area of 50 acres or more, the
Planning Board may grant the rights referred to above for such
period of time, longer than three years, as shall be determined by
the Planning Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration the
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under preliminary approval, economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development. The applicant may apply
for thereafter and the Planning Board may thereafter grant an
extension to preliminary approval for such additional period of time
as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable,
taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary approval,
the potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area of the section or sections awaiting final approval, economic
conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development,
provided that if the design standards have been revised, such
revised standards may govern.
§ 200-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-13
1:585
§ 200-14. Final site plan approval.
(3) In the event that no extension is applied for, preliminary approval
shall expire and the site plan shall lapse three years from such
approval.
J. Variances; Planning Board review in lieu of Board of Adjustment. The
Planning Board, when reviewing applications for site plans, shall have
the power to grant to the same extent and subject to the same
restrictions as the Board of Adjustment variances from lot area, lot
dimensional, setback and yard requirements, provided that relief shall
not be granted for more than one lot.
A. Objectives of review. The final site plan shall be reviewed to ascertain
whether the construction documents to be utilized in construction of
the project substantially conform to the approved preliminary site plan.
B. Application. Two or more copies of the final site plan, an application in a
form approved by the Planning Board and the requisite fee shall be
delivered to the administrative officer. [Amended 12-22-1980 by Ord.
No. 80-41]
C. Final site plan details.
(1) The final site plan application technical materials shall include the
following:
(a) The approved preliminary site plan, together with all proposed
additions, changes or departures therefrom, if applicable.
(b) Final construction documents, among other items, illustrating:
[1] The final plans for site development and site improvement,
including those construction details as may be specified at
the time of preliminary approval.
[2] The ground floor or other floor plans sufficient to show
pedestrian, vehicular or other access as it relates to the
final site plan.
[3] The building elevation or typical elevations, including size,
structure, materials, colors and textures.
[4] Elevations or typical illustrations of any accessory
structures, signs or area visible to the general public.
[5] A final landscape plan, signed and sealed by a certified or
licensed landscape architect, in the form of construction
drawings and substantially conforming to the approved
preliminary landscape plan. The plan shall be prepared for
separate halftone sheets of the engineer's grading site
plan. The plan shall include the location and detailed
specifications for all landscape architectural
§ 200-13 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-14
1:586
improvements, including planting details which conform
with the standard Township details, and for the irrigation
and maintenance of all planting areas. [Added 8-21-1989
by Ord. No. 89-34]
[6] A traffic signage plan conforming to the requirements of
§ 200-91U of Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures,
of this chapter. [Added 8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 89-34]
[7] A final landscape plan, signed and sealed by a certified or
licensed landscape architect, in the form of construction
documents and substantially conforming to the approved
preliminary landscape plan. The landscape plan shall be
prepared upon separate halftone sheets of the engineered
site plan with contour lines so that landscape details and
grading are clearly shown and may be adequately
reviewed. It shall show: [Added 5-16-1988 by Ord. No.
88-9]
[a] Reverse frontage buffers and other important
landscape areas at a minimum scale of one inch equals
30 feet or larger.
[b] The manner of irrigation of all nonresidential and high
density residential sites.
[c] All existing trees to be removed and preserved and
what methods will be used to assure preservation
during and after construction. Prior to any tree
removal, the applicant will be required to receive
approval of the board of jurisdiction or the Township
Landscape Architect.
[d] The existing and proposed topography by the use of
one-foot contours for all land forms and berms in
coordination with the final grading and drainage plans
submitted by the project engineer.
[e] A landscape management and maintenance schedule
and agreement.
[f] Planting details conforming to the standards set forth
in § 200-91R(2) of Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan
Procedures, of this chapter.
(2) At the request of the Township Landscape Architect, the applicant
shall provide five copies of the final landscape drawings with a final
approval box for the approval signature of the Township Landscape
Architect and Fire Code Official. Where Greenbelt boundaries are
delineated, a final approval box for the signature of the
Environmental Commission Chair must also be provided.
§ 200-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-14
1:587
D. Final site plan review.
(1) Within 45 days after submission of a complete final site plan
application or within such further time as may be agreed upon by
the applicant, the Planning Board shall approve the application for
final site plan approval with or without conditions, provided that
the following requirements are met:
(a) The detailed drawings and specifications meet all applicable
codes and ordinances.
(b) The final plans are substantially the same as the approved
preliminary site plans.
(c) Bonds have been posted to ensure the installation of
improvements, as applicable.
(d) Proof has been submitted that all taxes and assessments for
local improvements on the property have been paid.
(2) Upon receipt of a complete application, the administrative officer
shall submit one copy to each of those professionals and boards
having received a copy of the preliminary plan. [Amended
7-30-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-20]
(3) The professionals and boards shall have a period of 30 days after
receipt of the final plan to make a report and recommendations
concerning the final plan. The Planning Board shall take such
recommendations into account, but shall have the right to proceed
in the absence of any such recommendation.
E. Final plan hearing. Planning Board action shall take place at a hearing.
No public notice of application shall be required.
F. Decision of Planning Board. The decision of the Planning Board shall be
as set forth in § 200-77 of Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures,
of this chapter, for decision on site plan applications under varying
procedural conditions.
G. Effect of final approval. Final approval shall terminate the time period
of preliminary approval for the section granted final approval and shall
guarantee the applicant that the zoning requirements applicable to the
preliminary approval and all other rights conferred upon the applicant
as part of preliminary approval shall not be changed for a period of two
years after the date of final approval.
H. Time limit for final approval and extensions.
(1) Final approval shall expire two years from the date of final approval
unless the applicant has secured a building permit to commence
construction. The Planning Board may extend final approval, and
the protection offered under Subsection G above for one year. Up to
three such extensions may be granted.
§ 200-14 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-14
1:588
§ 200-15. Minor site plan approval.
(2) In the case of a site plan for a planned commercial development,
planned industrial park development or residential cluster of 50
acres or conventional site plan for 150 acres or more, the Planning
Board may extend the rights granted under final approval for such
period of time, longer than two years, as shall be determined by the
Planning Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration the
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under final approval, economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development. The developer may apply
for thereafter, and the Planning Board may thereafter grant, an
extension of final approval for such additional period of time as
shall be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable, taking
into consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential
floor area permissible under final approval, the number of dwelling
units and nonresidential floor area remaining to be developed,
economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development.
I. Conditions of final approval. The Planning Board may, as a condition of
final approval:
(1) Grant final approval only for designated geographic sections of the
development.
(2) Grant final approval for certain work, but require resubmission for
final approval for designated elements, such as but not limited to,
such items as landscaping, signs or street furniture and require
approval of these elements as a prerequisite for a certificate of
occupancy.
(3) Condition the granting of a certificate of occupancy subject to the
applicant or developer or subsequent heirs or assignees meeting
certain requirements within a designated period of time, not to
exceed one year, from the date of issuance of the certificate of
occupancy. This may include, but is not limited to, such items as the
installation of landscaping, erection of signs, installation of
improvements or re-evaluation of circulation patterns.
A. Objectives of review. The minor site plan shall be reviewed to determine
the acceptability of the proposed site design modifications and shall be
in sufficient detail to enable the Planning Board and its professionals to
ascertain compliance with the performance standards and other
standards of this Part 1 as well as applicable Township ordinances.
B. Application. Two or more copies of the minor site plan, an application in
a form approved by the Planning Board and the requisite fee shall be
delivered to the administrative officer.
§ 200-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-15
1:589
C. Minor site plan details. The minor site plan application technical
materials, notwithstanding any other requirements of this or other
Township ordinances, shall contain the following:
(1) Locator map at a scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet, or larger
scale, showing the lot and block number of the parcel in question
and the lot and block numbers of adjacent and opposite properties.
This map should also show any contiguous lot in which the
applicant has any direct or indirect interest and the nature of the
applicant's interest.
(2) A site plan at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, or larger scale, and
any supplemental plans that are necessary to properly depict the
project. The minor site plan shall show the following information as
appropriate to describe the proposed site modifications:
(a) North arrow, scale, graphic scale, date and notes and dated
revisions.
(b) The zoning district in which the parcel is located, together with
the district boundaries included within the boundaries of the
parcel or within 200 feet therefrom. All setback lines,
landscape strips, landscape buffers, building heights and other
bulk requirements shall be shown and dimensioned. Any
deviation from requirements of this Part 1 shall be specifically
shown.
(c) Survey map, prepared by a licensed surveyor of New Jersey,
showing boundaries of the properties, lines of all existing
streets and roads, easements, rights-of-way, and areas
dedicated to public use within 200 feet of the development.
These shall be dimensioned and, where applicable, referenced
as to direction.
(d) Reference to any existing or proposed deed restrictions or
exceptions concerning all or any portion of the parcel. A copy
of such covenants, deed restrictions or exceptions shall be
submitted with the application.
(e) The existing and proposed contours, referred to United States
Coast and Geodetic Survey Datum, at a contour interval of not
less than two feet. Existing contours are to be indicated by
solid lines. Any proposed change of on-site natural features
(e.g., vegetation, wooded areas, watercourses, etc.) shall be
specifically noted.
(f) The site plan shall include existing ponds, streams and
watercourses as well as the designated greenbelt or wetlands
as defined by N.J.A.C. 7:7A and Freshwater Wetlands
Protection Act,189 if applicable. Any effects on existing
189. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.
§ 200-15 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-15
1:590
drainage facilities resulting from the proposed site
modifications shall be described.
(g) The location of all existing buildings, bridges, culverts, paving,
lighting, signs or any other structures with grade elevations for
each structure in the area adjacent the proposed site
modifications. Grade elevations may be established from use of
Township topographical maps.
(h) The distances measured along the right-of-way lines of existing
streets abutting the property, to the nearest intersection with
other streets.
(i) The proposed modification(s) to the existing use or uses of the
land, buildings and structures.
(j) Specifically identified on the site plan, in tabular form, shall be
pertinent zoning data indicating the bulk/area requirements of
the zone in which the proposed development is located and
how the proposed site modifications respond to the zoning
requirements.
(k) The location and size of all proposed easements, rights-of-way,
public areas to be dedicated to the public or to be restricted or
defined by deed or any other arrangement. Also, location of
any Master Plan proposals indicating roadway, greenbelt,
public area or facility shall be shown.
(l) A tabulation of a proposed building's perimeter that fronts on a
public or private street or on a fire apparatus space expressed
in feet as well as percentage of total building perimeter linear
footage shall be indicated as part of site data information
contained on a site plan.
(m) Location of all utilities, including gas, electric, water, sewer
and CATV.
D. Minor site plan review. Within 45 days after submission of a complete
minor site plan application or within such further time as may be
agreed upon by the applicant, the Planning Board shall act on the minor
site plan application.
E. Minor site plan hearing. Planning Board action shall take place at a
public hearing. Public notice of an application as provided in § 200-76 of
Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures, of this chapter, shall be
required.
F. Minor site plan action. After the conclusion of the hearing, but in no
event later than the first regular meeting following the hearing, the
Planning Board, by resolution, may approve, disapprove or
conditionally approve the minor site plan.
§ 200-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-15
1:591
G. Decision of Planning Board. See § 200-77 of Part 3, Subdivision and Site
Plan Procedures, of this chapter, for decision on minor site plan
applications.
H. Effect of minor site plan approval. Minor site plan approval shall
guarantee the applicant that the zoning requirements applicable to
minor site plan approval and all other rights conferred upon the
applicant shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of
minor site plan approval unless otherwise permitted by law.
I. Time limit for minor site plan approval and extensions. Minor site plan
approval shall expire two years from the date of approval unless the
applicant has secured a building permit to commence construction. The
Planning Board may extend the approval and protection offered under
Subsection H for one year. Up to three such extensions may be granted.
J. Conditions of approval. The Planning Board may place conditions of
approval, where appropriate.
§ 200-15 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-15
1:592
ARTICLE V
General Performance Standards
§ 200-16. General intent. [Amended 2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1]
No site plan shall be approved by the Planning Board unless the use
meets the performance standards herein set forth and such state or federal
standards as may be more stringent than those set forth herein. Failure
to comply with the performance standards at any time after issuance of a
certificate of occupancy shall be cause for revocation of such certificate.
Application of these site plan standards should also encourage cost-efficient
methods and designs to enable the construction of low- and moderateincome
housing without creating an adverse impact on the public health,
safety and general welfare of the Township or for the future residents of the
development. In reviewing any site plan, the Planning Board shall consider
the following requirements of this article.
§ 200-17. Circulation and parking.
§ 200-18. Site design and building layout.
The site design and layout of buildings and parking areas shall be reviewed
so as to provide an aesthetically pleasing design and efficient arrangement.
Particular attention shall be given to safety and fire protection, impact on
surrounding development and contiguous and adjacent buildings and lands.
§ 200-19. Lighting.
Adequate lighting shall be provided to ensure safe movement of persons and
vehicles and for security purposes. Directional lights shall be arranged so
as to minimize glare and reflection on adjacent properties.
A. The pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement within and adjacent to
the site, with particular emphasis on the provision and layout of parking
areas, off-street loading and unloading, movement of people, goods and
vehicles from access roads, within the site, between buildings and
between buildings and vehicles shall be reviewed.
B. The Planning Board shall ensure that all parking spaces are usable and
are safely and conveniently arranged. Access to the site from adjacent
roads shall be designed so as to interfere as little as possible with traffic
flow on these roads and to permit vehicles a rapid and safe ingress and
egress to the site.
C. Any and all rules, guidelines and/or directives established regarding
parking, loading and unloading and pedestrian and vehicular movement
shall be in accordance with applicable provisions of the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990. [Added 2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 93-01]
§ 200-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-20
1:593
§ 200-20. Common open space. [Amended 2-16-1993 by Ord. No.
93-01]
Common open space shall be provided as part of any planned residential
development or open space cluster development. The open space should be
classified as developed (recreational) or undeveloped (natural) space. The
design of all developed (recreational) space shall be in accordance with all
applicable equal access provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990.190
§ 200-21. Signs. [Amended 2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 93-01]
Signs shall be designed so as to be aesthetically pleasing and harmonious
with other signs and buildings on the site. They shall be located so as
to achieve their purpose without constituting hazards to vehicles and
pedestrians or being visually distracting from the overall site design. All
permanent signs shall be designed and erected in a manner consistent with
applicable provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
§ 200-22. Utilities.
Storm drainage, sanitary waste disposal, water supply and solid waste
collection and disposal shall be reviewed. Particular emphasis shall be
given to the preservation of stream corridors, establishment of drainage
rights-of-way and the adequacy of existing utility systems and the need for
improvements both on-site and off-tract, where appropriate, to adequately
carry runoff and sewage and to maintain an adequate supply of water at
sufficient pressure.
§ 200-23. Environmental considerations. [Amended 12-22-1980 by
Ord. No. 80-41]
Environmental elements relating to the prevention of soil erosion,
preservation of trees, protection of watercourses and plains, protection of
water sources, noise, air quality, topography, soil and animal life shall be
reviewed, and the design of the plan shall minimize any adverse impact on
these elements.
A. Environmental impact. No application for development shall be
approved unless it has been affirmatively determined by the Planning
Board, after an environmental appraisal, that the proposed project:
(1) Will not result in a significant adverse impact on the environment.
(2) Has been conceived and designed in such a manner that it will not
significantly impair natural processes.
(3) Will not place a disproportionate or excessive demand upon the
total resources available to the project site and to the impact area.
190. Editor's Note: Original Sections 23-5.5, Buffering, and 23-5.6, Landscaping, were deleted
5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 88-9.
§ 200-20 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-23
1:594
B. Application of requirement. To facilitate the environmental appraisal,
all development applications excluding those for one residential
dwelling unit or lot must include a preliminary environmental impact
statement (EIS). Based on the findings of the preliminary EIS, detailed
statements or clarification of detail on specific areas of environmental
impact may be required. Applications requiring an EIS may be rejected
by the Planning Board for failure to furnish sufficient information to
enable the Board to make an adequate environmental approval. The
applicant may request a preapplication conference with the
Environmental Commission concerning the level of detail and scope of
the preliminary EIS for a particular project.
C. Requirements of preliminary EIS and Green Development Practices
Checklist. Applicants shall supply four copies of the following items to
comply with the preliminary EIS requirements: [Amended 4-20-1990
by Ord. No. 90-12; 9-7-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-16]
(1) West Windsor Township Preliminary Environmental Worksheet and
Green Development Practices Checklist. The Environmental
Worksheet, provided by the Township, requires information on the
existing condition of the site (natural features, land use, water
quality, etc.), anticipated changes due to the proposed development
and measures which will be used to mitigate adverse
environmental impacts. The Green Development Practices
Checklist requests a description or consideration of development
practices that will seek to balance environmental, economic and
social impacts or opportunities. It is intended that this analysis will
facilitate more sustainable development. The applicant shall use
the most recent, approved edition of the West Windsor Natural
Resources Inventory or a Township-approved equivalent as a data
source.
(2) Preliminary environmental analysis maps.
(a) Maps shall be produced which show the location of proposed
lots and structures with respect to the natural features of the
site. The applicant's proposed development plan shall be
superimposed on the natural factor maps (available for
purchase from the Township Engineer) in outline form. The
resulting maps shall be at a scale of one inch equals 800 feet,
or larger.
(b) Preliminary environmental analysis maps shall be produced
using, but not limited to, the following seven natural resource
maps:
[1] Land Suitability for Development.
[2] Environmentally Sensitive Areas.
[3] Vegetation and Wildlife Habitats.
§ 200-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-23
1:595
§ 200-24. Street furniture.
The site plan shall provide for those elements of street furniture appropriate
to the particular use. These may include phone booths, benches, bike racks,
trash receptacles and bus shelters.
[4] Suitability for Septic Tank Effluent Disposal (if on-site
sewage treatment is proposed).
[5] Depth to Seasonally High Water Table.
[6] Aquifer Recharge Potential.
[7] Flood Hazard Areas.
(c) Other maps may be required by the Planning Board, depending
upon the peculiar site characteristics, in order for the Board to
determine compliance with Subsection A herein.
(3) Stormwater management plan overview.
(a) The applicant shall provide a brief overview narrative
describing stormwater management on the site. Topics
discussed shall include, but not be limited to: existing storm
water runoff volume and rate and anticipated changes with
proposed development at various level storm events, including
the two-, ten- and one-hundred-year storms; the existing
direction of flow over the site and anticipated changes; the
proposed measures to reduce stormwater runoff and maintain
water quality in nearby stream and ponds; and the
maintenance plans for proposed stormwater management
facilities.
(b) To the extent that technical information is provided as part of a
development application in accordance with Article VII,
Stormwater Control, of Part 3 of this chapter, it need not be
duplicated here but may be referenced as part of the
preliminary EIS.
D. Requirements of detailed EIS. The preliminary EIS shall be reviewed by
the West Windsor Environmental Commission for completeness, and
the potential environmental impact of the proposed project shall be
assessed according to the standards as set forth in Subsection A herein.
The Environmental Commission shall recommend action on the project
to the Planning Board as to whether the project meets the standards of
Subsection A herein. If the Environmental Commission determines that
said standards are not met by the preliminary EIS as submitted, the
developer shall have the option of submitting more detailed information
or clarifying information with respect to those areas of the preliminary
EIS which the Environmental Commission feels are deficient and
warrant a detailed EIS.
§ 200-23 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-25
1:596
§ 200-25. Technical performance standards applicable to all uses.
In all districts and for all uses requiring site plan approval, the following
provisions as may apply to specific site plan applications as set forth below
shall apply. For any technical manual cited, the latest edition shall govern
for technical review, where applicable.
A. Airborne emissions.
(1) No use generating airborne emissions, activity, operation or device
shall be established, modified, constructed or used without having
first obtained valid permits and certificates from the Bureau of Air
Pollution Control, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:27-8. Specifically, no use, activity,
operation or device shall be established, modified or constructed
without a valid Permit to Construct. No use, activity, operation or
device shall be operated, occupied or used without a valid
Certificate to Operate Control Apparatus or Equipment.
(2) In addition to the requirements of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, the following shall also apply:
(a) Steam emissions. No visible emissions of steam having an
equivalent capacity greater than 60% and except that direct
results of combustion shall be permitted within 500 feet of a
residential district.
(b) Toxic matter. Emissions of chemicals, gases, components or
elements, listed as being toxic matter by the American
Conference of Governmental Hygienists, New Jersey
Department of Labor and Industry or the Unite States
Environmental Protection Agency shall not exceed the
threshold level, as determined in accordance with ASTM
D-1391. The emission of concentrations, levels or mass
loadings in excess of the threshold value shall be permitted
only if the emissions of said toxic matter comply with the
applicable regulations of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, New Jersey Department of Labor
and Industry and United States Environmental Protection
Agency. Proof of compliance shall require the submission of
duplicate copies of certifications or permits from the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and New
Jersey Department of Labor and Industry approving the
concentrations, level or loading proposed by the applicant.
(c) Odorous matter. No odor shall be emitted that is detectable by
the human sense at or beyond an adjacent lot line so as to be
detrimental or injurious to the life, health, safety, comfort or
welfare of adjacent occupants or residents. There is hereby
established as a guide in determining such quantities of
offensive odors Table III (Odor Thresholds) in Chapter 5, Air
§ 200-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-25
1:597
Pollution Abatement Manual, Copyright 1951, by
Manufacturing Chemists Association, Inc., Washington, D.C.
B. Noise.
(1) Standard. Noise shall be measured with a sound level meter
complying with the standards of The American National Standards
Institute, American Standards Specifications for General Purpose
Sound Level Meters (ANSI S.1.4-1961 or its latest revisions). The
instrument shall be set to the A-weighted response scale and the
meter to the slow response. Measurements shall be conducted in
accordance with American Standard Method for the Physical
Measurements of Sound (ANSI S.1.2-1961).
(2) Noise level restrictions.
(a) Noises shall not exceed the maximum sound levels specified in
the table, except as designated below:
Noise Level Restrictions
Performance
Category
Maximum Level
Permitted
(dBA) Where Measured
Residence districts 55 On or beyond the
neighboring use or
lot line
All other districts 65 On or beyond the
lot line or district
boundaries
(b) In any residence district, the A-weighted sound levels shall not
exceed 50 dBA during the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
Whenever a residence district abuts any other district, the
most restricted of the limitations shall apply.
(3) Exclusions and permitted variations.
(a) The levels specified in the table may be exceeded once by 10
dBA in a single period of 15 minutes during any one day.
(b) Peak values of short duration, also known as "impact noises,"
may exceed the value specified in the table by 20 dBA or have a
maximum noise level of 80 dBA, whichever is more restrictive.
(c) Noises such as alarms, sirens, emergency warning devices,
motor vehicles and other sources not under the direct control
of a use or agricultural equipment are excluded from the above
limitations.
C. Vibration.
§ 200-25 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-25
1:598
(1) Standard. Ground-transmitted vibrations shall be measured with a
seismograph or complement of instruments capable of recording
vibration displacement and frequency in the three mutually
perpendicular directions, simultaneously.
(2) Vibration level restrictions. Vibration levels shall not exceed a
particle velocity of 0.05 inches per second in any district. During
the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. in residence districts, vibration
levels shall not exceed a particle velocity of 0.02 inches per second.
Measurements shall be made at the points of maximum vibration
intensity and on or beyond adjacent lot lines or neighboring uses,
whichever is more restrictive.
D. Heat and glare.
(1) Heat. Sources of heat, including but not limited to, steam, gases,
vapors, products of combustion or chemical reaction shall not
discharge onto or directly contact structures, plant life or animal
life on neighboring uses or impair the function or operation of a
neighboring use. No use, occupation, activity, operation or device
shall cause an increase in ambient temperature, as measured on
the boundary between neighboring uses.
(2) Glare. No use, operation or activity shall produce an illumination in
excess of one footcandle in a residence district. In all other
districts, light intensities of all illumination sources shall be kept as
low as possible and shall not interfere, annoy, cause deformity or
cause loss in visual performance to persons and animals of
neighboring uses.
E. Radioactivity. No use, activity, operation or device concerned with the
utilization or storage of radioactive materials shall be established,
modified, constructed or used without having first obtained valid
permits and certificates from the Office of Radiation Protection, New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
F. Storage and waste disposal.
(1) In all districts, any operation, use or any activity involving the
manufacture, utilization or storage of flammable, combustible and/
or explosive materials shall be conducted in accordance with the
regulations promulgated by the Department of Labor and Industry
of New Jersey or Chapter 89, Fire Prevention, whichever is more
restrictive.
(2) All flammable, explosive and/or combustible material shall be
stored in accordance with the Fire Prevention Code of the
Township or New Jersey Department of Labor and Industry Codes,
whichever is more restrictive.
(3) All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products
stored outdoors shall be enclosed by an approved safety fence and
§ 200-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-25
1:599
suitable landscaping to screen such areas from public view and
shall conform to all yard requirements imposed by Part 4, Zoning,
of this chapter upon the principal buildings in the district.
(4) No materials, wastes or other substance shall be stored or
maintained upon a lot in such a manner that natural runoff from
such areas on a site with an approved stormwater drainage plan
can impair the existing water quality of a stream, watercourse or
aquifer more than the primary use intended for the lot.
(5) All materials and/or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or
which constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise
attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only if
enclosed in containers which are adequate to eliminate such
hazards.
§ 200-25 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-25
1:600
ARTICLE VI
Design Details
§ 200-26. Purpose.
The purpose of the design details set forth in this article is to implement the
general performance standards established in Article V of this Part 1.
§ 200-27. Circulation and parking.
A. Off-street parking. In all zones in connection with every industrial
business, institutional, recreational, residential or any other use, there
shall be provided, at the time any building or structure is erected or is
enlarged or increased in capacity, off-street parking for automotive,
bicycle and other vehicles in accordance with the requirements set
forth herein. Such facilities shall be completed prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy. The applicant shall also meet the requirements
of L. 1975, c. 221,191 and applicable provisions of the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, requiring parking spaces for the handicapped.
[Amended 2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 93-01]
B. Schedule of off-street parking requirements. [Amended 12-22-1980
by Ord. No. 80-41; 12-27-1988 by Ord. No. 88-51; 12-16-1991 by
Ord. No. 91-34; 5-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-08; 9-15-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-22]
(1) Motor vehicle parking requirements. The minimum number of offstreet
parking spaces with proper access from a street, alley or
driveway for each use in all districts shall be as follows:
Land or Building Use Minimum Standards
Academic and administrative
buildings for educational
facilities of higher learning
1 space for each 1.25 persons
employed therein, plus 1 space
as applicable for each 5 students
Assembly hall, auditorium,
stadium, theater, church or
similar places of public of
assemblage
1 space for four fixed seats;
where capacity is not
determined by the number fixed
seats, 1 space for each 40 square
feet of floor area available for
patron use
Automobile and gasoline
service station
1 space for each gasoline pump,
grease rack or similar service
area, with a minimum of five
spaces plus 1 space for each
employee during the period of
greatest employment
191. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:32-12.
§ 200-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-27
1:601
Land or Building Use Minimum Standards
Boarding, lodging or rooming
room house
1 space for each rental room in
addition to the requirement for
the dwelling unit for any family
or household permanently
residing therein
Professional offices, except
medical and dental offices
1 space for 250 square feet of
building floor area or 1 space for
each 200 square feet of floor
area, with each space in excess
of 1/250 square feet constructed
with a pervious surface
Child-care center, preschool,
kindergarten, day camp or
institutional home
1 space for each 300 square feet
of building floor area
Dormitories 1 space for each 4 persons of
rated occupancy
Drive-in or fast food
establishment
1 space for each 25 square feet
of building floor area plus 1
space for each two persons
employed therein
Dwelling: single-family,
detached unit
1 space for each two bedrooms
or fraction thereof
Dwelling: all other dwelling
units, except units for the
elderly, in designated districts
1.25 spaces for 1-bedroom unit,
1.75 spaces for 2-bedroom unit,
2.00 spaces for 3-bedroom unit
or fraction thereof
Dwelling: units designed and
intended for the elderly
1 space for each dwelling unit,
except where it can be
demonstrated that other than
automobile transit will be
available, in which case these
requirements may be reduced
accordingly
Dwelling: additional spaces for
guest parking
0.5 space for each dwelling unit
for additional visitor parking
Financial institutions 1 space for each 250 square feet
of building floor area
§ 200-27 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-27
1:602
Land or Building Use Minimum Standards
General office, corporate office,
research offices
1 space for each 250 square feet
of floor area, with each space in
excess of 1/300 square feet
constructed with a pervious
surface. Such spaces may be
constructed and used only upon
the approval of a certificate of
need by the board of jurisdiction
at either the hearing on the site
plan application or at a
subsequent noticed hearing at
which the applicant
demonstrates by clear and
convincing evidence that there is
a need for such spaces. Prior to
such approval, such spaces shall
be banked. (Such standards shall
not apply to approved
preliminary or final site plans
that are within their protection
period.)
Hotel, motel or inn 1 space for each rental room,
plus 1 space for each two
persons employed therein
Manufacturing, wholesaling
and warehousing
1 space for each 600 square feet
of building floor area or 1 space
per employee on the maximum
shift, whichever is greater
Medical or dental clinic or
office
1 space for each 142 square feet
of building floor area
Mixed uses If two or more uses are
conducted on one lot, the
minimum required number of
parking spaces shall be
aggregate of the required
minimum number of parking
spaces for each use, computed
separately, except as may be
modified by § 200-28D of this
article.
Nursing homes 1 space for each bed
Personal service business 1 space for every 200 square
feet of building floor area
§ 200-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-27
1:603
Land or Building Use Minimum Standards
Public or private schools 1 space for each employee, plus
1 space for each 5 seats in the
auditorium or other places of
assembly available to the public
Research laboratories 1 space for each 500 square feet
of building floor area or 1 space
for each employee, whichever is
greater
Restaurant, tavern or similar
establishment
1 space for each 3 seating
accommodations or 1 space for
each 40 square feet of floor area
devoted to patron drinking and
dining use, whichever yields the
greatest number of spaces, plus
1 space for each two employees
employed therein
Retail business, shopping
center
1 space for each 200 square feet
of building floor area
Retail business, individual Minimum of 1 space for each
350 square feet of building floor
area; maximum of 1 space for
each 200 square feet of building
floor area
Retail business, Princeton
Junction Overlay Zone
Minimum of 1 space for each
500 square feet of building floor
area; maximum of 1 space for
each 350 square feet of building
floor area
Supermarkets, food stores 1 space for each 175 square feet
of building floor area
Undertakers, mortuary or
funeral home
1 space for each 60 square feet
of floor area for seating
accommodations, plus 1 space
for each person employed
therein
Uses not specified As determined by the Planning
Board in accordance with the
standards established in
§ 200-28C(1) of this article
Veterinary clinic 1 space for each 300 square feet
of building floor area, excluding
areas devoted to utility and
overnight stays by animals for
medical purposes
§ 200-27 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-27
1:604
(2) Bicycle parking requirements. In addition to the required facilities
for passenger automobiles, facilities for the secure and convenient
parking of bicycles shall be provided. The number of such bicycle
spaces shall be one space for each 20 parking spaces or fraction
thereof; provided, however, that should it be demonstrated that the
proposed use of the development application will generate a
greater need for bicycle parking than that provided for herein, the
Planning Board may require a reasonable increase in bicycle
parking spaces. Bicycle parking facilities shall be of such type and
quantity as to encourage and facilitate the use of the bicycle as a
means of transportation by the employees and customers of the
land or building.
C. Off-street loading requirements.
(1) Off-street loading area or berths, open or enclosed with proper
access from a street, highway, common service driveway or alley,
shall be provided for any use specified herein. In addition, such
spaces shall comply with the design standards for such spaces as
contained herein.
(2) Any land which is developed as a unit under single ownership and
control shall be considered a single lot for the purpose of these
loading requirements.
D. Schedule of off-street loading requirements. In no case shall the
required space be less than one loading area, and additional space shall
be provided as follows: [Amended 12-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-41]
(1) For retail stores, financial institutions, educational facilities,
restaurants, wholesale, warehouse, general service, manufacturing
or industrial establishments, the number of berths on the building
floor area shall be as follows:
Building Floor Area
(square feet) Number of Berths
Up to 4,000 1 loading area
4,001 to 10,000 1
10,001 to 20,000 2
Each additional 20,000 or major
fraction thereof up to a
maximum of 60,000
1
Each 50,000 over 60,000 1 additional berth
(2) For apartment buildings, motels, hotels, offices, dormitories,
schools, places of public assembly or similar uses, the number of
berths based on the building floor area devoted to such uses shall
be as follows:
§ 200-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-27
1:605
§ 200-28. Supplementary parking and loading space requirements.
Building Floor Area
(square feet) Number of Berths
Up to 10,000 1 loading area
10,001 to 100,000 1
Each 100,001 or fraction
thereof over 100,001
1 additional berth
(3) For undertakers and funeral homes: one loading area for each
chapel.
A. Fractional space. When the application of a unit of measurement for a
parking space or loading space to a particular use or structure results
in a fractional space, a space shall be required for each such fraction.
B. Computing number of employees. The number of employees, where not
clearly stipulated, shall be computed on the basis of persons to be
employed, taking into consideration day, night and seasonal variations.
C. Space requirements. [Amended 4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12]
(1) Minimum requirements for uses not specifically covered. In
determining minimum parking space requirements for uses not
covered in this article, the Planning Board shall be guided by the
number of persons to be employed in said building or by the use;
the numbers of persons expected to reside in, visit or patronize the
building or use; the anticipated percentage of residents, visitors or
patrons using various transportation modes; and the need for safe
and convenient loading space for visitors or patrons and goods. In
all cases, minimum parking space requirements shall be in
accordance with applicable provisions of the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990. [Amended 2-16-1993 by Ord. No.
93-01]
(2) Additional parking requirements for multifamily development. For
any multifamily development, 1/2 parking space per unit is
required for additional visitor parking demands.
D. Supplementary space requirements applying to motor vehicle parking
and off-street loading. [Amended 12-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-41]
(1) Collective or mixed uses off-street parking loading requirements.
Collective provision of off-street parking and loading facilities by
two or more buildings or uses located on adjacent lots is permitted
to allow for the sharing of such facilities for commercial and
multiple use centers according to the following schedule:
(a) For buildings or groups of uses of less than 10,000 square feet,
the total parking and loading facilities shall not be less than the
§ 200-27 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-28
1:606
sum of requirements for the various individual uses computed
separately.
(b) Where the total area of nonresidential use is greater than
10,000 square feet but less than 30,000 square feet, the total
number of parking spaces provided shall equal one car for
every 200 square feet of building floor area. Additional parking
shall be provided for residential uses built in conjunction with
a center of this size and shall equal at least 1.5 spaces for each
dwelling unit. Off-street loading facilities may be based on
documented, actual use of facilities similar to the combined
uses or the total as required if calculated as separate uses.
(c) Where the total nonresidential use is greater than 30,000
square feet, the number of off-street parking spaces provided
shall equal 5.5 cars for every 1,000 square feet of building floor
area. Off-street loading facilities may be based on documented,
actual usage of facilities similar to the combined uses or the
total as required if calculated as separate uses. In centers of
this size, which, in addition to retail shops and services,
contain residential and/or office spaces, additional parking
shall be provided according to the following:
[1] Residential: one parking space for each dwelling unit.
[2] Office: one parking space for each 300 square feet of
building floor area which exceeds 20% of the total gross
floor area of the nonresidential uses.
(2) Waiver of parking and off-street loading and unloading
requirements.
(a) Excess spaces. Where it can be demonstrated, at the time of
Planning Board review that the parking and/or loading and
unloading requirements of this article will result in more
parking spaces than actual needs require, the Planning Board
may permit a portion of the proposed parking and/or loading
areas to remain unpaved, but landscaped and improved only
with a six-inch base course of one-and-one-half-inch crushed
stone stabilized with topsoil and seeded to lessen stormwater
runoff. Such unpaved area shall remain reserved for such
future facilities needs and, if conditions in use or actual
operation of proposed use vary, the Planning Board may
require such unpaved space to be paved.
(b) Exceeding minimum off-street parking and loading
requirements. Minimum off-street parking and loading
requirements as required by this article may only be exceeded
as permitted in this article or where it can be demonstrated at
the time of Planning Board review that such additional parking
facilities are necessary for the actual operation of a proposed
use. In such instances, the Planning Board may grant an
§ 200-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-28
1:607
§ 200-29. General circulation; parking and loading area design
standards.
increase in minimum space on a lot, provided that all other
bulk and area requirements are met for the use in the district
in which it is located. [Amended 9-15-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-22]
(3) Educational facilities parking modifications.
(a) Where a building is for an educational institution which
prohibits the ownership or operation of automobiles by
students or that restricts the parking of student automobiles to
designated institutional parking areas or to parking areas in
another Township, such students need not be included in the
calculation of automobile parking requirements.
(b) Institutional parking spaces of educational institutions that are
provided for normal daytime activity for other purposes shall
be considered to be available for such public uses as are
normally conducted in the evening or on weekends in places of
public assembly of such institutions.
A. Access. Unobstructed access to and from a street shall be provided.
Paved access drives or driveways shall be provided in accordance with
the criteria provided in Subsection I of this section.
B. Location of parking spaces. [Amended 12-22-1980 by Ord. No.
80-41]
(1) Such parking spaces, open or enclosed, shall be on the same lot or
tract of land as the building or use to be served unless the Planning
Board, in connection with site plan review, shall approve collective
off-street parking facilities for two or more buildings or uses on
adjacent or contiguous lots. The total of such collective off-street
parking facilities shall be not less than the sum of facilities required
for the individual uses computed separately.
(2) Parking and loading in front of building. Parking lots, loading and
unloading areas shall be prohibited in the area between the front
building line and the street line, except for parking as permitted
below:
(a) In industrial or educational districts, up to 10% of the required
spaces for executive (including deans or department chairs in
educational facilities) or visitor parking may be immediately in
front of a principal building, provided that such parking areas
are shielded from view at the public street right-of-way by a
landscaped strip or screen.
(b) In residential districts, a driveway within a required front yard
may be used and counted as one motor vehicle parking space.
§ 200-28 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-29
1:608
In addition, all motor vehicles shall be parked in approved
designated parking areas.
C. Location in different zones. No access drive, driveway or other means of
ingress and egress shall be located in any residential zone to provide
access to uses other than those permitted in such residential zone.
D. Sidewalks and curbing.
(1) Sidewalks between parking areas and principal structures, along
aisles and driveways and wherever pedestrian traffic shall occur
shall be provided with a minimum width of four feet of passable
area and be raised six inches or more above the parking area,
except when crossing streets or driveways. At points of intersection
between pedestrian and motorized lines of travel and at other
points where necessary to avoid abrupt changes in grade, a
sidewalk shall slope gradually so as to provide an uninterrupted
line of travel. Guide rails and wheel stops permanently anchored to
the ground shall be provided in appropriate locations. Parked
vehicles shall not overhang or extend over sidewalk areas unless an
additional sidewalk width of 2 1/2 feet is provided to accommodate
such overhang. [Amended 4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12]
(2) All sidewalks and curbing shall be in compliance with the
applicable provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990. [Added 2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 93-01]
E. Enclosed facilities. Required parking areas may be constructed within
or under any portion of a main building, provided that the access
driveway does not at any point leave a grade in excess of 10%. All
parking structures shall provide a minimum of 98 inches vertical
clearance through entrances and within the structure to disabled
parking spaces, in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act
of 1990. [Amended 2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 93-01]
F. Landscaping and drainage.
(1) Parking areas shall be suitably landscaped to minimize noise, glare
and other nuisance characteristics as well as to enhance the
environment and ecology of the site and surrounding area. General
landscaping design shall conform to criteria set forth in § 200-20 of
this article. All open parking areas and accessways thereto shall be
properly drained, and all such areas shall be a paved surface,
except for parking spaces accessory to one-family or two-family
residences.
(2) Parking viewed from the public right-of-way or from any property
used for residential purposes shall be suitably shielded.
G. Lighting. [Amended 12-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-41]
§ 200-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-29
1:609
(1) All parking areas shall be lighted to provided a minimum of three
footcandles at driveway intersections with main roads and a total
average illumination of 0.5 footcandle throughout the parking area.
(2) Such lighting shall be shielded in such a manner as not to create a
hazard or nuisance to the adjoining properties or the traveling
public.
H. General circulation design principles.
(1) Parking space allocations should be oriented to specific buildings.
(2) Parking areas may be designed to focus on major walkways which
should be marked.
(3) Where pedestrians must cross service roads or access roads to
reach parking areas, crosswalks should be clearly designated by
pavement markings and signs and be in accordance with applicable
provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
[Amended 2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 93-01]
(4) Roads and driveways from main roads should be located at grade
and not below the crest of vertical curves.
(5) All parking and loading spaces and driveways shall be so arranged
that cars and trucks may be turned on the lot so that it is not
necessary to back into any street.
(6) In business districts, provision for pedestrian access between
adjoining commercial lots should be encouraged.
I. Location of driveways. [Amended 12-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-41]
(1) Design.
(a) All entrance and exit driveways shall be located to afford
maximum safety to traffic, provide for safe and convenient
ingress and egress to and from the site and to minimize conflict
with the flow of traffic.
(b) Any exit driveway or driveway lane shall be so designed in
profile and grading and located to provide the following
minimum sight distance measured in each direction. The
measurements shall be from the driver's seat of a vehicle
standing on that portion of the exit driveway that is
immediately outside the edge of the road right-of-way.
Allowable Speed
(miles per hour)
Required Sight Distance
(feet)
25 150
30 200
§ 200-29 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-29
1:610
Allowable Speed
(miles per hour)
Required Sight Distance
(feet)
35 250
40 300
45 350
50 400
(c) Where a site occupies a corner of two intersecting roads, no
driveway entrance or exit shall be located within 50 feet of the
point of tangency of the existing or proposed curb radius of
that site.
(d) No part of any driveway shall be located within a minimum of
10 feet of a side property line. However, the Planning Board
may permit a driveway serving two or more adjacent sites to be
located on or within 10 feet of a side property line between the
adjacent sites.
(e) No entrance or exit driveway shall be located on a rotary ramp
of an interchange or within 20 feet of the beginning of any
ramp or other portion of an interchange.
(f) Where two or more driveways connect a single site to any one
road, a minimum clear distance of 200 feet measured along the
right-of-way line shall separate the closest edges of any two
such driveways. Where such development fronts on an arterial
street, access to parking and service areas, where practicable,
shall be provided by a single access to the arterial street.
(g) Where a development fronts on a principal, major or minor
arterial or a major collector, a combined one point of access
and egress to parking and service areas shall be provided,
except where large frontages (1,000 feet or larger) are
involved. In those instances where two or more driveways
connect a single site to any one road, a minimum clear distance
of 300 feet measured along the right-of-way line shall separate
the closest edges of any two such driveways.
(2) Driveway angle.
(a) Two-way operation. Driveways used for two-way operation
shall intersect the road at an angle to as near 90º as site
conditions will permit and in no case will be less than 60º.
(b) One-way operation. Driveways used by vehicles in one
direction of travel (right turn only) shall not form an angle
smaller than 45º with a road, unless acceleration and
deceleration lanes are provided.
§ 200-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-29
1:611
(3) Driveway dimensions. The dimensions of driveways shall be
designed to adequately accommodate the volume and character of
vehicles anticipated to be attracted daily onto the land
development for which a site plan is prepared. The required
maximum and minimum dimensions for driveways are indicated
below. Driveways serving large volumes of daily traffic or traffic of
over 15% truck traffic shall be required to utilize high to maximum
dimensions. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
Type of Use
One-Way
Operation
Driveway*
(width in feet)
Two-Way Operation
Driveway*
(width in feet)
3- to 10-family
residence
10-15 24
Over 10-family 15-25 24
Commercial and
industrial
15-30 24
*All driveways shall be five feet wider at the curbline, and this
additional width shall be maintained for a distance of 20 feet into
the site.
J. Acceleration/deceleration lanes. Where access to a parking area of 100
or more spaces is proposed, acceleration and/or deceleration lanes
shall be provided in accordance with design criteria established by the
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
Standards Manuals.
K. New or altered parking lots. No public or private parking area or access
roads shall be constructed, altered or added to in the Township until
there shall have been filed with the Construction Official an application
for a building permit, which shall include a plan, in duplicate, drawn to
scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot or lots of the building or
structure and accessory buildings already existing or to be erected, and
containing such other information as shall be deemed necessary by the
Construction Official to determine conformity with the provisions of this
Part 1, the Building Code192 and with applicable provisions of the
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. [Amended 2-16-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-01]
L. Maintenance of off-street parking and loading areas.
(1) Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private off-street
parking or loading area shall be maintained in good condition, free
of hazards and deterioration. All pavement areas, sidewalks, curbs,
drainage facilities, lighting, bumpers, guardrails, markings, signs,
192. Editor's Note: See Ch. 63, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 200-29 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-29
1:612
bicycle parking devices, landscaping and other improvements shall
be maintained in workable, safe and good condition.
(2) The Township Engineer may authorize repairs for such
improvements if, after proper notice, the owner fails to maintain
such improvements and such conditions constitute a hazard to
health and safety or where such improvements are governed by a
development or other similar agreement. [Amended 4-19-1999
by Ord. No. 99-07]
M. Automobile parking design principles. [Amended 12-22-1980 by Ord.
No. 80-41]
(1) Access. The width of all aisles providing direct access to individual
parking stalls shall be in accordance with the requirements set
forth below. The minimum width of access aisles shall conform with
the following requirements:
Parking Angle
(degrees)
Aisle Width One-
Way Traffic
(feet)
Aisle Width Two-
Way Traffic
(feet)
0 (parallel) 12 24
30 12 24
45 14 24
60 18 24
90 (perpendicular) 24 24
(2) General. A one-way car movement (to the left or counterclockwise)
should be encouraged. A major loop road should be developed
around the parking areas. All parking shall be located in bays
generally perpendicular to driveways or roads.
(3) Parking lot layout. Parking areas or lots providing for more than 60
motor vehicle spaces shall, where possible, be subdivided into
modular parking bays or lots of not greater than 60 spaces each.
Single row or line of spaces within a bay should be no more than 20
spaces in length. Parking bay should be separated from access or
circulation drives by ten-foot-wide islands for the full width of a bay
at the ends of rows. Designated handicapped parking spaces shall
be located on the shortest route of travel from adjacent parking to
an accessible entrance. Every effort shall be made to plan an
accessible path of travel from parking spaces to primary access
which does not cross vehicular traffic lanes. When it is necessary to
cross vehicular traffic lanes, the route of traffic shall be designated
and marked as a crosswalk. [Amended 2-16-1993 by Ord. No.
93-01]
(4) Markings. In outdoor parking or service areas for uses open to the
public, parking spaces shall be double-striped between spaces with
§ 200-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-29
1:613
lines 18 inches on center. Lines shall be four inches wide. Such
areas shall be curbed with permanent and durable curbing to
confine cars to striped parking, without overhang or projection
onto sidewalks, driveways, bicycle parking areas, planted areas or
adjacent landscaped areas. Markings for designated handicapped
parking spaces shall be in accordance with applicable provisions of
the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. [Amended 2-16-1993
by Ord. No. 93-01]
(5) Areas computed as parking spaces. Areas which may be computed
as open or enclosed off-street parking spaces include any private
nonresidential garage, carport or other area available for parking,
other than a street, access lane or a driveway. However, a driveway
within a required front yard for a one-family residence may count
as one parking space. A private residential garage may also count
as one parking space, provided that the dwelling unit contains a
basement or similar area for occupant household storage needs.
[Amended 4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12]
(6) Size of parking spaces. Parking space sizes shall be measured as
follows, exclusive of interior driveway or maneuvering areas:
[Amended 7-25-1983 by Ord. No. 83-18]
(a) Standard spaces: nine feet in width by 18 feet in length.
(b) Compact car spaces: eight feet in width by 14 feet in length.
(c) Parking spaces for people with disabilities shall be in
accordance with the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code
(N.J.A.C. 5:23-7) or the Americans with Disabilities Act, as
applicable. [Amended 2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 93-01;
3-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-02]
(d) Spaces within a parking garage or structure;
[1] Standard spaces: 8 1/2 feet in width by 15 feet in length.
[2] Compact spaces: 7 1/2 feet in width by 15 feet in length.
[3] Aisle widths: Requirements of Subsection M(6)(d)[1]
above may be reduced by two feet for aisles serving
standard spaces or combination standard/compact bay
arrangements. Aisles exclusively serving compact bays
may be 20 feet in width.
(7) Parking for the handicapped. The number, location, size and
marking of spaces shall conform to the design requirements
required for such spaces by the State of New Jersey [barrier-free
design (N.J.S.A. 52:32-12)] and the Americans with Disabilities Act
of 1990. Minimum spaces in general shall be as follows: [Amended
2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 93-01]
§ 200-29 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-29
1:614
Total Parking in Lot
Handicapped Spaces
Required
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
52 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
1,001 and over 20, plus 1 for each 100 over
1,000
(8) Commuter Parking. One commuter (car pool/van pool) space shall
be provided for every 40 parking spaces. Such commuter spaces
shall be located close the entrance in the preferred parking spaces
and designated as commuter (car pool/van pool) spaces. [Added
9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-22193]
(9) Compact car parking. Where parking for compact cars is provided
as part of an off-street parking facility, such spaces shall not
exceed 1/3 of the total number of required parking spaces.
Compact car spaces shall be located within a parking facility and
contain proper signage and markings so that use by standard size
automobiles is discouraged. [Added 11-14-1983 by Ord. No.
83-31]
(10) Tandem parking. Where tandem parking is provided, the following
shall apply: [Added 6-8-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-18]
(a) It shall be accessible only to employees and valet parking.
(b) Valet parking is permitted in the aisle.
(c) Only employee vehicles shall be permitted in restricted-access
tandem spaces.
(d) Tandem spaces shall not be more than two vehicles deep.
N. Bicycle parking design principles. [Amended 12-22-1980 by Ord. No.
80-41]
193. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection M(8) and (9) as
Subsection M(9) and (10), respectively.
§ 200-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-29
1:615
(1) General. Bicycle parking facilities shall be of such a type and
quantity so as to encourage and facilitate the use of the bicycle as a
means of transportation by the employees and customers of the
proposed use requiring site plan approval.
(2) Location. Outdoor bicycle parking facilities shall be located in
convenient locations close to building entrances or pedestrian
walkways leading to building entrances. Such facilities shall be
clearly marked and separated from automobile access by either
landscaping, raised curbs or similar devices. Indoor bicycle parking
facilities shall be provided in a secure and safe area.
(3) Access. Bicycle access should be combined with motor vehicle
access where possible. In those cases where bicycle access is
combined with motor vehicle access driveways to the site under
review, the driveway shall be not less than 15 feet wide if one-way
in direction, and 30 feet if two-way in direction. In those cases
where bicycle access is independent from motor vehicle access
driveways to the site under review, the bicycle access drive shall be
not less than four feet wide if one-way in direction and eight feet
wide if two-way in direction, Subsection I(3) of this section
notwithstanding. Bicycle access to a lot shall not be combined with
pedestrian access, nor shall it be via a separate path parallel and
adjacent to motor vehicle access. Access, egress and internal
circulation shall be planned so as to minimize conflicts between
automobiles, trucks, bicycles and pedestrians, both within the lot
and on the adjacent street. Bicycle access driveways and aisles
shall not contain hazards to the cyclists (e.g., parallel bar drainage
grates, insufficient sight clearance at points of intersection or
insufficient lateral or vertical clearance or radii of curvature).
(4) Parking facilities. Bicycle parking facilities shall be located close to
major entrances to buildings or other areas they serve, in view of
working personnel on-site or close to high activity areas to
minimize chances of theft or vandalism. Parking facilities shall
provide for padlock, chain or cable attachment and shall allow for
both wheels and the frame of a bicycle to be secured to it with a
standard six-foot cable or chain. Devices such as lockers or those
that support the bicycle by its frame or handlebars shall be used
rather than slotted concrete slab or vertical bar type racks or other
devices that support the bicycle by a wheel and could cause
damage to wheel rims. (In PRN developments, higher density
residential developments, for industrial uses and for other uses
involving regular daily access by defined groups of people or the
parking of bicycles for period of time generally in excess of three
hours, consideration should be given to sheltered parking facilities
that provide protection for bicycles from direct sunlight and
precipitation.) For any use for which 12 or more employee bicycle
parking spaces are required or provided, not less than 25% of the
bicycle parking spaces shall be provided within wholly enclosed
§ 200-29 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-29
1:616
§ 200-30. Site design and building layout. [Amended 2-25-1985 by
Ord. No. 85-1]
In reviewing site plans, the following site design and building layout
principles, where applicable, shall be followed. For minimum spacing
between buildings, between similar structures, the following shall apply:
individually secured compartments or lockers, providing protection
against theft, vandalism and the weather for all or any part of
any bicycle parked therein. Other provisions of this Part 1 to the
contrary notwithstanding, the lockers shall be close to an entrance
to the building they serve, but need neither be located at a major
entrance to the building nor be in view of working personnel onsite
or close to high activity areas. In lieu of the lockers, the same
number of bicycle parking spaces providing equivalent security
and convenience may be provided within the building they serve.
[Amended 9-13-1982 by Ord. No. 82-41]
O. Off-street loading area; berth sizes.
(1) Loading area. A loading area need not be necessarily a full berth,
but shall have a minimum plan dimension of at least 10 feet
overload clearance. The Construction Official shall determine the
sufficiency of the off-street loading area(s) based upon the land and
amount of loading and unloading operation required by the
proposed use, but in no case shall the use of such space hinder the
free movement of vehicles and pedestrians over a street, sidewalk
or alley.
(2) Loading berth. Each required loading berth shall be at least 12 feet
wide, 33 feet long and 14 feet high.
P. Location and access of loading areas, berths.
(1) Unobstructed access, at least 10 feet wide, to and from a street
shall be provided. Such access may be combined with access to a
parking lot. All permitted or required loading areas or berths shall
be on the same lot as the use to which they are accessory. No
entrance or exit for any loading area or berth shall be located
within 50 feet of any street intersection. No off-street loading berth
or area shall be located in any front yard.
(2) All areas for the loading and unloading of vehicles and for the
servicing of establishments or shops shall have adequate and
unobstructed access from a street, service driveway or alley and
shall be so arranged that they may be used without blocking or
otherwise interfering with the use of automobile accessways,
parking facilities, fire lanes or sidewalks.
A. In development groups (more than one building or structure on a tract),
the following distances shall be maintained between structures:
§ 200-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-30
1:617
§ 200-31. Lighting.
In connection with every site plan, the applicant shall submit plans for all
proposed exterior lighting. These plans shall include the location, type of
light, radius of light, manufacturer's specification sheet and intensity in
footcandles. The following design standards shall be followed:
(1) End wall (no openings) to end wall: 12 feet minimum.
(2) Any building face to street curb: 20 feet minimum.
(3) Any building face to parking area: 12 feet minimum.
(4) End wall to window wall: 30 feet minimum.
(5) Window wall to window wall: 75 feet minimum.
B. The Planning Board shall reduce the above distances by not more
than 1/3 if there is an angle of 20º or more between buildings and if
extensive landscaping or buffers are placed between buildings.
A. The style of the light and light standard shall be consistent with the
architectural style of the principal building.
B. The maximum height of freestanding lights shall be the same as the
principal building, but not exceeding 25 feet.
C. All lights shall be shielded to restrict the maximum apex angle of the
cone of illumination to 150º.
D. Where lights along property lines would be visible to adjacent
residents, the lights shall be appropriately shielded. Such shieldings
may include berming, landscape material, decorative fencing and, in
the case of buildings in excess of two stories, interior window shades or
other appropriate treatment that restricts exterior light passage. Site
lighting, other than that needed for security purposes, shall be set on a
timer system that shuts off all but security lighting of the site by 11:00
p.m. [Amended 12-27-1988 by Ord. No. 88-51]
E. Spotlight-type fixtures attached to buildings and visible to the public
shall be avoided.
F. Freestanding lights shall be so located and protected to avoid being
easily damaged by vehicles.
G. Lighting shall be located along streets, parking areas, at intersections
and where various types of circulation systems merge, intersect or split.
H. Pathways, sidewalks and trails shall be lighted with low or mushroomtype
standards.
I. Stairways and sloping or rising paths, building entrances and exits
require illumination.
§ 200-30 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-31
1:618
§ 200-32. Sign regulations. [Amended 12-14-1992 by Ord. No.
92-37; 12-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-41; 12-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-37;
10-15-1996 by Ord. No. 96-25; 12-23-1996 by Ord. No. 96-33;
12-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-27; 2-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-02;
4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07; 5-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-07;
10-6-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-28]
Each site plan application shall include a sign plan showing the specific
design, location, size, height, construction and illumination of proposed
signs in accordance with the regulations contained herein. Sign functions
and sign types are defined in § 200-4 of this chapter.
J. Lighting shall be provided where buildings are set back or offset, if
access is provided at such points.
K. The following intensity in footcandles shall be provided:
(1) Parking lots: an average of 0.5 footcandles throughout.
(2) Intersections: 3.0 footcandles.
(3) Maximum at property lines: 1.0 footcandles.
(4) In residential areas: average of 0.6 footcandles.
A. Schedule of sign use regulations. Signs shall be permitted in each
zoning district according to the following use regulations and other
applicable requirements of this section.
(1) Permitted signs in residential districts. The following standards
shall apply to all signs in residential districts.
(a) Permitted sign functions, type of sign, size of sign and
maximum number of signs shall be as follows:
Sign
Function Type of Sign
Size of Sign
(square feet)
Maximum
Number of
Signs per Lot
Business Ground,
hanging, wall
12, 6 for
hanging
1
Directory Ground, wall 12 1
Identification Ground, wall,
integral
4 1
Instructional Ground, wall 2 Determined by
safety
considerations
Nameplate Ground,
hanging, wall,
integral
1 1
§ 200-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-32
1:619
Sign
Function Type of Sign
Size of Sign
(square feet)
Maximum
Number of
Signs per Lot
No
solicitation
Wall 1 1
Permanent
noncommercial
Ground
Hanging
Wall
Integral
16
12
12
4
1*
NOTES:
*Additional signs require approval of the Zoning Officer,
which shall not be unreasonably withheld.
(b) Sign illumination. Only wall signs and integral signs are
permitted to be illuminated.
(c) Miscellaneous standards.
[1] Provisions for home occupation signage as set forth in Part
4, Zoning, of this chapter shall supersede requirements
contained in this Subsection A.
[2] "No solicitation" signs shall be located on or within two
feet of the primary public entrance.
(2) Permitted signs in nonresidential districts. The following standards
shall apply to all signs in nonresidential districts, except signage
for nonresidential planned developments where Subsection B of
this section applies and for the Princeton Junction Overlay District
where § 200-207.1D applies. No sign type other than those
identified below shall be permitted.
(a) Wall signage.
[1] One wall sign shall be permitted per business.
[2] The following types of wall signs shall be permitted:
[a] Internally lit raised letters with concealed ballast.
[b] Back-lit raised letters with concealed ballast.
[c] Signage board with gooseneck lighting.
[d] Individual cut letters with gooseneck lighting.
[3] The maximum sign area shall be 90% of the linear business
frontage, with a maximum area of 50 square feet. For
§ 200-32 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-32
1:620
example, if the linear business frontage is 25 feet, the
maximum sign area shall be 22 1/2 square feet (0.9 by 25).
[4] The letter height shall be a maximum of 18 inches.
[5] Letters shall project a maximum of six inches.
[6] Wall signs shall not be permitted above the roofline.
(b) Street address signage.
[1] Street address signage shall be provided on each building
or for each individual tenant.
[2] Street address numbers shall have a maximum height of
eight inches.
(c) Ground-mounted project/tenant identification signage.
[1] One ground-mounted project/tenant identification sign
shall be permitted for each site, provided that a monument
sign is not installed.
[2] The maximum sign area shall be 48 square feet.
[3] The maximum sign height, including structure and sign
area, shall be nine feet above existing grade.
[4] The base of the sign shall be constructed of materials that
are consistent with the building architecture and shall be
landscaped with plantings.
[5] If lighted, the sign shall be lit by direct, external light
sources, internally illuminated letters/logos or back-lit
raised letters/logos.
[6] Mounting hardware shall be hidden from view.
(d) Monument signage.
[1] One monument sign shall be permitted for each, provided
that a ground-mounted project/tenant identification sign is
not installed.
[2] The maximum monument sign area, including the
structure, shall be 48 square feet.
[3] The maximum monument sign height, including structure
and sign area, shall be four feet above existing grade.
[4] The base of the monument sign shall be constructed of
materials that are consistent with the building
architecture and shall be landscaped with plantings.
(e) Awnings and canopies.
§ 200-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-32
1:621
[1] One sign with lettering per business shall be permitted on
an awning or canopy, and logos shall be permitted on all
awnings and canopies, provided that:
[a] The letter and logo height does not exceed 50% of the
diagonal portion of the awning or canopy.
[b] The letter and logo height is located on the vertical
flap and does not exceed eight inches.
[c] The letter and logo area does not exceed 15% of the
area of the diagonal portion of the awning or canopy.
[d] The signage shall only be on first-floor awnings and
canopies.
[2] Awnings and canopies shall be aesthetically compatible
with the building and consistent with each other.
[3] Awnings and canopies shall be kept in good order and
repair.
[4] All awnings and canopies shall be made of canvas or cloth.
(f) Window lettering and signs. Window lettering and signs shall
be permitted, provided that they:
[1] Are inside the window;
[2] Do not exceed 15% of the window area;
[3] Pertain only to the establishment occupying the premises
where the window is located; and
[4] Shall have a professional appearance.
(g) Directory signage.
[1] One directory sign per separate street frontage shall be
permitted for professional offices and medical and dental
offices.
[2] The maximum directory sign area shall be two square feet
per occupant and shall not exceed 12 square feet.
[3] The directory sign shall be a wall sign.
[4] The letter height shall not exceed four inches.
(h) Instructional signage.
[1] Instructional wall and ground signs are permitted.
[2] The maximum number shall be determined by safety
considerations.
§ 200-32 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-32
1:622
[3] The maximum instructional sign area shall be two square
feet.
(i) Nameplate signage.
[1] One nameplate shall be permitted per building.
[2] The nameplate sign may be a ground, hanging, wall, or
integral sign.
[3] The maximum nameplate sign area shall be 1/2 square
foot.
(j) Flag signage.
[1] One freestanding flag sign shall be permitted for corporate
and professional offices.
[2] The flagpole shall be no taller than 18 feet measured from
existing grade.
[3] The maximum flag area shall be 15 square feet.
[4] Flag signs shall be kept in good order and repair.
B. Signage in nonresidential planned development. The following
standards shall apply to all signs in nonresidential planned
developments:
(1) Signage plan. All nonresidential planned developments shall
submit a comprehensive signage plan indicating specific criteria
for signage within the planned development. The comprehensive
signage plan shall, at a minimum, indicate the type, size, style of
lettering, colors, construction material, type of pole or standard
and illumination and shall include a site plan and elevations of the
entire property and locations and details of all proposed signage.
Included in the comprehensive signage plan shall be all illuminated
interior signs, which shall be consistent throughout the
development and which shall not detract from the aesthetic
impression created by the remainder of the signage plan.
(2) Wall signage.
(a) One wall sign shall be permitted per business for each front
business facade and each rear or side business facade.
(b) The following types of wall signs shall be permitted:
[1] Internally lit raised letters with concealed ballast.
[2] Back-lit raised letters with concealed ballast.
[3] Signage board with gooseneck lighting.
[4] Individual cut letters with gooseneck lighting.
§ 200-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-32
1:623
(c) For buildings within planned developments, the closest portion
of which is less than 130 feet from the right-of-way, the
maximum sign area shall be 90% of the linear business
frontage, with a maximum area of 50 square feet, and the letter
height shall be a maximum of 18 inches.
(d) For buildings the closest portion of which is between 130 feet
and 400 feet from the right-of-way, the maximum sign area
shall be 120% of the linear business frontage, with a maximum
area of 100 square feet, and the letter height shall be a
maximum of two feet.
(e) For buildings more than 400 feet from the right-of-way, the
maximum sign area shall be 225% of the linear business
frontage, with a maximum area of 150 square feet, and the
maximum letter height shall be three feet.
(f) Wall signs shall not be permitted above the roofline.
(3) Monument signage.
(a) One monument sign for each nonretail building shall be
permitted.
(b) The maximum monument sign area, including the structure,
shall be 48 square feet.
(c) The maximum monument sign height, including the structure
and sign area, shall be four feet above existing grade.
(d) The base of the monument sign shall be constructed of
materials that are consistent with the building architecture
and shall be landscaped with plantings.
(4) Ground-mounted project/tenant identification signage.
(a) One ground-mounted project/tenant identification sign for
each street frontage shall be permitted for each planned
development.
(b) The maximum ground-mounted project/tenant identification
sign area shall be 165 square feet.
(c) The maximum ground-mounted project/tenant identification
sign height (including structure and sign area) shall be 20 feet
above existing grade.
(d) The height of the base of the ground-mounted project/tenant
identification sign shall be at least 17% of the total height.
(e) The base of the ground-mounted project/tenant identification
sign shall be constructed of materials that are consistent with
the building architecture and shall be landscaped with
plantings.
§ 200-32 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-32
1:624
(f) The maximum letter height shall be 18 inches.
(g) A maximum of six tenants shall be permitted on the groundmounted
project/tenant identification sign.
(h) Color and materials of ground-mounted project/tenant
identification signage shall be consistent with other structures
on site, including buildings and other signs.
(i) If lighted, the sign shall be lit by direct, external light sources,
internally illuminated letters/logos or back-lit raised letters/
logos.
(j) Mounting hardware shall be hidden from view.
(5) Awnings and canopies.
(a) One sign with lettering per business shall be permitted on an
awning or canopy, and logos shall be permitted on all awnings
and canopies, provided that:
[1] The letter and logo height does not exceed 50% of the
diagonal portion of the awning or canopy.
[2] The letter and logo height is located on the vertical flap
and does not exceed eight inches.
[3] The letter and logo area does not exceed 15% of the area
of the diagonal portion of the awning or canopy.
[4] The signage shall only be on first-floor awnings and
canopies.
(b) Awnings and canopies shall be aesthetically compatible with
the building and consistent with each other.
(c) Awnings and canopies shall be kept in good order and repair.
(d) All awnings and canopies shall be made of canvas or cloth.
(6) Window lettering and signs. Window letter and signs shall be
permitted, provided that they:
(a) Are inside the window;
(b) Do not exceed 15% of the window area;
(c) Pertain only to the establishment occupying the premises
where the window is located; and
(d) Shall have a professional appearance.
(7) Directory signage.
(a) One directory sign per separate street frontage shall be
permitted for each planned development.
§ 200-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-32
1:625
(b) The maximum directory sign area shall be two square feet per
occupant and shall not exceed 12 square feet.
(c) The directory sign shall be a wall sign.
(d) The letter height shall not exceed four inches.
(8) Instructional signage.
(a) Instructional wall and ground signs are permitted.
(b) The number shall be determined by safety considerations.
(c) The maximum instructional sign area shall be two square feet.
(9) Nameplate signage.
(a) One nameplate shall be permitted per building.
(b) The nameplate sign may be a ground, hanging, wall or integral
sign.
(c) The maximum nameplate sign area shall be 1/2 square foot.
(10) Flag signage.
(a) One freestanding flag sign shall be permitted for corporate and
professional offices.
(b) The flagpole shall be no taller than 18 feet measured from
existing grade.
(c) The maximum flag area shall be 15 square feet.
(d) Flags shall be kept in good order and repair.
(11) Street address signage.
(a) Street address signage shall be provided on each building or
for each individual tenant.
(b) Street address numbers shall have a maximum height of eight
inches.
C. Prohibited signs. Any other provisions of this section or any other
section of this chapter notwithstanding, the following signs shall be
prohibited in all zoning districts:
(1) Signs which contain or are an imitation of an official traffic signal
or hide from view any traffic street signal or sign.
(2) Signs which are designed to move, either by mechanical or other
means. Signs which are portable, self-supporting without being
firmly embedded in the ground, supported by another object or
mounted on wheels. Signs placed on vehicles or trailers which are
parked or located for the primary purpose of displaying said sign.
§ 200-32 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-32
1:626
This does not apply to signs or lettering on buses, taxis or vehicles
operating during the normal course of business.
(3) Any abstract mosaic, mural or painting or graphic art techniques
applied, implanted or placed directly onto a wall, fence or exterior
of a building.
(4) Mounted or portable search lighting used to project moving or
stationary overhead light beams.
(5) Signs which flash, or are accented by flashing lights, except for
time and temperature indicators and emergency highway lights.
(6) Signs which emit odors or smoke or produce noise or sounds
capable of being heard, even though the sounds produced are not
understandable.
(7) Silhouetted or three-dimensional signs; e.g., signs lacking a
background and having letters, figures or devices silhouetted
against the sky or other open space not a part of the sign and/or
signs in which objects or representational devices are present in
the round or other than in a vertical plane.
(8) Any freestanding sign or any sign projecting from a building within
a triangular area bounded by the intersection of two right-of-way
lines and a line connecting points 30 feet from such intersection
along the right-of-way lines, whether existing or shown on the
Master Plan or in sight clearance triangles specified in other
regulations.
(9) Any sign erected upon, against or above a roof or on top of a
parapet of a building.
(10) Advertising signs, including billboards and temporary off-site
advertising signs usually attached to the ground or appended to
posts, unless specifically permitted as a conditional use and
developed in accordance with the requirements of § 200-243.1.
(11) Signs which contain or consist of banners, posters, pennant
ribbons, balloons or blimps, streamers, strings of light bulbs,
spinners or other similar moving devices.
(12) Signs painted or attached to utility poles, trees, fences, booths,
street furniture or boulders.
(13) Circulars and throwaway flyers attached to vehicles.
(14) Portable signs or signs not permanently anchored to a building or
to the ground.
(15) Obsolete or abandoned signs.
D. Supplemental sign provisions.
§ 200-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-32
1:627
(1) General sign standards. Any sign for which the purpose, location,
type or definition is not clearly permitted or prohibited by this
article shall be considered as being a sign of the most closely
resembling purpose, function, type or definition as established by
this article. The following general sign standards shall apply to all
permitted signs in all zoning districts:
(a) Nonconforming signs. Nonconforming signs which are
structurally altered, relocated or replaced shall comply with all
provisions of this article.
(b) Structural requirements. All signs shall comply with structural
requirements as established by the Township's Building
Code.194 This article, however, shall, where applicable, take
precedence over that code in all matters pertaining to the
regulation of design and location.
(c) Maximum height of signs. Signs shall be no higher than four
feet in residential districts.
(d) Sign location. Signs shall not be in or within the public right-ofway
nor interfere with sight distances at street intersections or
ingress and egress points to a lot. To the extent possible,
adjacent signs on the same or adjoining buildings should be
placed within the same horizontal band and be of reasonably
harmonious materials and colors.
(e) Signage graphics considerations. For any residential or
nonresidential development, all signage shall be consistent in
style of lettering, signage colors, construction material, type of
pole or standard, size and lighting.
(f) Sign area calculation. The total area of all signs on a lot shall
not exceed the limitations of this article. Signs visible on or
through windows shall be included within the total area of
signage on a lot. Signs may be two-sided, with the perimeter
not to exceed the individual sign area limitation.
(2) Special design standards for wall signs.
(a) Wall signs shall be attached parallel to the facade of the
building and project not more than 12 inches therefrom and
shall not exceed higher than the top of the parapet in the case
of one story buildings; and in the case of taller buildings, shall
not extend above the sill of the windows of the second story,
nor extend more than 15 feet above the outside grade.
(b) Wall signs shall not cover wholly or in part any wall opening,
including doors, fire escapes and windows, nor project beyond
the ends of the wall to which it is attached. All such signs must
194. Editor's Note: See Ch. 63, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 200-32 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-32
1:628
be safely and adequately attached to said building wall by
means satisfactory to the Construction Official.195
E. Enforcement.
(1) When a single-occupancy business ceases operation for more than
60 days, any sign face identifying or advertising such business and
all supporting structures shall be immediately removed.
(2) When an owner entity such as a shopping center or a multitenant
building changes and the owner's name is on the sign, then within
90 days the sign shall be removed and replaced if it is
nonconforming.
F. Sign illumination standards for all districts.
(1) Fixtures used to illuminate signs shall comply with the following:
(a) Top-mounted external light fixtures shall have illumination
levels plotted such that 100% of the beam angle used is not
greater than the size of the externally illuminated signs.
(b) Illumination from other positioned light fixtures shall continue
to be restricted to the sign area. Visors or other directional
control devices shall be used to eliminate any spill light.
(2) Detailed plans are to be provided to illustrate floodlight
distribution patterns. Once properly installed, the fixtures are to be
aimed, permanently affixed, and maintained in the approved
position according to the terms of approval outlined in the
approving resolution.
(3) Foundations supporting lighting poles installed less than two feet
behind the curb shall not be less than four inches above grade.
(4) Outdoor light fixtures for purposes of private, commercial, or
industrial usage shall not be attached or mounted to public
property (i.e., buildings, utility poles, telephone poles, street lights,
and road/street signs). Furthermore, these fixtures shall not tap or
extend power from sources servicing public lighting and power
devices.
(5) Light distributions generated by light fixtures shall be confined to
the property on which they are installed.
(a) Outdoor light fixtures properly installed and maintained shall
be directed so that there will not be any direct glare source
visible from any adjacent residential property.
195. Editor's Note: Original Subsection 23-6.6.5, Supplementary Sign Regulations and Design
Considerations, which immediately followed this subsection, and containing portions of
Ord. Nos. 78-20 and 78-25, was repealed by Ord. No. 92-37. Former Subsection E,
Billboards, as amended, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
5-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-09. See now § 200-243.1.
§ 200-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-32
1:629
(b) Light fixtures installed within any setback area, including
front, rear or side yard setbacks, shall contain shielded devices
to prevent light spill and glare upward and onto adjacent
properties.
(6) Light trespass (nuisance light). All light fixtures, except street
lighting maintained by a governmental authority, shall be designed,
installed and maintained to prevent light trespass, as specified
below.
(a) Outdoor light fixtures shall be installed and maintained so that
there will not be any direct glare source visible from any
property other than the property in which the fixture is
located.
(b) Special shielding devices shall be affixed to light fixtures near
adjacent properties to the extent necessary to prevent light
trespass.
(7) Internally illuminated signs shall not exceed 70 lumens as
measured one foot away from signs.
(8) When building surfaces are used as signs, the luminance values
and surface reflectances shall be the same as those indicated for
externally illuminated signs.
(9) Outdoor lighting energy conservation. All sign-related lighting shall
be designed to prevent misdirected or excessive artificial light and
to maximize energy efficiency, including use of solar lighting to the
extent practicable.
(10) Submission of plans. Plans and evidence of compliance shall
include the following:
(a) Description of outdoor lamp/luminaire combinations, including
component specifications such as lamps, reflectors, optics,
angle of cutoff, supports, and poles, and provision of
manufacturers' catalog cuts.
(b) Locations and descriptions of every outdoor enclosed light
fixture and hours of operation, their aiming angles and
mounting heights.
(c) The initial horizontal and vertical illuminance shall be
illustrated in footcandles (before depreciation). Illustrate
relamping and cleaning cycles to arrive at maintained values of
illumination. Separately state proposed maintained
footcandles (horizontal and vertical).
(d) Computer-generated photometric grid showing footcandle
readings every 10 feet and the average footcandles. Depending
upon the design application, this can be for either or both
facade (vertical) or horizontal illumination levels.
§ 200-32 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-33
1:630
§ 200-33. Utilities.
The design and location of all utilities shall be based on Township standards
and the public utility having primary jurisdiction. The location of all utilities
shall be coordinated by the Township Engineer. Necessary approvals from
the Township health office, where applicable, shall also be required.
§ 200-34. Environmental considerations.
In addition to conforming to the EIS standards, as set forth herein, the site
plan shall be designed in accordance with applicable Township ordinances
designed to protect the environment. These include, but are not limited to,
Chapter 143, Soil Removal; Part 6, Flood Damage and Prevention, of this
chapter; and Chapter 170, Trees.
§ 200-35. Street furniture.
Street furniture are the man-made elements of the environment. These
include but are not limited to phone booths, benches, planting boxes, mail
and meter boxes, lighting standards, directional signs, bollards (posts),
fences and walls, water fountains and pools, drinking fountains, trash
receptacles and bike racks. In reviewing a site plan, details of street
furniture shall include location, size, lighting and design relationship to the
principal building(s). Such furniture shall be subordinate to the site plan
and arranged in a design-coordinated fashion to the principal use on the
lot (e.g., color, scale and bulk shall be reasonably harmonious with the
principal building and coordinated with the overall site landscaping plan).
§ 200-36. Supplemental design criteria. [Amended 12-22-1980 by
Ord. No. 80-41]
Supplemental design criteria for planned residential developments (open
space clusters, planned developments and planned residential
neighborhoods) and higher density housing developments (housing types
permitted in R-3 through R-5A Districts) shall be as follows.
A. General design principles. In the review of site plans for planned
residential developments or higher density residential developments, in
addition to the site plan criteria established in preceding sections of
this article, the following principles shall also apply:
(1) Utilities to be constructed within and to serve such developments
shall be underground.
(2) Consideration shall be given to the preservation and conservation
of natural features, including large trees, groves, waterways,
aquifer recharge areas, scenic and historic points or other
community assets within such developments.
(3) All portions of such developments not to be covered with buildings
or other impermeable surfaces and not to be retained in a natural
state shall be landscaped.
§ 200-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-36
1:631
(4) The protection of wooded areas, specimen trees of five-inch caliper
or over and vegetation suitable for buffer strips within the
development shall be a factor in determining the location of open
space, buildings, underground services, walks, paved areas,
playgrounds, parking areas and finished grade levels.
(5) In residential areas, reverse frontage lots shall be avoided, except
in cases where proximity to major highways necessitates such
location. In such cases, the lot should normally front on the minor
road and be screened from the major road by suitable planting.
(6) The street system may utilize, where proper, culs-de-sac, loop
streets and P-loops and other suitable forms of street layout.
Varying street size according to its intended traffic carrying
purpose is encouraged.
(a) When a cul-de-sac is used in a residential designated use area,
it shall be provided with a paved turning circle of sufficient
width to facilitate snow removal and to permit easy access for
fire-fighting equipment and general truck delivery. A right-ofway
radius for a cul-de-sac should be equal to 58 feet, with
landscaped center islands encouraged.
(b) The maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall be 600 feet to the
turning circle. This distance may be increased to 800 feet if an
emergency vehicular access and pedestrian walkway of at least
10 feet in width is provided from the head of a cul-de-sac
providing direct access to the adjacent street. The length of a
cul-de-sac may be in excess of 600 feet if it serves no more than
20 dwelling units or uses generating equivalent traffic. Cul-desac
turnarounds may be in the form of parking courts if a
turning radius of at least 35 feet is maintained.
(c) Any cul-de-sac shall be readily identifiable as such by traffic
moving on the collector streets to which it is connected. Culsde-
sac shall not be located so as to appear to terminate
collector streets.
(d) P-loops shall have an entrance leg not exceeding 900 feet. The
loop of a P-loop shall have a street length not exceeding 3,000
feet.
(7) The street system shall be integrated with the existing network of
streets so that there are at least two points of access. When a
project is to be developed in sections, each section shall provide
two points of access, one of which may be temporary.
(8) Pedestrian circulation separated from vehicular circulation is
encouraged, either in a separate right-of-way or by curbing, grass
strips, planting or other protective barriers.
§ 200-36 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-36
1:632
B. Building site design principles. In the site planning and layout of varied
housing types contained within planned developments or developed as
single use projects, the following principles, as appropriate, should be
followed:
(1) Overall principles.
(a) The site plan should be broken into visually small groupings
such as quadrangles, clusters and courts. Devices to slow
speed and reduce the size of each visual grouping, such as
garden walls and gates, reduction in setbacks of facing
buildings and variable landscape layout are encouraged.
(b) No more than five freestanding houses should be placed in a
row with the same setback from a straight street line.
(c) Boredom of visually repeated elements should be avoided. The
use of curved streets or variety of architectural design or
landscaping to avoid a view of more than three identical
structures from any single point on a street should be
encouraged.
(d) Site planning should respect climate and wind orientation to
ensure proper building siting enabling energy conservation
(e.g., maximize southern building exposure for use of solar
energy, consider proper wind orientation to reduce negative
effects of cold winter winds and to take advantage of cooling
summer breezes).
(e) Townhouses or other similar attached dwelling units should be
grouped in clusters. Private parking areas should be located
near dwelling unit entrances. Any outdoor living areas or
patios should adjoin open space or paths leading to open space.
Dwelling units should not front on a through street. Screening
of such outdoor living areas may be accomplished with plant
materials, masonry structures or wood fencing. Architectural
elements such as masonry walls and fences shall be compatible
in both style and materials with the dwelling unit of which it is
part.
(f) Architectural style and major design elements of each dwelling
unit, such as materials, color tones, windows and roof design,
should be compatible with all proposed dwelling units in the
immediate neighborhood or residential cluster.
(g) Where private garages are provided, constructed either as part
of a dwelling unit or on individual lots, the following guidelines
shall be followed:
[1] All garages shall conform architecturally to, and be of
similar materials as, the principal building in the
development.
§ 200-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-36
1:633
[2] A garage need not set back from one side line of an
individual lot and may be attached to a garage on an
adjacent individual lot.
[3] No garage which is not attached to or part of a dwelling
unit on the same individual lot should be closer than 20
feet to said dwelling unit.
[4] Where common garage structures are considered, they
shall be provided in clusters housing no more than four
cars. They should be located so as to provide as short a
walk as practicable to the principal residence.
(h) As either part of common open space or open space areas,
recreational facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts
and play lots are encouraged but should be carefully located to
avoid problems of noise, lights and similar nuisance elements,
affecting residential units. They shall be located not less than
50 feet from any boundary line exclusive of buffers.
(2) Townhouses.
(a) For townhouses, a maximum of eight dwelling units in a single
row with a minimum offset of two to four feet between every
two dwelling units are encouraged. No more than six dwelling
units should be permitted in a straight line. The planes of other
straight facades should be no more than 80 feet in length
without at least a two foot offset.
(b) The rooflines of at least 30% of the number of units which are
attached in a structure having a single linear plan should be
staggered in height by not less than 5% of the height of the
rooflines of the remaining units in such structures.
(c) An outdoor private living space for each dwelling unit is
encouraged. Adequate visual screening of such living space
from all other neighboring dwelling units, outdoor living
spaces, parking areas and roadways shall be provided.
(d) Each dwelling unit shall have not less than two exposures and
not less than two means of egress.
(3) Patio homes.
(a) No more than four dwelling units shall be connected to form
one structure. Major rooms of a dwelling should open onto a
private central court or atrium.
(b) Dwelling units shall be attached so that private outdoor living
areas are formed, providing maximum safety and privacy from
adjoining units. No windows of an adjoining unit shall face the
private outdoor living space of any unit.
§ 200-36 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-36
1:634
(c) An outdoor private living area, patio or atrium shall be
provided for each dwelling unit. Such patio area shall be not
less than 400 square feet in size, having no single dimension of
less than 15 feet. Further, such patio area should be completely
clear of structures and shall be designed for the outdoor use of
the occupants of the dwelling unit. Adequate visual screening
from neighboring dwelling units, patios, adjacent parking
areas and roadways shall be provided.
(4) Zero lot line homes.
(a) No more than five individual units should be placed in a row
with the same setback from a straight street line. Variation of
principal building placement on individual lots is encouraged.
(b) An outdoor private living space for each dwelling unit shall be
provided. Adequate visual screening of such living space from
all other neighboring dwelling units, outdoor living spaces,
parking areas and roadways shall be provided.
(c) Walls placed on lot lines shall not contain window openings of
living areas. Cross lot easements may be provided such that
the adjacent lot homeowner may gain access to his or her
dwelling for purposes of maintenance and repair; alternatively,
buildings may be placed three feet from one side lot line.
(5) Semidetached dwellings (e.g., duplex, triplex and quadraplex).
(a) A duplex structure shall contain no more than two attached
units, a triplex structure shall contain no more than three
attached units and a quadraplex structure shall contain no
more than four attached units. Each unit shall have its own
separate entrance and exit.
(b) At least 30% of each dwelling type which is attached in a
structure having a single linear plane shall be set back not less
than 10 feet behind the facades of the remaining units in such
structure.
(c) A variety of building heights between one- and two-story
structures for each dwelling type is encouraged within a single
project.
(d) An outdoor private living space for each dwelling unit is
encouraged. Adequate visual screening of such living space
from all other neighboring dwelling units, outdoor living
spaces, parking areas and roadways shall be provided.
(6) Garden apartments; maisonettes.
(a) Each garden apartment, maisonette or similar multifamily
structure should be limited to a maximum of 20 dwelling units
and a length of 180 feet. Such structures should be grouped in
§ 200-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-36
1:635
clusters of consistent architectural design. A minimum of twofoot
building offset for every two ground floor dwelling units
or a minimum of four-foot offset for every five ground floor
dwelling units shall be provided.
(b) In maisonette style structures, an outdoor private living space
for each ground floor unit shall be provided. Adequate visual
screening of such living space from all other neighboring
dwelling units, outdoor living spaces, parking areas and
roadways shall be provided.
(c) A variety of building heights between two-, three- and fourstory
structures is encouraged within a single project.
(d) Open balconies for individual dwelling units are encouraged.
(7) Mid-rise apartments.
(a) Each mid-rise structure shall be sited according to proper
considerations to maximize views, sun and wind factors. Each
unit shall have sunlight for at least part of the day. Sun shadow
diagrams shall be provided for each structure such that no
adjacent lower-storied building shall be contained within any
such shadows for more than one hour of a day.
(b) Mid-rise apartments of similar multifamily structures should
be located on a site directly adjacent to the major portions of
common space or open space in the development. Where a
mid-rise structure is proposed adjacent to the State D & R
Canal Park, a minimum setback of 300 feet from the edge of
the park shall be provided, with appropriate tree plantings
between the structure's closest wall facing the Canal and the
park's edge to soften the visual appearance of the building.
Their placement within planned developments shall be
harmonious in architectural style with the other housing types
that may be located within such developments.
(c) Open balconies, decks or patios at the ground floor units are
encouraged.
(d) Jogs of a minimum of four feet to create visual breaks on the
exterior of a building are encouraged.
(e) Angled walls, varied widths or enlarged foyer or atrium areas
at points where building jobs or where laundries, elevator or
stair towers occur are encouraged.
C. Common open space and recreation.
(1) General requirements.
(a) In the designation of common open space areas, consideration
shall be given to providing for continuity of open space
§ 200-36 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-36
1:636
between sections of a development and between open space
with a development and open space on adjacent lands. Open
space shall be distributed throughout the development so that
there is a hierarchy of activities from preservation areas to
passive open space adjacent and between each residential
cluster. Designating all open space in one portion of a
development is to be discouraged.
(b) Usable recreation space should be provided for active
recreation within 1/4 mile of all units. Part of this may be a lake
or pond having a substantially constant water level, but
excluding therefrom detention and retention basins. Any larger
preservation spaces shall still be contiguous to and directly
related to dwelling structures. Usable recreation space may be
improved with facilities for swimming pools, tot lots,
playgrounds and quiet outdoor sports such as, but not limited
to, tennis, paddle tennis, golf, baseball, basketball, soccer,
lacrosse and the like, and accessory buildings such as
clubhouses and pavilions.
(c) Carefully orient passive recreational facilities.
(d) Recreational facilities should be operated for the residents of
the development. They should not be commercial enterprises
open to anyone who pays a fee.
(e) Open space and recreational areas shall be accessible to
individuals with disabilities in accordance with the Americans
with Disabilities Act of 1990. [Added 2-16-1993 by Ord. No.
93-01]
(2) Distribution requirements applicable to planned residential or
higher density residential developments. The common open space
or open space requirements as required for certain planned
residential developments permitted by Part 4, Zoning, of this
chapter shall be distributed generally as outlined below:
§ 200-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-36
1:637
Minimum Distribution
Percentages of Open Space
(expressed as percent of
gross tract area)
When at least
40% open
space
required
When less
than 40% open
space required
1. In usable recreation
facilities as set forth in
Subsection C(3)(c) below
15% 10%
2. In natural features,
significant wooded areas,
vegetation and in other
usable open space which
shall be defined as lands
other than in channels,
floodways or water bodies,
whether used for recreation,
retention or detention
purposes
15% N/A
3. In lands excluded in
Number 2 above
10% N/A
(3) Open space/recreation design guidelines.
(a) An effective open space system should tie together a number of
diverse recreational activity areas with adequate pedestrian
pathways and auto/bicycle access for residents it is intended to
serve. As many homes as possible should have direct access to
the open space of a development. Developed open space
generally should not be isolated in one corner of a project.
(b) Active recreation should be visibly close but shall not interfere
with the privacy of adjacent residents. It should be designed to
accommodate the recreation needs of the project's intended
age groups.
(c) Recreational facilities.
[1] Pathways and bikeways. Use to connect open space
between recreational facilities and between residential
buildings and other uses. Vehicular conflicts with open
space pathways are discouraged.
[2] Internal bicycle paths. In planned developments where
internal bicycle paths are proposed primarily intended to
provide access for occupants of such developments, the
§ 200-36 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-36
1:638
following pathway width design guidelines shall be
observed:
Type of Bikeway
Pathway Width
(feet)
One-way bikeway shared
with pedestrians
8
Two-way bikeway shared
with pedestrians
12
One-way independent
bikeway path
4
Two-way independent
bikeway path
8
[3] Play lots. Minimum of 2,000 square feet for toddlers and
up to 5,000 square feet for older children. Primarily used
by preschool age children. Facilities include swings, slides,
play sculptures and benches for parents. Effective service
radius of one lot of 1/8 of a mile. Approximately one play
lot for each 400 persons or 100 children.
[4] Playgrounds.
[a] Designed for a variety of uses and equipment should
reflect the patronage. Sandboxes and play sculpture
for young children, basketball courts or backboards
for older youths, paved areas for various activities and
shuffleboard and sunny and quiet areas for the elderly.
[b] The size of playgrounds should generally be based on
population as follows:
Population
Size
(acres)
2,000 3.50
3,000 4.75
4,000 7.00
[5] Tennis. One court for each 100 dwelling units. Automobile
parking should be provided on the basis of four spaces per
court, together with appropriate bicycle parking facilities.
[6] Swimming pools.
[a] The size of pools should generally be based on the
number of dwelling units as follows:
§ 200-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-36
1:639
Number of Dwelling
Units
Pool Size
(square feet)
Under 50 800 to 1,000
50 to 100 1,000 to 1,300
101 to 150 1,200 to 1,500
151 to 200 1,400 to 1,800
Over 200 1,800 up
[b] In larger developments, a series of smaller pools
relating to individual housing groups should be
considered instead of a centrally located, large pool.
Wading pools should be provided where the
anticipated child population indicates that they will be
used.
[7] Community buildings. In planned developments of over
150 dwelling units, consideration shall be given toward a
recreation center/community multipurpose building. Such
facilities should be within walking or easy biking distance
of the majority of residents it is intended to serve.
[8] Other amenities. Consider jogging trails and exercise
areas in an adult-oriented project. Provide benches and
sitting areas along pathways where appropriate and
particularly where they can incorporate or provide views
of a significant landscape feature, recreational facility or
interesting site design of the project. Consider an area
reserved for small garden plots in larger developments.
D. Fire lanes/fire apparatus access. [Added 8-2-1983 by Ord. No.
83-24]
(1) General requirement. At a minimum, a building shall have 25% of
its perimeter fronting on a public or private street or on a fire
apparatus space unobstructed for at least 30 feet in width.
Depending on a building's design configuration and use, location of
its egress points with respect to a public street or fire apparatus
space and location of a fire hydrant, this general requirement may
be increased by the Planning Board upon receipt of a report by the
Township's Fire Subcode Official as to why such increases are
needed.
(a) Such fire apparatus space shall be accessible from a street by a
posted fire lane not less than 18 feet in width.
(b) Both fire lane and fire apparatus space shall be posted by
appropriate signage or pavement markings. They shall not be
obstructed so as to impede fire apparatus access.
§ 200-36 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-36
1:640
§ 200-36.1. Use of pervious and impervious surfaces. [Added
9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-22]
Impervious surfaces shall be used for all drives and parking areas except
as otherwise required by § 200-27B(1), and pervious surfaces shall be used
for all other paved areas, including sidewalks, trails, courtyards, and other
site amenities. The board of jurisdiction may exclude site amenities from
the MIC requirement when necessary to secure site amenities that will not
otherwise be provided.
(c) Fire lanes need not be separate accessways, but may be
incorporated as part of an individual site's access driveway
system or off-street parking access aisles, so long as they are
properly posted. Fire lanes may also be separate facilities
incorporated on a site as a grassed over supportable sub-base,
a paved block grass system or similar cross section which can
effectively support fire apparatus and serve as a fire lane.
Construction standards for such fire lanes shall be as
stipulated in § 200-91A(6) of Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan
Procedures, of this chapter.
(2) The requirements of this subsection shall not be applicable to
existing structures or ones for which a building permit has been
issued as of June 30,1983, including any application to increase the
size of an existing structure, except that such alterations shall
continue to be subject to and must conform to the provisions of
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.4 and 5:23-2.5, and any amendments thereto.
§ 200-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-36.1
1:641

ARTICLE VII
Administration
§ 200-37. Enforcement and penalties. [Amended 10-25-1982 by Ord.
No. 82-49]
This Part 1 shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer or any proper officer
of the Township. Requirements for enforcement and penalties for
noncompliance shall be as set forth for Part 4, Zoning, of this chapter.
§ 200-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-37
1:643

Part 2
[Adopted 12-27-1979 By OSrdu.b Ndiov.i s7i9o-n31996 As Ch. XXI Of The Revised
General Ordinances]
ARTICLE VIII
Title, Purpose and Approving Authority
§ 200-38. Title.
This Part 2 shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision Ordinance
of West Windsor Township."
§ 200-39. Purpose. [Amended 2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1]
The purpose of this Part 2 shall be to provide rules, regulations and
standards to guide land subdivision in West Windsor Township in order
to promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of
said Township and to carry out the objectives of the Municipal Land Use
Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.). It shall be administered to ensure the
orderly growth and development, the conservation, protection and proper
use of land and adequate provisions for circulation utilities and services and
the conservation and environmental protection of all land, water and air
resources within the jurisdiction of West Windsor Township. Application of
these subdivision rules, regulations and standards should also encourage
cost-performance methods and designs to enable the construction of lowand
moderate-income housing without creating an adverse impact on the
public health, safety and general welfare of the Township or for the future
residents of the development.
§ 200-40. Approving authority.
A. Planning Board. The provisions of this Part 2 shall be administered by
the Planning Board of the Township of West Windsor, except as set forth
in Subsection B of this section.
B. Zoning Board of Adjustment. The provisions of this Part 2 shall be
administered by the Zoning Board of Adjustment in applications before
the Zoning Board of Adjustment involving variances provided for in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d) on which subdivision approval would be required.
For such applications, any reference in this Part 2 to the Planning Board
shall be considered to refer to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, where
applicable.
196. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 84-30 Adopted The Site Plan Checklist And Subdivision Checklist.
Copies Of The Checklists Are On File And Available For Public Inspection In The Division
Of Land Use And Shall Be Provided Upon Request.
§ 200-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-40
1:645

ARTICLE IX
Terminology
§ 200-41. Definitions. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
Certain words and phrases used in this Part 2 are defined as noted in
§ 200-4 of this chapter.
§ 200-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-41
1:647

ARTICLE X
General Provisions
§ 200-42. Application of requirements.
These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the minimum
requirements for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of West Windsor Township. No building permit, certificate of
occupancy or other required permit shall be issued except in accordance
with an approval of the subdivision and its improvements granted pursuant
to this Part 2 unless modified in accordance with § 200-43.
§ 200-43. Exceptions.
A. The Planning Board, when acting upon applications for preliminary or
minor subdivision approval, shall have the power to grant such
exceptions and waivers from the requirements for subdivision approval
as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of this
Part 2 if the applicant can clearly demonstrate that, because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the literal enforcement of one or more
provisions of this Part 2, it is impracticable or will exact undue
hardship.
B. A building permit or certificate of occupancy may be issued if all
improvements have been installed or completed except the finish
course of the road, and the Township Engineer warrants that
completion of the road is in the Township's interest after the subdivider
has completed construction of the dwellings and structures. The
maintenance guaranty required shall not begin until the finish course
has been installed.
C. The Construction Code Official may also authorize the issuance of a
temporary certificate of occupancy if the following improvements have
been bonded but not yet installed: landscaping, sidewalks, other similar
improvements. [Amended 4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12]
D. In major subdivisions where three or fewer new building lots are
involved as part of a development application, the Planning Board, upon
request of an applicant, shall have the power to defer requirements for
the installation of public improvements or posting of improvement
guarantees for such improvements, provided that:
(1) The applicant clearly demonstrates that such improvements are not
reasonably immediately necessary to ensure the public health,
safety or welfare of residents or potential residents of the lots
involved or existing residents of the adjacent areas. In establishing
the basis for a deferment, the Planning Board may take into
account a report from its engineer, planner or other advisers or
agencies it deems appropriate as to when such improvements may
be necessary in the public interest and as to the timing of
improvement activities by adjacent land owners or other public
§ 200-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-43
1:649
agencies which would require installation of the subject subdivision
improvements to complete a development scheme for the adjacent
area.
(2) Any deferment granted shall not relieve the applicant or any
subsequent owners of the initial tract from which the new lots are
being created from the responsibility for the installation or
payment of a pro rata share of the ultimate costs of installation of
improvements related to and benefiting the lots of the subject
development application. Such deferred liability shall be enforced
in connection with an off-tract improvement pursuant to the
Municipal Land Use Law197 and this chapter at the time of the
development of the remainder of the initial tract or the
development of any other related tract, or as otherwise provided by
law.
(3) The final plat, Planning Board final approval resolution and
individual lot deed instruments shall stipulate the terms and
conditions of any such deferments. In addition, recordable
agreements may be required at the option of the Planning Board.
(4) Only one deferment as outlined herein for a parcel (contiguous lots
under similar ownership shall constitute a single parcel for
purposes of this deferment provision) may be permitted from the
date of enactment of this Part 2.
(5) The Planning Board, when acting upon an application which
includes provisions for low- and moderate-income housing, shall
waive those portions of the design standards which create barriers
to the construction of low- or moderate-income housing and which
are not necessary to protect public health and safety. 198 [Added
2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-01; 10-7-1985 by Ord. No. 85-25]
197. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
198. Editor's Note: Former Section 21-3.2, Subdivision Committee, which immediately followed
this subsection, was deleted 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07.
§ 200-43 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-43
1:650
ARTICLE XI
Procedure for Subdivision Approval
§ 200-44. General intent.
§ 200-45. Filing, referral and classification procedures.
A. Any applicant wishing to subdivide land within West Windsor Township
shall apply for and obtain the approval of the Planning Board in
accordance with the following procedure. Sketch plat approval shall be
required for all minor subdivisions. Major subdivisions shall be formally
reviewed and approved in two stages: preliminary and final. An
informal discussion and review sketch plat stage is encouraged of
applicants seeking major subdivision plat approval.
B. The applicant or the applicant's agent shall appear at all regular
meetings of the Planning Board whenever the application is being
considered. Failure to appear shall give the Planning Board the right to
postpone action on the application for that particular meeting or deny
and dismiss the application without prejudice if the applicant or the
applicant's agent's absence deprives the Planning Board of information
necessary to make a decision. Development applications containing
low- and moderate-income units shall conform to the procedural and
plat detail regulations contained herein, except as modified by
§ 200-48, Expedited review; low/moderate-income developments.
[Amended 2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1]
A. Filing. Subdivision applications shall be received for official processing
by the Township no sooner than the 16th and no later than the 12th day
before the fourth Wednesday of each month. The applicant shall submit
one copy of all required applications, plans and exhibits as set forth
under the appropriate site plan review stage of this article to the
administrative officer, who shall thereafter notify the applicant of
remaining completeness items, fees and of the required number of
copies of application documents, plans and exhibits to be submitted at
the scale required and in addition at a reduced size. The time for the
Board's review shall not begin to run until the receipt of a complete
application with the required fee. [Amended 8-13-1984 by Ord. No.
84-24; 4-30-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-05]
B. Referral. [Amended 10-25-1982 by Ord. No. 82-47]
(1) The administrative officer shall forward, upon receipt of a
subdivision application in proper form with requisite fees, one copy
of each of an application to the planner, environmental consultant
and Township Engineer for their preliminary determination of
completeness and classification of the subdivision. The planner,
environmental consultant and the Township Engineer shall report
back to the administrative officer within seven days of the filing
date whether the application is complete or noting items omitted or
other deviations of ordinances.
§ 200-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-45
1:651
§ 200-46. (Reserved)199
§ 200-47. Requirements common to sketch, preliminary and/or final
plat stages.
(2) If the application is deemed to be complete, the administrative
officer shall distribute copies as stipulated within this Part 2 for the
appropriate subdivision review state. The Planning Board may also
designate other local or higher governmental agencies to receive
copies of any application for review and recommendation beyond
those agencies stipulated in this Part 2. If the application is found
to be incomplete or in violation of any applicable codes and
ordinances, the applicant shall be notified by certified mail as to the
items omitted or other deviations of ordinances.
C. Classification. [Amended 10-25-1982 by Ord. No. 82-47]
(1) The administrative officer shall determine whether the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment has approval jurisdiction on
the application. The administrative officer may confer with the
Township Attorney in making this determination.
(2) The administrative officer shall classify the application as either a
minor or major subdivision.
A. Map details. All maps or other documents submitted for subdivision plat
review shall contain the following information in addition to specific
plat details as required for each approval stage noted herein:
(1) The title and location of the property.
(2) The name and address of the landowner and applicant. If a
corporation is the landowner or applicant, the principal office and
the name of the President and Secretary shall be included.
(3) The name, address and professional license number and seal of the
professional preparing documents and drawings. All plats, except
those prepared at the sketch stage, shall be signed and sealed by a
licensed land surveyor of the State of New Jersey.
(4) The place for the signature of the Chair and Secretary of the
Planning Board and Health Officer.200
(5) The date of the plat and any modifications thereto.
(6) 201The following legends shall be on the plat map:
199. Editor's Note: Former § 200-46, Site Plan Review Advisory Board (SPRAB) action on major
subdivisions, was repealed 7-30-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-20.
200. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
201. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 200-45 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-47
1:652
(SKETCH) or (PRELIMINARY) or (FINAL)
1. SUBDIVISION OF
LOT __________ BLOCK
ZONE
DATE _________________ SCALE
APPLICANT
ADDRESS
SUBDIVISION CONTROL NO.
2. I CONSENT TO THE FILING OF THIS SUBDIVISION PLAT
WITH THE PLANNING BOARD OF WEST WINDSOR
TOWNSHIP.
(Owner) (Date)
3. To be signed before issuance of a building permit and
incorporated only on a final plat of a major subdivision:
I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT ALL THE REQUIRED
IMPROVEMENTS HAVE BEEN INSTALLED OR A BOND
POSTED IN COMPLIANCE WITH ALL APPLICABLE CODES
AND ORDINANCES.
(If Improvements Installed)
(Township Engineer)
(If Bond Posted)
(Date)
(Township Clerk) (Date)
Building Permit Issued (Date)
4. To be incorporated on final plat for major or sketch plat for
minor and signed prior to issuance of a building permit:
VERIFICATION THAT PAYMENT OF MUNICIPAL TAXES OR
ASSESSMENTS IS CURRENT.
(Tax Collector) (Date)
5. The appropriate approval signature block to be incorporated
depending on whether subdivision is a minor or a major.
(a) Minor Subdivision Approved
(Date of Board Approval)
(Chair) (Date)
§ 200-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-47
1:653
§ 200-48. Expedited review; low/moderate-income developments.
[Added 2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1]
(Planning Board Secretary) (Date)
Deed to subdivision must be filed with County Clerk within
190 days of date of Board Approval.
(b) Major Subdivision Approved (Preliminary or Final)
(Date of Board Approval)
(Chair) (Date)
(Planning Board Secretary) (Date)
6. EXPIRATION OF APPROVAL (1) Major: Preliminary - 3 Years;
Final - 2 Years; or (2) Minor: 2 Years.
Date (without extensions)
B. Other information. The Planning Board may require such additional
information not specified in this Part 2 or any revisions in the
accompanying documents as are reasonably necessary to make an
informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for
approval of the application for development have been met. The
application shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of any such
additional information or any revisions in the accompanying documents
so required by the municipal agency.
A. A major development application containing low/moderate-income
units shall be reviewed for completeness and a determination made
within 15 days of its receipt for official processing. Thereafter, 45 days
will be allotted for review of preliminary applications and 30 days for
the review of final applications by the appropriate Township agencies
and other governmental entities as may be deemed appropriate. Upon
completion of the review period or within 60 days of an application
deemed complete for preliminary approval or 45 days for final approval,
a public hearing shall be commenced on the application, it being given
priority placement upon the Planning Board's agenda. Applications
submitted under this section shall be subject to the Municipal Land Use
Law's maximum approval time periods for preliminary or final
applications or combinations thereof with respect to rendering a final
decision on the application unless an applicant grants an extension to
said time period.202
202. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46, 40:55D-48 and 40:55D-50.
§ 200-47 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-48
1:654
§ 200-49. Compliance with other ordinances; waiver of information
required.
§ 200-50. Sketch plats for minor or major subdivisions.
B. A nonbinding concept plan review of an application containing low/
moderate-income units shall be heard by the Planning Board within 30
days' receipt of such a request by an applicant.
C. Upon determination that the application is complete, the administrative
officer shall forward a copy of the application to the Affordable Housing
Committee. [Added 11-26-1990 by Ord. No. 90-29]
A. Information and documents required for other Township codes and
ordinances, such as soil erosion and sedimentation plans or stormwater
management plans, shall be submitted as part of an application for
subdivision approval and may be used to comply with subdivision
submission requirements for particular stages as applicable.
B. The Planning Board may waive submission of any required exhibits in
appropriate cases and for specific subdivision plats. Request for such
waivers shall accompany a subdivision application and state the
reasons why such waiver(s) is being requested.
A. Objectives of submission. The sketch plat may be submitted so that it
can be informally reviewed to determine the plat's general compliance
with applicable Township ordinances and design requirements as set
forth herein. Also, the submission may form the basis for classification
by the administrative officer of the plat as a major or minor subdivision.
Sketch plats for major subdivisions shall be used as a basis for changes
and redesign so as to avoid undue expense and delay in preparing more
detailed plans and specifications in subsequent review stages. The
board of jurisdiction shall not be governed by any statutory time limits
in its review of sketch plats for major subdivisions, and it is expressly
understood that compliance with the board's recommendations shall
not bind the Planning Board in subsequent deliberations of a formal
subdivision application. [Amended 7-30-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-20]
B. Application. Two or more copies of the sketch plat, an application in a
form approved by the Planning Board and the requisite fee, if deemed a
minor subdivision, shall be delivered to the administrative officer, in
accordance with the procedures set forth herein.
C. Sketch plat details. The sketch plat, notwithstanding any other
requirement stipulated by this Part 2, shall contain the following
information, except that the Planning Board may waive any
requirement or request additional information where it is clearly
appropriate to the particular application.
§ 200-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-50
1:655
(1) All plats shall be based on accurate information at a scale of not
more than one inch equals 100 feet to enable the entire tract to be
shown on one sheet.
(2) A location map showing the entire tract to be subdivided, giving the
accurate location of all existing and proposed property and street
lines, at a scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet, or larger scale,
showing the entire subdivision and its relation to all features shown
on the Official Map and Master Plan and located within 1/2 mile of
the extreme limits to the subdivision, and the zoning classification
of the proposed subdivision and of adjacent land.
(3) The location of existing houses, buildings and other structures,
with accurate dimensions from all existing and proposed lot lines,
wooded areas and isolated trees more than five inches in diameter,
and topography with the portion to be subdivided and within 200
feet thereof at twenty-foot, or smaller, contour intervals. (United
States Geological Survey topographic quadrant map series are
acceptable for topography at this stage.)
(4) The name of the owner, all adjoining property owners and those
across existing or proposed streets as disclosed by the most recent
Township tax records.
(5) The tax map sheet, date of revision, block and lot numbers and zone
district of the tract proposed to be subdivided.
(6) Existing and proposed features.
(a) The location of existing or proposed streets, roads, easements,
greenbelts, public rights-of-way, streams, bridges, culverts,
drainage ditches and natural watercourses in and within 500
feet of the subdivision. Also, indicate all Township Master Plan
proposals on-site or off-tract within 500 feet of the proposed
subdivision. [Amended 10-16-1989 by Ord. No. 89-40]
(b) In assembling the required data, the applicant shall be
required to rely only on existing information available from the
Township's Master Plan documents, natural resource inventory
and engineering data available from the Township Engineer.
[Added 2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1]
(7) The original and proposed lot layout, lot dimensions, all required
setback lines and the lot area of each lot in square feet and
acreage. Lots shall be designated by letters for minor subdivisions
and by consecutive numbers for major subdivisions until given
official lot number designations by the Township Engineer.
(8) As determined by the Health Officer, the location of all percolation
tests, including those that failed, and soil logs conducted at the
expenses of the applicant and approved by the Health Officer shall
be shown on the plat.203
§ 200-50 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-50
1:656
(9) As applicable, the date of original preparation and date of revision,
if any, or plat, as well as the old name, if submitted previously
under a different title.
(10) A preliminary environmental impact statement, as outlined in Part
1, Article V, § 200-23, of this chapter.
(11) The acreage of the tract to be subdivided to nearest 1/10 of an acre
and, if an open space cluster, the area of the open space.
(12) A concept landscape plan, prepared by a certified or licensed
landscape architect, showing existing structure and existing
woodlands, isolated trees greater than five inches in caliper,
existing topographic contours and all other natural features.
[Added 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 88-9]
(13) An aerial photograph on the drawings with the site boundaries
outlined to evaluate the effects upon existing vegetation and
surrounding land uses. [Added 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 88-9]
(14) In the case of a minor subdivision if wetlands exist, as per N.J.A.C.
7:7A-1 et seq., Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act, rules are to be
complied with prior to submission of plans to the Township. All
areas of wetlands shall be depicted on plans with surveyors metes
and bounds information for the outbounds of such areas. A letter of
interpretation issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Division of Coastal Resources, shall be
submitted indicating the presence or absence of freshwater
wetlands on the parcel in question. [Added 8-21-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-35]
(15) A letter of interpretation issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Division of Coastal Resources, shall be
submitted, indicating the presence or absence of freshwater
wetlands on the parcel in question. [Added 4-20-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-12]
(16) As a condition precedent to the application for a building permit, a
proposed grading plan for each individual lot shall be submitted to
the Township Engineer for review and approval. This plan shall
include the proposed building footprint, finished first floor
elevation and proposed ground elevations at the following
locations: all lot corners, all building corners and at vehicle
entrance to a garage. The plan shall also show the proposed
finished basement floor elevation, the existing groundwater
elevation, the highest seasonally high groundwater elevation, the
methods of determining both the existing groundwater elevation
and the highest seasonally high groundwater elevation and by
whom these determinations were made. Proposed contours at one-
203. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 200-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-50
1:657
§ 200-51. Plat approval for minor subdivisions.
foot intervals shall be shown and shall include proposed grading
over the septic system area, if applicable. [Added 4-20-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-12]
(17) As-built lot grading plan. [Added 4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12]
(a) As a condition precedent to the issuance of certificates of
occupancy, pursuant to the State Uniform Construction Code,
an as-built lot grading plan prepared by a land surveyor
licensed in the State of New Jersey shall be submitted to the
Construction Official and to the Township Engineer, bearing a
certification that the lot grading complies with the proposed lot
grading plan as approved or as amended and approved by the
Township Engineer.
(b) The as-built plan shall be prepared with contours of one-foot
intervals and shall include the building footprint, finished first
floor elevation and ground elevations at all lot corners, all
building corners, vehicle entrance to a garage, drainage swale
inverts between adjacent interrupted landscape berms, the top
of the curb adjacent to property corners, the edge of Townshipowned
sidewalk adjacent to property corners and at the center
of the driveway, inlet grate elevations (private and Townshipowned)
and all high points on the lot. The invert and
surrounding ground elevation shall be shown for sanitary
sewer clean-outs and for sump pump discharge line clean-outs.
The plan shall also show the location of the septic system,
lateral inverts, D-box outlet inverts and septic tank lid
elevations, if applicable. All proposed ground elevations shown
on the approved proposed grading plan shall be included on
the as-built plan.
A. Distribution. If classified as a minor subdivision, one copy of the plat
shall be retained for the Planning Board file and one copy of the plat
shall be forwarded by the administrative officer to each of the following
for review and comment:
(1) The Township Planning Board.
(2) The Township Engineer.
(3) The Township Planner.
(4) The County Planning Board.
(5) The Township Health Officer.204
(6) The Township Construction Official.
204. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 200-50 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-51
1:658
(7) The Planning Board Attorney.
(8) The Township Environmental Commission and its consultant.
(9) Other agencies as may be determined by the Planning Board (e.g.,
Secretary of the School Board, Clerk of adjoining Township, New
Jersey Department of Transportation, D&R Canal Commission,
etc.).
(10) The West Windsor Affordable Housing Committee, if the
application includes low- and moderate-income units, or if the
zoning includes low- and moderate-income units.205
B. Action.
(1) The Planning Board shall act within 45 days of the filing date of a
complete application for a minor subdivision. The Board shall not
approve or conditionally approve the minor subdivision prior to
receipt of comments by the above agencies or officials or before 30
days from the filing date has elapsed without any comments,
whichever occurs first. Further, the Planning Board shall have the
right to approve or change the classification of the subdivision by a
majority vote.
(2) If approved, a notation to the effect shall be made on the plat, and it
shall be signed by the Planning Board Chair and the Planning
Board Secretary and returned to the subdivider within one week
following the meeting of the Planning Board at which official action
was taken.
(3) If rejected, the reasons for rejection shall be noted on all copies of
the application form, one of which shall be returned to the
applicant. The Planning Board may attach conditions of approval to
any minor subdivision.
C. Filing with county recording officer.
(1) If approved as a minor subdivision, a plat drawn in compliance with
Chapter 141 of the Laws of 1960206 or a deed stamped with the date
of the Planning Board approval shall be filed by the subdivider with
the county recording officer within 190 days from the date of
approval. Failure to file within 190 days shall void said subdivision
approval.
(2) The Planning Board may extend the one-hundred-ninety-day period
for filing a minor subdivision plat or deed if the developer proves to
the reasonable satisfaction of the Planning Board that the
developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
filing because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals
205. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
206. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 200-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-51
1:659
from other governmental or quasi-governmental entities and that
the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
required approvals. The length of the extension shall be equal to
the period of delay caused by the wait for the required approvals,
as determined by the Planning Board. The developer may apply for
the extension either before or after what would otherwise be the
expiration date.207
(3) The Planning Board shall grant an extension of minor subdivision
approval for a period determined by the Board, but not exceeding
one year from what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the
developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that
the developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining
legally required approvals from other governmental entities and
that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
required approvals. A developer shall apply for the extension
before what would otherwise be the expiration date of minor
subdivision approval or the 91st day after the developer receives
the last legally required approval from other governmental entities,
whichever occurs later. [Added 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
D. Limit of minor subdivision. No minor subdivision shall be approved by
the Planning Board if any minor subdivision has already been approved
since August 15, 1975. This limitation prohibits the further minor
subdivision of an original tract of land from which a minor subdivision
has been approved. It also prohibits the further minor subdivision of the
new lot created from such a minor subdivision.
E. Approved minor subdivisions; municipal distribution. Before the
construction official issues a building permit for the approved minor
subdivision, the applicant shall provide the administrative officer with a
certificate of filing from the County Clerk's office. The administrative
officer shall distribute copies of the approved subdivision to each of the
following: [Amended 10-25-1982 by Ord. No. 82-47]
(1) Township Engineer: two prints.
(2) Applicant: one print.
(3) Construction Official, for each lot and block file: one print.
(4) Tax Assessor: one print.
(5) County Planning Board: one print.
(6) Planning Board file: one print.
F. Effect of minor subdivision approval. The granting of minor subdivision
approval shall guarantee that the zoning requirements and general
207. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 200-51 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-51
1:660
§ 200-52. Sketch plat review for major subdivisions.
§ 200-53. Preliminary plat approval for major subdivisions.
terms and conditions, whether conditional or otherwise, upon which
minor subdivision approval was granted shall not be changed for a
period of two years after the date of minor subdivision approval,
provided that the approved minor subdivision shall have been duly
recorded as provided herein. Applicants shall be responsible for
necessary approvals prior to development as may be required by other
Township codes and ordinances.
A. Distribution. If classified as a major subdivision, one copy of the plat
shall be retained by the Township Planning Board and one copy of the
plat shall be forwarded by the administrative officer to each of the
following for review and comment:
(1) 208The Township Engineer.
(2) The Township Planner.
(3) The County Planning Board.
(4) The Township Environmental Commission and its consultant.
(5) The Township Health Officer. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-07]
(6) The Township Fire Protection Official.
(7) The Sewer Consultant/Advisory Committee.
(8) Other agencies as may be determined by the Planning Board (e.g.,
the Clerk of the adjoining Township, New Jersey Department of
Transportation, D&R Canal Commission, etc.)
(9) The West Windsor Affordable Housing Committee, if the application
includes low- and moderate-income units, or if the zoning includes
low- and moderate-income units. [Added 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-07]
B. Action. The Planning Board shall approve or disapprove the sketch plat,
setting forth reasons therefor, and, if approved, the applicant shall
proceed onto the preliminary plat approval stage as stipulated herein.
[Amended 7-30-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-20]
C. Effect of sketch plat approval for major subdivision. Sketch plat
approval shall be deemed to be approval by the Planning Board only of
the concept presented by the sketch plat. No vested rights shall accrue
as the result of sketch plat approval.
208. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(1), regarding the Township Site Plan Review Advisory
Board, was repealed 7-30-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-20.
§ 200-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-53
1:661
A. Objectives of submission. To transfer the general and approximate
ideas of the sketch plat more exactly to a precise base to verify their
feasibility and merit before proceeding with detailed construction and
engineering documents.
B. Application. Two or more copies of the preliminary plat, an application
in a form approved by the Planning Board and the requisite fee shall be
delivered to the administrative officer in accordance with the
procedures set forth herein.
C. Preliminary plat details. The preliminary plat, notwithstanding any
other requirement stipulated by this Part 2, shall be clearly and legibly
drawn or reproduced at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet
and shall contain or be accompanied by the following information,
except that the Planning Board may waive any requirement or request
additional information where it is clearly appropriate to the particular
application:
(1) A key map at a scale not smaller than one inch equals 1,000 feet,
showing the relation of the portion to be subdivided to the entire
tract and the relation of the entire tract to the neighborhood for at
1,000 feet beyond its boundaries.
(2) The tract name, tax map sheet, block and lot number, date,
reference meridian, graphic scale and the following names and
addresses:
(a) The name and address of the record owner or owners.
(b) The name and address of the subdivider and, if a partnership
or corporation, names of all individuals having more than 10%
ownership.
(c) The name and address of the person who prepared the plat.
(d) The names of adjacent and facing owners.
(3) A survey map, prepared by a licensed surveyor of New Jersey,
showing boundaries of the tract to be subdivided, with tract size to
the nearest 1/100 of an acre. [Amended 8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
89-35]
(4) Contours.
(a) Existing and proposed contours at five-foot intervals for slopes
averaging 10% or greater and at two-foot intervals for land of
lesser slope shall be required. Contours shall be in the United
States Coast and Geodetic Control Survey Datum. At least two
permanent bench marks for each 50 acres or portion thereof
shall be established on opposite ends of the proposed
subdivision, and their locations, descriptions and elevations
shall be noted on the preliminary plat. Existing contours shall
§ 200-53 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-53
1:662
be shown beyond the limits of the subject tract for a distance of
at least 200 feet. [Amended 4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12]
(b) For preliminary applications only the applicant may rely on
existing topographic information on file in the Township
Engineer's office, provided that there have been no major
changes in the site's topography and that, if requested by the
Township Engineer, specific portions of the site topography will
be updated, if required, at the applicant's expense, to approve
the project's stormwater control drainage plan. [Added
2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1]
(5) The location of existing and required setback lines, proposed
building footprints, streets within 200 feet of the subdivision; and
the location of existing and proposed buildings, watercourses,
floodplains, railroads, bridges, culverts, drainpipes, greenbelts and
all natural features, such as wooded areas and rock formations.
Also indicate all Township Master Plan proposals on-site and offtract
within 500 feet of the proposed subdivision. [Amended
8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 89-35; 10-16-1989 by Ord. No. 89-40;
4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12209]
(6) When a public sewage disposal system is not available, the current
rules, regulations and procedures of the Township shall be followed
in submission of sufficient percolation test and soil log data that
will enable the Health Officer to make a recommendation to the
Township Planning Board. An adverse report by the Health Officer
shall be deemed as sufficient grounds for the Planning Board to
disapprove said subdivision or portion thereof. The Planning Board
will not reconsider any subdivision or portion thereof so
disapproved until the requirements of the Health Officer are
met.210
(7) A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to
the land being subdivided shall be submitted with the preliminary
plat.
(8) Plans and profiles showing proposed utility layouts (sanitary
sewers, storm drains, water, gas, electric, detention basins, etc.)
showing feasible connections to existing or proposed utility
systems. Cross sections of streets may be required by the Township
Engineer. Locations of fire hydrants and street lights shall be
established with the aid of the Township Fire Protection Official
and the Township Engineer, respectively.
(9) The proposed names of all streets within the subdivision shall be
shown and shall be subject to approval by the Planning Board.
209. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
210. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 200-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-53
1:663
(10) Each block and lot shall be numbered in accordance with the
system of numbers, which will ultimately be the numbers shown on
the Township Tax Map.
(11) A drainage plan shall be submitted, which shall show the existing
contours and proposed contours, proposed finished grade
elevations at street intersections and breaks in grade, proposed
rates of grades of streets, locations of drainage sub-basin limits,
proposed method of block drainage, including proposed (down)
slope arrows and all drainage systems and structures, including
sizes and invert and casting elevations. The plan shall be
accompanied by a set of drainage computations certified by a
professional engineer. Where brook or stream channel
improvements are proposed or required, the plans for such
improvements shall be approved by the State Department of
Environmental Protection or the Mercer County Planning Board,
where applicable. [Amended 4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12]
(12) All proposed lot lines, dimensioned in feet and tenths, and the
approximate area of all lots in square feet, as well as any open
spaces proposed to be dedicated for public use.
(13) When the development of the subdivision or improvements within
the subdivision are contingent upon improvements outside the
boundaries of said subdivision, information shall be supplied by the
subdivider prior to Planning Board consideration for preliminary
approval that the improvements outside the subdivision shall be
installed and shall be available to the subdivider prior to the
issuance of any certificate of occupancy for the project or phase of
a project that is the subject of a development application.
[Amended 2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1]
(14) Any open space proposed to be dedicated for public use or
playgrounds or other public purpose and the location and use of all
such property shall be shown on the plat.
(15) When deemed necessary to determine the suitability of the soil to
support new construction, the Planning Board may require as a
condition of final approval test holes or borings to be made by a
New Jersey licensed engineer or an approved testing laboratory at
the expense of the subdivider under the direction of the Township
Engineer, prior to the commencement of construction. [Amended
2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1]
(16) A statement accompanying the preliminary plat indicating the type
of structure(s) to be erected and the approximate date of
construction start; a tentative section plan for the entire
subdivision indicating the estimated number of lots on which final
approval will be requested for the first section.
§ 200-53 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-53
1:664
(17) A full or partial environmental impact statement, as may be
required by the Planning Board at the time of preliminary plat
approval. Provide four completed copies of the Green Development
Practices Checklist, as outlined in Part 1, Article V, § 200-23, of this
chapter. [Amended 9-7-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-16]
(18) A soil survey map, prepared by a professional engineer, to indicate
the different types of soils that exist on the subject tract and within
200 feet of the extreme limits of the subject tract. This map shall be
in conformance with the soil survey of Mercer County, New Jersey,
published by the United States Department of Agriculture. Where
wetlands exist on or within 200 feet of the extreme limits of the
subject tract, as per N.J.A.C. 7:7A-1 et seq., the wetlands boundary
shall be superimposed on the soil survey map. [Added 8-21-1989
by Ord. No. 89-35]
(19) If wetlands exist, as per N.J.A.C. 7-1 et seq. or 7A-1 et seq.,
Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act rules are to be complied with
prior to submission of plans to the Township. An area of wetlands
shall be depicted on plans with surveyor's metes and bounds
information for the out-bounds of such areas. A letter of
interpretation issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Division of Coastal Resources, shall be
submitted, indicating the presence or absence of freshwater
wetlands on the parcel in question. [Added 8-21-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-35]
(20) A landscape plan, prepared by a certified or licensed landscape
architect, at a minimum scale of one inch equals 50 feet or larger,
illustrating the proposed site elements as they relate to existing
structures and site amenities, including existing woodlands,
isolated trees greater than five-inch caliper, existing topographic
contours and any and all other natural features; the intent, location
and type of all existing and proposed landscaping and buffering;
and the location, form, height and width of other landscape
architectural materials such as berms, fences, walls, site
furnishings, bridges and walks. [Added 8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
89-35]
(21) An aerial photograph with the site boundaries outlined to evaluate
the effects upon existing vegetation and surrounding land use.
[Added 8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 89-35]
(22) A traffic signage plan conforming to the requirements of § 200-91U
of Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures, of this chapter.
[Added 9-19-1988 by Ord. No. 88-26; amended 8-21-1989 by
Ord. No. 89-35]
(23) A letter of interpretation issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Division of Coastal Resources, shall be
submitted, indicating the presence or absence of freshwater
§ 200-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-53
1:665
wetlands on the parcel in question. [Added 4-20-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-12]
D. Preliminary plat review.
(1) Within 45 days of the submission to the administrative officer of a
complete subdivision plat application for 10 lots or less or within 95
days of submission of a complete application for a subdivision
application of more than 10 lots or within such further time as may
be agreed upon by the developer, the Planning Board shall act upon
the application.
(2) Submission of a major development subdivision application shall be
reviewed and acted upon by the Planning Board according to
§ 200-48, Expedited review; low/moderate-income developments,
herein. [Added 2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1]
(3) Distribution. Upon receipt of a complete application, the
administrative officer shall submit one copy to each member of the
Planning Board and one copy of the application to the following
professionals and boards: [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
99-07]
(a) The Township Engineer.
(b) The Township Planning Consultant.
(c) The Township Health Officer.
(d) The Township Environmental Consultant.
(e) The Township Forestry Committee.
(f) The Township Public Safety Officer.
(g) The Township Fire Marshal.
(h) The Township Local Fire Company.
(i) The Township First Aid Squad.
(j) The Township Traffic Engineering Consultant.
(k) The Township Landscape Architect.
(l) The Township Mayor.
(m) The Mercer County Planning Board and other agencies, where
applicable (e.g., New Jersey Department of Transportation, D
& R Canal Commission, the Clerk of the adjoining Township,
the Secretary of the School Board, etc.).
(n) Such other boards, agencies or professionals as the Planning
Board may deem necessary or which may be required to be
notified by law.
§ 200-53 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-53
1:666
(o) The West Windsor Affordable Housing Committee, if the
application includes low- and moderate-income units, or if the
zoning includes low- and moderate-income units.
(4) Review. The professionals and boards shall have a period of 30 days
after the filing date of a subdivision plat application of 10 or fewer
lots or 73 days on a subdivision plat application of more than 10
lots to make a report and recommendations concerning the
preliminary plat. The Planning Board shall take such
recommendations into account but shall have the right to proceed
in the absence of any such recommendation.
E. Preliminary plat hearing. All actions of the Planning Board on
preliminary subdivision plats shall be at a public hearing. Public notice
of an application as provided in § 200-76 of Part 3, Subdivision and Site
Plan Procedures, of this chapter, shall be required for all major
subdivision plats. Applicants for major subdivision plats requiring
variances by the Planning Board shall also be required to provide public
notice of application.
F. Preliminary plat action. After the conclusion of the hearing, but in no
event later than the first regular meeting following the hearing, the
Planning Board shall by resolution approve, disapprove or conditionally
approve the preliminary plat, stating the reasons for any disapproval.
G. Decisions of Planning Board. See § 200-77 of Part 3, Subdivision and
Site Plan Procedures, of this chapter, for decisions on subdivision plat
applications under varying procedural conditions.
H. Effect of preliminary approval. Preliminary approval of a subdivision
plat shall, except as provided in Subsection I herein, confer upon the
applicant the following rights for a three-year period from the date of
the preliminary approval.
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements, layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks, lot size, yard dimensions and on-site
and off-tract improvements and any requirements peculiar to the
specific subdivision plat. The Township may modify by ordinance
such general terms and conditions of preliminary approval as they
relate to public health and safety, provided that such modifications
are in accord with amendments adopted by ordinance subsequent
to approval.
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat.
I. Extension of preliminary approval.
§ 200-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-53
1:667
(1) The applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year but not to exceed a total extension of two years,
provided that if the design standards have been revised by
ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
(2) In the case of a subdivision plat for an area of 50 acres or more, the
Planning Board may grant the rights referred to above for such
period of time, longer than three years, as shall be determined by
the Planning Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration the
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under preliminary approval, economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development. The applicant may apply
for thereafter and the Planning Board may thereafter grant an
extension to preliminary approval for such additional period of time
as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable,
taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary approval,
the potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area of the section or sections awaiting final approval, economic
conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development,
provided that if the design standards have been revised, such
revised standards may govern.
(3) Any extension granted hereunder shall be conditioned upon
payment by the applicant of development fees at the rate
authorized by the West Windsor Township Code in effect at the time
the extension is granted. [Added 4-12-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-06]
J. Variances; Planning Board review in lieu of Board of Adjustment. The
Planning Board, when reviewing applications for subdivision plats, shall
have the power to grant to the same extent and subject to the same
restrictions as the Board of Adjustment variances from lot area, lot
dimensions, setback and yard requirements, provided that relief shall
not be granted for more than one lot.
K. Approved preliminary plat; municipal distribution.
(1) The administrative officer shall distribute copies of the approved
preliminary plat with construction plans to each of the following:
(a) Township Engineer: one print.
(b) Applicant: one print.
(c) Sanitary Sewer Consultant: one print.
(d) Planning Board file: one print.
(2) Further, one print of just the plat drawing shall be distributed to
the Health Officer and Environmental Commission.211
§ 200-53 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-54
1:668
§ 200-54. Final plat approval for major subdivisions.
A. Objectives of review. The final plat shall be reviewed to determine
whether the construction documents to be utilized in construction of
the project substantially conform with the approved preliminary plat
and to assure proper posting of performance and maintenance bonds.
B. Application. Two or more copies of the final plat, an application in a
form approved by the Planning Board and the requisite fee shall be
delivered to the administrative officer. The final plat shall be submitted
to the Planning Board for final approval within three years from the
date of preliminary plat approval or within such extension as provided
herein.
C. Final plat details. The final plat, notwithstanding any other
requirements stipulated by this Part 2 or other Township ordinances,
shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth, Mylar or equal at a scale of one
inch equals 100 feet, except where otherwise permitted by the Planning
Board and in compliance with all the provisions of Chapter 141 of the
Laws of 1960 (Map Filing Law).212 The final plat shall contain or be
accompanied by:
(1) Date, name and location of the subdivision, name of owner, graphic
scale and reference meridian.
(2) Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, land reserved or dedicated to
public use, all lot lines and other site lines, with accurate
dimensions, bearings or deflection angles and radii, arcs and
central angles of all curves.
(3) The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to
public use shall be designated, and the proposed use of sites other
than residential shall be noted.
(4) Each block and lot shall be numbered in accordance with the
system of numbers, which will ultimately be the numbers shown on
the Township Tax Map.
(5) Location of all monuments.
(6) Names of owners of adjoining unsubdivided land.
(7) Certification by a land surveyor licensed in the State of New Jersey
as to the accuracy of the details of the plat.
(8) Certification that the applicant is agent or owner of the land or that
the owner has given consent under an option agreement.
211. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
212. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 200-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-54
1:669
(9) When approval of a plat is required by any officer or body of such
municipality, county or state, approval shall be certified on the plat.
(10) Final construction plans and profiles showing proposed utility
layouts (sanitary sewers, storm drains, water, gas, electric,
detention basins, etc.) showing connections to existing or proposed
utility systems. Cross sections of streets may be required by the
Township Engineer.
(11) Final drainage plan.
(a) A final drainage plan shall accompany the final plat. Such
drainage plan shall show existing and proposed contours as
required in § 200-53C, Preliminary plat details, and shall show
the same information as required on the preliminary plat, with
the addition that the individual lot grading shall be shown as
follows: final grades shall be shown for each lot corner, all high
and low points and breaks in grade and at the corners of
tentative house locations and the center line of the driveway at
the right-of-way and center of the garage doors. If it is
intended to use drainage swales, the elevation of these swales
shall be shown. Easements are required for all cross lot
drainage where drainage from one lot crosses over a
downslope property either in swales or underground piping.
[Amended 8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 89-35; 4-20-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-12]
(b) All swales carrying cross-lot drainage shall be constructed in
easements that are to be provided for the purpose of cross-lot
drainage. The intent is to have all stormwater runoff drain to
the street or to drainage swales without crossing the property
of an adjacent lot unless there is an easement provided for that
purpose. [Added 4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12]
(12) A soil erosion control plan and narrative shall accompany the final
plat. Such soil erosion control plan shall show the same information
as required on the final drainage plan and soil erosion control
measures conforming with Article III, Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control, of Chapter 143 of the Code of the Township of West
Windsor. The soil erosion control plan and the final drainage plan
may be combined as one plan and shall be submitted to the Mercer
County Soil Conservation District for review and approval.
[Amended 4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12]
(13) Proposed grading plan.
(a) As a condition precedent to the application for a building
permit, a proposed grading plan for each individual lot shall be
submitted to the Township Engineer for review and approval.
This plan shall include the proposed building footprint, finished
first floor elevation and proposed ground elevations at the
§ 200-54 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-54
1:670
following locations: at all lot corners, all building corners and
at vehicle entrance to a garage. The plan shall also show
the proposed finished basement floor elevation, the existing
groundwater elevation, the highest seasonally high
groundwater elevation, the methods of determining both the
existing groundwater elevation and the highest seasonally high
groundwater elevation and by whom these determinations
were made. Proposed contours at one-foot intervals shall be
shown. Proposed grading over the septic system area, if
applicable, shall also be shown. [Amended 8-21-1989 by
Ord. No. 89-35; 4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12]
(b) If the proposed individual lot grading plan deviates from the
approved subdivision final drainage plan, then an amended
subdivision final drainage plan shall be submitted to the
Township Engineer for review and approval.
(14) A copy of the preliminary approval resolution, together with all
proposed additions, changes or departures therefrom, if applicable,
shall be submitted with the final plat application. [Added
8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 89-35]
(15) A landscape plan, prepared by a certified or licensed landscape
architect at a minimum scale of one inch equals 50 feet or larger,
illustrating the proposed site elements as they relate to existing
woodlands, isolated trees greater than five-inch caliper, existing
topographic contours and any and all existing and proposed
landscaping and buffering and the location, berm, height and width
of other landscape architectural materials such as berms, fences,
walls, site furnishings, bridges and walks. [Added 8-21-1989 by
Ord. No. 89-35]
(16) An aerial photograph with the site boundaries outlined to evaluate
the existing vegetation and surrounding land uses. [Added
8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 89-35]
(17) A traffic signage plan conforming to the requirements of § 200-91U
of Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures, of this chapter.
[Added 8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 89-35]
(18) As-built lot grading plan. [Added 4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12]
(a) As a condition precedent to the issuance of certificates of
occupancy, pursuant to the State Uniform Construction Code,
an as-built lot grading plan prepared by a land surveyor
licensed in the State of New Jersey shall be submitted to the
Construction Official and to the Township Engineer, bearing a
certification that the lot grading complies with the proposed lot
grading plan and the final drainage plan as approved or as
amended and approved by the Township Engineer.
§ 200-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-54
1:671
(b) The as-built plan shall be prepared with contours of one-foot
intervals and shall include the building footprint, finished first
floor elevation and ground elevations at all lot corners, all
building corners, vehicle entrance to a garage, drainage swale
inverts between adjacent interrupted landscape berms, top of
the curb adjacent to the property corners, edge of the
Township-owned sidewalk adjacent to property corners and at
the center of the driveway, inlet grate elevations (private and
Township-owned) and all high points on the lot. The invert and
surrounding ground elevation shall be shown for sanitary
sewer clean-outs and for sump pump discharge line clean-outs.
The plan shall also show the location of the septic system,
lateral inverts, D-box outlet inverts and septic tank lid
elevations, if applicable. All proposed ground elevations shown
on the approved proposed grading plan shall be included on
the as-built plan.
D. Final plat review.
(1) Within 45 days after the filing date of a complete final plat
application or within such further time as may be agreed upon by
the applicant, the Planning Board shall approve the application for
final plat approval with or without conditions, provided that the
following requirements are met:
(a) The detailed drawings and specifications meet all applicable
Township codes and ordinances.
(b) The final plats are substantially the same as the approved
preliminary plats.
(c) Bonds have been posted to ensure the installation of all
improvements.
(d) The applicant agrees, in writing, to all conditions of final
approval.
(e) Proof has been submitted that all taxes and assessments for
local improvements on the property have been paid.
(2) Distribution.
(a) Upon receipt of a complete application, the administrative
officer shall submit one copy to each of those professionals and
boards or agencies having received a copy of the preliminary
plat. [Amended 7-30-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-20]
(b) Submission of a major development subdivision application
shall be reviewed and acted upon by the Planning Board
according to § 200-48, Expedited review; low/moderate-income
developments, herein. [Added 2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1]
§ 200-54 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-54
1:672
(3) Review. The professionals and boards or agencies shall have a
period of 30 days after the filing date of the final plat to make a
report and recommendation concerning the final plat. The Planning
Board shall have the right to proceed in the absence of any such
recommendation.
E. (Reserved)213
F. Decision of Planning Board. As set forth in § 200-77 of Part 3,
Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures, of this chapter, for decisions on
subdivision applications under varying procedural conditions.
G. Effect of final approval. Final approval shall terminate the time period
of preliminary approval for the section granted final approval and shall
guarantee the applicant that the zoning requirements applicable to the
preliminary approval and all other rights conferred upon the applicant
as part of preliminary approval shall not be changed for a period of two
years after the date of final approval, provided that these rights shall
expire if the plat has not been duly recorded within the time prescribed
in Subsection J of this section.
H. Time limit for final approval and extensions. Final approval shall expire
two years from the date of final approval unless the applicant has
secured a building permit to commence construction. The Planning
Board may extend final approval and the protection offered under
Subsection G above for one year. Up to three such extensions may be
granted. Any extension granted hereunder shall be conditioned upon
payment by the applicant of development fees at the rate authorized by
the West Windsor Township Code in effect at the time the extension is
granted. In the case of a PRN or an open space or residential cluster of
50 acres or more or a conventional subdivision for 150 acres or more,
the Planning Board may extend the rights granted under final approval
for such period of time, longer than two years, as shall be determined
by the Planning Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration the
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under final approval, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness
of the development. The developer may apply for, thereafter, and the
Planning Board may thereafter grant an extension of final approval for
such additional period of time as shall be determined by the Planning
Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration the above factors.
[Amended 4-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-07]
I. County Planning Board approval. Any plat which requires County
Planning Board approval pursuant to N.J S.A. 40:27-6.2 shall be
forwarded to the County Planning Board for its action. The Planning
Board may grant final approval subject to approval by the County
Planning Board.
213. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, concerning final plat hearing, was repealed 10-7-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-25.
§ 200-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-54
1:673
J. Filing of approved final plat. The final plat shall be filed by the
subdivider with the county recording officer within 95 days from the
date of such approval. If any final plat is not filed within that period, the
approval shall expire. For good cause, the Planning Board may extend
the time for the filing of the plat for an additional period not to exceed
95 days. No plat shall be accepted for filing by the Clerk of the County
of Mercer unless it has been duly approved by the Township of West
Windsor Planning Board and signed by its Chair and Secretary.
K. Approved final plat; municipal distribution.
(1) Before the administrative officer returns any approved final plat to
the subdivider or the Construction Official issues a building permit
for the subdivision, the applicant shall provide the administrative
officer with a certificate of filing from the County Clerk's office.
(2) The administrative officer shall distribute copies of the approved
final plat as follows:
(a) Township Engineer: one polyester film and cloth print and one
paper print.
(b) Tax Assessor: one print of plat only.
(c) Construction Official: one print.
(d) Township Clerk: one print of plat only.
(e) Health Officer: one print.
(f) County Planning Board: one print.
(g) Planning Board file: one print.
L. Certificates showing approval.
(1) The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee or any other
person interested in any land which forms part of a subdivision or
which formed part of such a subdivision three years preceding the
effective date of this Part 2 may apply, in writing, to the
administrative officer of the municipality for the issuance of a
certificate certifying whether or not such subdivision has been
approved by the Planning Board. Such application shall contain a
diagram showing the location and dimension of the land to be
covered by the certificate and the name of the owner thereof.
(2) The administrative officer shall make and issue such certificate
within 15 days after the receipt of such written application and the
fees therefor. Said officer shall keep a duplicate copy of each
certificate, consecutively numbered, including a statement of the
fee charged, in a binder as a permanent record of his or her office.
Each such certificate shall be designated a "certificate as to
approval of subdivision of land," and shall certify:
§ 200-54 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-54
1:674
(a) Whether there exists in said municipality a duly established
Planning Board and whether there is an ordinance controlling
subdivision of land adopted under the authority of this Part 2.
(b) Whether the subdivision, as it relates to the land shown in said
application, has been approved by the Planning Board, and, if
so, the date of such approval and any extensions and terms
thereof, showing that the subdivision of which the lands are a
part is a validly existing subdivision.
(c) Whether such subdivision, if the same has not been approved,
is statutorily exempt from the requirement of approval as
provided in this Part 2.
(3) The administrative officer shall be entitled to receive for such
certificate issued by said administrative officer a fee as stipulated
in the Chapter 82, Fees.
§ 200-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-54
1:675

ARTICLE XII
Design Standards for Subdivisions
§ 200-55. General.
In passing on the adequacy of subdivision plans, the Planning Board shall
apply the standards contained in this article.
§ 200-56. Streets, sidewalks and alleys.
A. Street extensions. The arrangement of collector and arterial streets
shall be such as to provide for the extension of existing collectors and
arterials. Local streets shall not be made continuous or so aligned that
one subdivision adds unduly to the traffic generated by a local street in
another subdivision.
B. Classification of streets.
(1) In any major subdivision it shall be the duty of the Planning Board
to classify proposed streets according to their types. The Planning
Board, in making its decisions, shall refer to the Master Plan and
shall consider conditions within the subdivision and surrounding
area. Other design characteristics of streets are shown on the Table
of Street Dimensions in Subsection E below. Definitions of streets
as set forth in the Master Plan are as follows:
(a) Principal arterials: Any federal or state highway, street or road
intended to carry regional, large traffic volumes at steady
speeds through the Township. The right-of-way shall be as
established by jurisdictional agency of roadway.
(b) Major arterials: Any street intended to carry large volumes of
traffic at steady speed with minimum interruptions to traffic
flow, generally intended to carry traffic among various
neighborhoods in the Township to destinations outside the
Township and linking minor arterials and collectors to
principal arterials. The right-of-way shall be 80 feet, with
storage lanes for turning movements at key intersections.
(c) Minor arterials: Any street which is intended for
intermunicipal traffic and generally serves as a feeder road to
major arterials. The-right-of-way shall be 70 feet, with storage
lanes for turning movements at key intersections.
(d) Major collectors: Any street which is intended for
intermunicipal traffic and generally provides direct links to the
arterial road system of the Township The right-of-way shall be
60 to 70 feet, depending on traffic volume characteristics.
Generally, average daily traffic (ADT) existing and future of
2,000 to 5,000 would require a sixty-foot right-of-way, while
over 5,000 ADT would require the seventy-foot right-of-way.
§ 200-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-56
1:677
(e) Minor collectors: Any street which is intended to gather traffic
from a series of local streets and distribute it to major
collectors or minor arterials. The right-of-way shall be 60 feet.
(f) Minor or local streets: A street intended primarily for access to
individual properties and designed for local traffic having
either origins or destinations on the street. If it can serve
traffic having origins or destinations on the street, it shall be
considered a collector.
(2) Waiver of classification definitions. In those instances where a
proposed subdivision abuts an existing subdivision where existing
stub or cul-de-sac streets may be extended, the Planning Board
may deem such extended streets local in nature for purposes of
classification, provided that such extended street is likely to serve
traffic having either origins or destinations on the street.
C. Lots abutting arterial roads. In a subdivision abutting a principal, major
or minor arterial, one of the following shall be required:
(1) The frontage shall be reversed so that the lots contiguous to such
roadways will front on a minor collector or local street, with an
additional lot depth of 50 feet as an easement exclusively for
planting and screening to be provided by the developer along the
arterial street. [Amended 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 88-9]
(2) A marginal service road shall be provided along such arterial street
and shall be separated from it by a raised landscaped divider strip
at least 20 feet in width.
(3) Such other means of separating through and local traffic and of
providing a suitable buffer shall be provided as the Planning Board
may determine to be appropriate.
(4) The side yard of a lot abutting a designated arterial roadway shall
be increased by an additional width of 50 feet as an easement
exclusively for planting and screening, to be provided by the
developer along the arterial street. [Added 12-27-1988 by Ord.
No. 88-51]
D. Lots abutting major collector streets. No residential lot shall abut a
major collector street only. Access shall be provided by reverse frontage
on a minor collector, local street or by a marginal service road, but no
additional setback is required. An appropriate landscaped buffer shall
be provided on such reverse frontage lots along the collector street,
containing a combination of shrubs, trees, conifers or berms
conforming to a uniform landscape plan.
E. Table of Street Dimensions.214 Right-of-way widths, measured from lot
line to lot line, graded widths, paving widths and other items, shall be
214. Editor's Note: See also the Diagrams of Street Sections located at the end of this chapter.
§ 200-56 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-56
1:678
not less than shown on the appended table and diagrams, unless
otherwise indicated on the Master Plan or the Official Map, when
adopted. [Amended 7-26-1982 by Ord. No. 82-29; 9-20-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-12; 8-26-1993 by Ord. No. 93-23215]
Table of Street Dimensions
Minor or
Local
Residential4
Minor-Major
Collectors4
Minor-
Major3
Arterial
ROW (right-of-way) width 50 ft. 60 ft. to 70 ft. 70 ft. to 80 ft.
Paving widths 30 ft. 36 ft.6 36 ft. or 54 ft.
Curb radii at
intersections
30 ft. 35 ft. 40 ft.
Lengths of tangents
between reverse curves
0 ft. 200 ft. 300 ft.
Minimum radii to center
line on curves
180 ft.1 500 ft. 1,000 ft.
Straight line maximum at
center line
500 ft. 3,000 ft. 4,000 ft.
Acceleration/
deceleration lanes2
-- 200 ft. 350 ft.
Maximum center line
grades
10% 8% 6%
Minimum center line
grades
0.75% 0.75% 0.75%
Cul-de-sac ROW
diameter
116 ft.
Cul-de-sac paving
diameter (except for
36-foot diameter center
circle)
96 ft.
Minimum spacing of
intersections
See § 200-57
Super-elevation See Note 5
Radius
(feet)
Added Pavement Width
(symmetrically) (feet)
180+ 0
150 to 179 2
125 to 149 3
215. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 200-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-56
1:679
Radius
(feet)
Added Pavement Width
(symmetrically) (feet)
100 to 124 4
75 to 99 6
Minor/Local
(feet)
Minor Collectors
(feet)
ROW (right-of-way) N/A N/A
Paving widths 24, provided no
parking on street
30, provided no
parking on street
Curb radii at intersections 24 30
Length of tangents between
reverse curves
0 100
Minimum radii to center
line curves
125 500
Straight line maximum at
center line
250 2,000
NOTES:
1Where because of the shape of tracts to be subdivided or topography
it is not feasible to adhere to a minimum radius of 180 feet, the
minimum pavement must be widened as the radius decreases to
accommodate the widened path of a turning vehicle, as follows:
2Required at intersections and at all driveways to private property on
arterials.
3Or as determined by the jurisdictional agency of the roadway.
4Within planned developments, if private streets are proposed and are
to be maintained by a homeowners' association, then such streets
shall conform to the requirements of Table A, Table of Street
Dimensions, except as amended below, for minor/local and minor
collector streets only. [Added 2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1]
5Super-elevation shall be provided for all collector and arterial streets
on curved alignments as required by the Township Engineer. [Added
4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12]
6Paving width of 36 feet applies only if the board of jurisdiction waives
the median requirement set forth in § 200-97B of Part 3, Subdivision
and Site Plan Procedures, of this chapter, shall apply. [Added
8-26-1993 by Ord. No. 93-23]
F. Nonresidential streets. The widths of internal streets in business or
industrial development designed as a whole in accordance with a
§ 200-56 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-56
1:680
comprehensive site plan shall be determined by the Planning Board in
each case in the light of the circumstances of the particular situation
and with a view to assuring the maximum safety and convenience of
access for traffic and fire-fighting equipment, circulation and parking,
including provisions for the loading and unloading of goods.
G. Reserve strips. There shall be no reserved strips or areas for controlling
access to streets except where control and disposal of the land
comprising such strips or areas have been placed in the hands of the
Township under conditions approved by the Planning Board.216
H. Subdivisions on existing streets.
(1) When a subdivision abuts an existing street, it shall be widened (if
necessary) and improved to conform to this Part 2.
(2) If the subdivision is only a small part of a longer run of a
substandard street and such improvement would produce a
hazardous saw-tooth arrangement, the municipality, on the advice
of the Planning Board, may elect to receive a cash payment in lieu
of the improvements and to hold the same in a separate escrow
account until continuous improvement of the street can be
accomplished.
I. Curved minor streets. Curved minor streets are preferred to discourage
speed and monotony. The maximum straight line between points on the
center line shall not exceed that specified in the Table of Street
Dimensions in Subsection E above.217
J. Crown slope. The crown or minor streets shall not be less than six
inches in order to provide for proper surface drainage.
K. Cut and fill slopes. To prevent gulleying and erosion, street cuts and
streets on fill shall be provided with side slopes no steeper than one
vertical to three horizontal or shall be equipped with cribbing, loose
concrete blocks or other form of retaining wall. Such slopes, including
cribbing and blocks, shall be suitably planted with perennial grasses or
other vegetation in accordance with a plan approved by the Planning
Board and shall be suitably maintained for a period of three years.
[Amended 4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12]
L. Street names.
(1) Street names and subdivision names shall not duplicate or nearly
duplicate the names of existing streets or subdivisions in the
municipality or surrounding communities. The continuation of an
existing street shall have the same name.
216. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
217. Editor's Note: Original Section 21-5.10, Buffer areas, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 88-9.
§ 200-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-56
1:681
(2) Endings of proper street names should reflect street classification
and differing types of streets in a development. As a guide, the
following terminology is provided:
Street Function Appropriate Street Name
Arterials and major collectors Roads, Boulevards, Avenues
Minor collectors Drives, Ways
Cul-de-sac Lane, Court, Place, Circle
(3) The developer shall submit, in writing, on a form to be provided by
the Township Department of Community Development, a list of all
proposed street names for any new development. This list is to be
forwarded by the Township to the appropriate postmaster serving
the particular zip code for review and verification of nonconflicting
names within the zip code. The Township Engineer shall then make
final determination and recommendation for accepting new street
names and will so notify the Planning Board or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) and the developer of the Township Engineer's
decision. [Amended 5-18-1987 by Ord. No. 87-8218]
M. Alleys. The following shall apply to the design and location of alleys:
(1) Public alleys shall not be permitted in residential developments
except by permission of the Planning Board. Where public alleys
are permitted in residential developments, they shall be 20 feet
wide and paved for the full width.
(2) Alleys serving commercial and industrial establishments are
required unless other provisions for service are approved by the
Planning Board. Alleys serving such establishments shall have a
paved width of at least 24 feet. If it is impossible for an alley to go
through a block, the alley shall be provided with a standard cul-desac
turnaround at its closed end.
N. Cul-de-sac or dead-end turnarounds.
(1) Culs-de-sac or dead-end turnarounds of a permanent nature shall
provide a turnaround at the end with a right-of-way radius equal to
58 feet. Landscaped center islands measuring 36 feet in diameter
are required.
(2) The maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall be 600 feet to the turning
circle. This distance may be increased to 800 feet if an emergency
vehicular access and pedestrian walkway of at least 10 feet in
width is provided from the head of a cul-de-sac providing direct
access to the adjacent street. The length of a cul-de-sac may be in
excess of 600 feet if it serves no more than 20 dwelling units or
uses generating equivalent traffic.
218. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 200-56 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-56
1:682
§ 200-57. Street intersections.
(3) In planned developments, if a cul-de-sac is less than 600 feet in
length, then Subsection N(1) may be amended by the Planning
Board to require a right-of-way turnaround radius of 50 feet and a
landscaped center island measuring 26 feet in diameter. [Added
2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1]
(4) Where a cul-de-sac street design is proposed to be located within
an existing treed environment, the Planning Board may consider an
alternate lot design treatment whereby minimum lot width on the
cul-de-sac may be reduced to 1/2 the required lot width for a
standard frontage lot. Such lot width reduction shall result in a
shorter cul-de-sac length and, therefore, less destruction of the
existing treed environment in order to be favorably considered by
the Planning Board. [Added 12-27-1988 by Ord. No. 88-51]
A. Angle of intersections. No more than two streets shall cross the same
point. Street intersections shall be at right angles wherever possible,
and intersections of less than 60º (measured at the center line of
streets) shall not be permitted.
B. Spacing. Only one point of access and one point of egress may be
allowed each property except where large frontages 1,000 feet or
larger are present. In those latter cases, streets shall not enter the
same side of major collector or minor arterial streets at intervals less
than 800 feet, major arterial streets at intervals of less than 1,200 feet
or principal arterials at intervals of less than 2,000 feet. Streets which
enter a minor or major/minor collector street from opposite sides shall
either be directly opposite to each other or they shall be separated by at
least 200 feet between their center lines, measured along the center
line of the intersected street.
C. Approaches. Approaches of any collector street to any intersection with
another collector or an arterial street shall follow a straight line course
within 100 feet of the intersection.
D. Extra widths. Where a nonresidential collector street or a collector/
arterial street serving more than 100 residential lots or dwelling units
intersects with another collector or arterial, both the right-of-way and
the pavement shall be widened by 24 feet for a distance of 200 feet back
from the intersection of the right-of-way lines. (See diagram.)219
E. Sight triangles. In addition to right-of-way widths required for the full
length of streets and wider intersections as specified above, sight
triangles shall be dedicated as follows: The area bounded by the rightof-
way lines and a straight line connecting sight points on street center
219. Editor's Note: The Extra Width and Sight Triangle Diagram is located at the end of this
chapter.
§ 200-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-57
1:683
§ 200-58. Curbs. [Amended 2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 93-01]
§ 200-59. Culverts.
lines which are the following distances from the intersection of the
center lines:
(1) Where a local street intersects another local street, 90 feet.
(2) Where a local street intersects a collector street or minor arterial,
90 feet on the local and 200 feet on the collector or minor arterial.
(3) Where a local, collector or minor arterial intersects a major or
principal arterial street, 90 feet back on the local, collector or
minor arterial streets and 300 feet back on the major or principal
arterial street.
F. Sight triangle prohibited obstructions. No fences or any other
obstruction nor any planting exceeding 30 inches in height as measured
on a horizontal from the center line of the road may be placed in any
sight triangle.
G. Property access. Unless necessary to provide access to a lot in separate
ownership existing before the date of this Part 2, no driveway access to
a property or additional street intersection may be permitted within the
extra widths or sight triangles, as specified herein.
H. Street and neighborhood or directional signs.
(1) Street signs shall have reflectorized white letters on a green
background. Letters shall be four inches high, except those
marking collector or primary streets, which shall be six inches
high. Signs shall be placed in accordance with the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition.
(2) At the discretion of the Planning Board, similar neighborhood or
directional signs with letters eight inches high may be permitted or
required.
A. Vertical (straight-face) curbs shall be required. Curb cuts, mountable
curbs or romps shall be provided wherever sidewalks cross streets to
accommodate wheelchairs and bicycles in accordance with New Jersey
Barrier Free Design Criteria and the Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990.
B. Built-up ramps shall not encroach into loading/unloading zones,
parking spaces or vehicular traffic lanes. Transitions from ramps to
walks, gutters or streets shall be flush and free of abrupt changes.
Detectable warnings on ramps shall extend the full width and depth of
the ramp to assist the visually impaired in negotiating the change in
slope.
§ 200-57 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-59
1:684
§ 200-60. Sidewalks.
§ 200-61. Lots.
A. All culverts constructed within public rights-of-way shall be owned by
Mercer County. All culvert designs shall be reviewed and approved by
the Mercer County Engineer as a condition of preliminary approval.
[Amended 4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12]
B. Culverts shall have headwalls and railings, where necessary, placed on
right-of-way lines, unless the stream flow is judged minor by the
Planning Board and the Township Engineer. In this case, at the option of
the developer, pipes may be extended no less than 25 feet beyond the
right-of-way line, and a single headwall may be built to grade on the
upstream side without a rolling. Because of traffic hazard, intruding
curbs and abutments near the paving lines are forbidden.
A. Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all streets and shall consist
of portland cement and concrete unless otherwise approved by the
Planning Board at the time of the preliminary hearing. All sidewalks
shall be in compliance with the requirements of the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990 regarding walkways and curbs. [Amended
4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12; 2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 93-01]
B. Sidewalks, paths in planned developments or higher density residential
developments.
(1) In developments served by common open space, sidewalks to such
space are required in easements or rights-of-way independent of
vehicular rights-of-way.
(2) Paths or sidewalks at least four feet wide, preferably independent
of vehicular rights-of-way, connecting individual buildings with offstreet
parking and refuse disposal areas shall be provided. Larger
widths may be required if such paths or sidewalks are an integral
part of a larger common path system or are intended to
accommodate bicycle traffic as well. The Planning Board shall be
guided by § 200-36C(3)(c)[3] of Part 1 of this chapter in those
instances where bicycle and pedestrian combined path systems are
proposed.
(3) Paths or sidewalks, preferably independent of vehicular rights-ofway,
connecting groups of buildings with activity centers or
differing use facilities shall be provided.
A. Lot size. Minimum lot size shall be governed by the provisions of Part 4,
Zoning, of this chapter, based on the zoning district in which the lot is
located.
B. Lot and house numbers. House and lot numbers shall be assigned each
lot by the Township Engineer.
§ 200-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-61
1:685
§ 200-62. Structure location and driveway.
§ 200-63. Easements.
C. Side lot lines. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right
angles to straight streets and radial to curved streets.
D. Lot frontage and width. Each lot shall front on an approved street
accepted by the municipality. Frontage shall be measured along a
straight line between points where side lines meet street lines, e.g., the
chord of a circle in a cul-de-sac.
E. Lot line on widened streets. Where extra width is provided for the
widening of existing streets, lot measurements shall begin at such extra
width line, and all setbacks shall be measured from such line unless
otherwise provided by Part 4, Zoning, of this chapter.
F. Unsuitable lots. All lots shall be suitable for the purpose for which they
are intended to be used. In order to prevent the use of lots which are
not suitable because of adverse topography, rock formations, flood
conditions, the presence of wetlands or similar circumstances, the
Planning Board may require such revisions in the layout of the
subdivisions as will accomplish one of the following: [Amended
4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12]
(1) That the area of the unsuitable lots is included in other lots by
increasing the size of the remaining lots.
(2) That it is included in an area to be deeded to the municipality and
held in its natural state for conservation and/or recreation
purposes.
(3) That some other suitable arrangement, such as common ownership
made permanent by deed covenants running with the land, is
made.220
A. All lots shall be such that a structure conforming to the intended use
and setback requirements of Part 4, Zoning, of this chapter, can be
constructed in an area of the lot that is in conformity with the provisions
of Part 4, Zoning, or Part 6, Flood Damage and Prevention, of this
chapter.
B. Any structure must be accessible by means of a driveway that complies
with the provisions of Article VI, § 200-29, of Part 1 of this chapter.
Driveways shall be so laid out that it is possible to turn all vehicles on
the lot and that it is not necessary to back any vehicle into a street.
A. Utility installation easements. Easements for utility installations may be
required. Easements for sanitary sewer lines shall be constructed in
220. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, Flag lots, as amended, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-20.
§ 200-61 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-63
1:686
such a manner so that all manholes have permanent, unrestricted
access for highway-type trucks for the purpose of maintaining said
sewer lines. Said easements shall be at least 20 feet in width or wider
if necessary, of which an area of 12 feet in width by 12 inches in depth
shall consist of quarry process with filter fabric with sufficient space for
vehicles to turn around located at least every 1,200 feet. Such easement
area may be seeded as long as the formation and the same is not
diminished. [Amended 9-13-1982 by Ord. No. 82-40]
B. Utility/landscape planting easements; adjacent streets. Based on field
conditions where existing utility placement containing overhead wires
would interfere with future street tree plantings' canopy growth, then
the Planning Board, upon recommendation of the Township Engineer
and Township Landscape Architect, may require an additional five feet
for a landscape planting easement to be located outside the public
right-of-way and utility easement in a manner compatible with an
overall street tree planting plan. [Added 4-12-1990 by Ord. No.
93-10]
C. Drainage and conservation easements. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-07]
(1) If the property on which a proposed subdivision is to be located is
traversed by a watercourse of any kind, including a channel or a
stream, the Planning Board may require that a stormwater and
drainage easement and right-of-way along said watercourse be
provided by the subdivider. The land which is the subject of such
easement and right-of-way shall be a strip, which conforms
substantially to the floodplain of such watercourse along both sides
of the watercourse or extends along both sides of the top of the
bank of the watercourse to a width of 15 feet in each direction or is
not less than an encroachment line established by a competent
higher authority, whichever is the greater; except, however, that if
the location of such watercourse is at or near the boundary of the
subdivision, the dimension of the easement and right-of-way shall
be modified to retain it within the confines of the subdivision. Said
easement and right-of-way shall include provisions assuring the
following: preservation of the channel of the watercourse;
prohibition of alteration of the contour, topography or composition
of the land within the easement and right-of-way; prohibition of
construction within the boundaries of the easement and right-ofway
which will obstruct or interfere with the natural flow of the
watercourse; and reservation to the Department of Public Works of
a right of entry for the purposes of maintaining the natural flow or
drainage of the watercourse, of maintaining any and all structures
related to the exercise of the easement and right-of-way and of
installing and maintaining storm or sanitary sewer systems or other
public utility and the right to add additional utility lines when
needed.
§ 200-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-63
1:687
§ 200-64. Preservation of natural or man-made assets.
Wherever possible, subdividers shall preserve trees, groves, waterways,
scenic points, historic spots and other community assets and landmarks.
§ 200-65. Sewers.
§ 200-66. (Reserved)221
§ 200-67. Design standards for single-family houses. [Added
8-29-1994 by Ord. No. 94-32]
(2) Drainage easements provided for the purpose of carrying overland
flow or for underground storm drain piping shall include provisions
assuring the following: preservation of the drainage swale or piping
system contained within the easement, prohibition of construction
within the boundaries of the easement and reservation to the
Department of Public Works of a right of entry for the purposes of
maintaining any and all structures related to the exercise of the
easement. [Added 4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12]
A. Dry sewers shall be required in all developments, whether or not such
sewers can be put to immediate use, provided that the development is
in a state approved sanitary sewer service area. [Amended 8-4-1986
by Ord. No. 86-19]
B. In the case of all major/minor subdivisions or site plans where sewer
lines which will pass in front of existing lots are to be installed, the
developer, as a condition of approval, shall provide: [Added 7-26-1982
by Ord. No. 82-38]
(1) To vacant property: a wye.
(2) To improved property: a lateral to the existing curbline (including
clean out). These laterals shall be provided in accordance with
Township details and shall be installed at locations approved by the
Township Engineer.
A. Legislative findings and purposes. Uniformity in the exterior design and
appearance of dwellings erected in the same residential neighborhoods
tends to adversely affect the desirability of the immediate and
neighboring areas for residential purposes and impairs existing
residential property in such areas, tends to impair the value of both
improved and unimproved real property in such areas and tends to
deprive the municipality of tax revenue and destroys a proper balance
between the taxable value of real property in such areas and the cost of
municipal services provided therefor. It is the purpose of this section to
prevent these and other harmful effects of uniformity in design and
221. Editor's Note: Former § 200-66, Reduced design standards for R-1 Residential
developments, as amended, was repealed 3-8-1999 by Ord. No. 99-04.
§ 200-63 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-67
1:688
appearance of dwellings erected in any housing development in the
same residential neighborhood and thus to promote and protect the
general welfare of the community.
B. Required minimum distance between dwellings substantially similar in
external appearance. Not more than one construction permit shall be
issued for any particular single-family detached dwelling unit in any
new housing development consisting of two or more detached dwellings
when the houses are substantially alike in exterior design and
appearance, unless such similar houses either are separated by a
distance of at least 200 feet or are situated on individual lots which are
themselves separated at all points by a distance of at least 100 feet. In
addition, the lots of houses which are substantially alike in exterior
design and appearance shall not be next to each other or across the
street from each other in whole or in part.
C. Criteria for determining whether dwellings are substantially similar in
external appearance. Houses described in the above Subsection B shall
be considered uniform in exterior design and appearance if they have
any one of the following characteristics:
(1) The same basic dimensions and floor plans are used without
substantial differentiation of one or more exterior elevations.
(2) The height and design of the roofs are without substantial change
in design and appearance.
(3) The size and type of windows and doors in the front elevation are
without substantial differentiation.
D. Number of house designs required. In addition to the foregoing, there
shall be not less than one basic house design and two different exterior
elevations in every housing development consisting of eight or fewer
houses, not fewer than two basic house designs and four different
exterior elevations in every housing development consisting of nine to
15 houses, not fewer than three basic house designs and six different
exterior elevations in every housing development consisting of 16 to 50
houses, not fewer than four basic house designs and seven different
exterior elevations in every housing development consisting of 51 to 77
houses and not fewer than four basic designs and eight different
elevations in every housing development consisting of 78 or more
houses.
E. Type and model of house; building elevations and floor plans.
(1) No construction permit shall hereafter be issued for more than one
dwelling unit in any housing development until the builder shall
post or cause to be posted on each specified lot on the map of the
subdivision on file with the Construction Official the type and
model of each house for which a construction permit has been or is
being issued.
§ 200-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-67
1:689
(2) Building elevations and floor plans for each required house design
must be submitted for review by the Department of Community
Development at final subdivision. Appeals therefrom may be made
to the Planning Board. Where an applicant has no immediate plans
for construction, these building elevations and floor plans must be
submitted for review by the Department of Community
Development prior to issuance of a building permit. [Amended
4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
§ 200-67 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-67
1:690
ARTICLE XIII
Administration
§ 200-68. Enforcement and penalties. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-07]
This Part 2 shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer or any proper officer
of the Township. Requirements for enforcement and penalties for
noncompliance shall be as set forth in Part 4, Zoning, of this chapter.
§ 200-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-68
1:691

Part 3
[Adopted 1S2u-b2d7i-v1i9si7o9n AAsnCdh S. iXteX PIVla On fP Trhoece Rdeuvriessed General
Ordinances]
ARTICLE XIV
Title, Purpose and Approving Authority
§ 200-69. Title.
This Part 3 shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision and Site
Plan Procedures Ordinance of West Windsor Township."
§ 200-70. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 3 shall be to provide definitions, rules,
administrative procedures, regulations and standards which would be
applicable to both site plan and subdivision applications.
§ 200-71. Approving authority.
A. Planning Board. The provisions of this Part 3 shall be administered by
the Planning Board of the Township of West Windsor, except as set forth
in Subsection B of this section.
B. Zoning Board of Adjustment. The provisions of this Part 3 shall be
administered by the Zoning Board of Adjustment in applications before
the Zoning Board of Adjustment involving variances provided for in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d on which subdivision and/or site plan approval
would be required. For such applications, any reference in this Part 3 to
the Planning Board shall be considered to refer to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, where applicable.
§ 200-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-71
1:693

ARTICLE XV
Terminology
§ 200-72. Definitions.222
Certain words and phrases used in this Part 3 are defined as noted in
§ 200-4 of this chapter.
222. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 200-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-72
1:695

ARTICLE XVI
General Provisions
§ 200-73. General intent.
The various rules and regulations contained herein are meant to enable
processing of various development applications in accordance with
procedures and objectives as established in Municipal Land Use Law
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
§ 200-74. Reservation of public areas.
A. If the Master Plan or the Official Map provides for the reservation of
designated streets, public drainageways, flood control basins or public
areas within the proposed development, before approving a subdivision
or site plan, the Planning Board may further require that such streets,
ways, basins or areas be shown on the plat in locations and sizes
suitable to their intended uses. The Planning Board may reserve the
location and extent of such streets, ways, basins or areas shown on the
plat for a period of one year after the approval of the final plat or within
such further time as may be agreed to by the developer. Unless during
such period or extension thereof the Township shall have entered into a
contract to purchase or institute condemnation proceedings according
to law for the fee or a lesser interest in the land comprising such
streets, ways, basins or areas, the developer shall not be bound by such
reservations shown on the plat and may proceed to use such land for
private use in accordance with applicable development regulations. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to the streets and roads, flood
control basins or public drainageways necessitated by the land
development and required for final approval.
B. The developer shall be entitled to just compensation for actual loss
found to be caused by such temporary reservation and deprivation of
use, provided that such request shall be made to the Township Council
within 10 days of final approval. In such instances, unless a lesser
amount has previously been mutually agreed upon, just compensation
shall be deemed to be the fair market value of an option to purchase the
land reserved for the period of reservation, provided that determination
of such fair market value shall include, but not be limited to,
consideration of the real property taxes apportioned to the land
reserved and prorated for the period of reservation. The developer shall
be compensated for the reasonable increased cost of legal, engineering
or other professional services incurred in connection with obtaining
subdivision or site plan approval caused by the reservation. Payment for
one-year compensation shall be based upon the applicant requesting of
the Township Council no greater than 5% of the current assessed value
of the land so reserved. Requests for greater compensation shall
require referral to the Township Assessor, who shall make a
recommendation to the Mayor.223
§ 200-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-75
1:697
§ 200-75. Simultaneous review.
The Planning Board shall have the power to review and approve or deny
conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with review for subdivision
approval without the developer being required to make further application
to the Planning Board or the Planning Board being required to hold further
hearings. The longest time period for action by the Planning Board, whether
it be for subdivision, conditional use or site plan approval, shall apply.
Whenever approval of a conditional use is requested by the applicant
pursuant to this section, notice of the hearing on the plat or site plan shall
include reference to the request for such conditional use.
§ 200-76. Hearings and notices. [Amended 7-27-1987 by Ord. No.
87-23]
§ 200-77. Decisions on applications for development.
A. When required. Hearings shall be required as part of approval for all
applications for development.
B. Maps and documents and exhibits on file. A complete set of maps,
documents and exhibits shall be on file at the office of the Planning
Board at least 10 days prior to the date of the noticed hearing.
C. Public notice of application. [Amended 4-12-1993 by Ord. No.
93-10; 12-23-1996 by Ord. No. 96-24]
(1) When required. Proof of public notice shall be required for all
applications for development and sign waiver applications.
(2) Contents of notice; to whom required and how served. Notice
requirements for hearings, contents of such notices, to whom
required and how served shall be in accordance with such
requirements as stipulated in Article XXXII of Part 4, Zoning, of this
chapter.
D. Transcript of hearings. If an applicant desires a court reporter, the cost
of taking testimony and transcribing it and providing a copy of the
transcript to the Township shall be at the expense of the applicant, who
shall arrange for the reporter's attendance.
A. Decisions to be in writing and contain findings and conclusions. Each
decision of the Planning Board on any application for development shall
be in writing and shall include findings of fact and conclusions based
thereon.
B. County Planning Board approval. Whenever review or approval of any
application by the County Planning Board is required, the Planning
Board shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of
223. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 200-75 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-77
1:698
a favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board or
upon County Planning Board approval by default for failure to report
thereon within the required time period.
C. Developments barred by administrative or judicial order. In the event
that a developer submits an application for development proposing a
development that is barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, by a
legal action instituted by any state agency, political subdivision or court
of competent jurisdiction to protect the public health and welfare, the
Planning Board shall process such application for development in
accordance with this Part 3, and if such application complies with the
requirements of this Part 3, the Planning Board shall approve such
application conditioned on removal of such legal barrier to
development.
D. Approval by other governmental agencies. In the event that
development proposed by an application for development requires an
approval by a governmental agency other than the Planning Board, the
Planning Board shall, in appropriate instances, condition its approval
upon the subsequent approval of such governmental agency.224
E. Decisions to be furnished to applicant and others. A copy of each
decision shall be mailed by the Planning Board within 10 days after the
date of decision to the applicant or, if represented then to the
applicant's attorney, without separate charge, and to all others upon
request for a fee as noted in Chapter 82, Fees.
F. Filing in office of administrative officer. A copy of each decision shall
also be filed by the Planning Board in the office of the administrative
officer, who shall make a copy of the filed decision available to any
interested party for a fee as noted in the Chapter 82, Fees, and
available for public inspection at the administrative officer's office
during reasonable hours.
G. Publication. A brief notice of each decision shall be published by the
administrative officer, and the Township may make a reasonable charge
for such publication. The applicant, also, may cause such publication to
be made if the applicant so desires. The time for appeal from the
decision shall run from the first publication, whether made by the
administrative officer or the applicant.
H. Time for decision on applications to Planning Board for preliminary
approval of site plans and major subdivisions. Preliminary approval
shall be granted or denied on applications to the Planning Board for a
site plan of 10 acres or less or for a major subdivision of 10 or fewer lots
within 45 days and for a site plan of more than 10 acres or for a major
subdivision of more than 10 lots within 95 days, after the date of
submission of a complete application to the administrative officer,
except as otherwise provided in Subsections J through N of this section.
224. Editor's Note: Original Section 24-3.4.5, which immediately followed this subsection, was
deleted 12-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-41.
§ 200-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-77
1:699
I. Time for decision on applications to Planning Board for minor
subdivision approval and final approval of site plans and major
subdivisions. Final approval of site plans and major subdivisions and
approval of minor subdivisions shall be granted or denied on
applications to the Planning Board within 45 days after the date of
submission of a complete application to the administrative officer,
except as otherwise provided in Subsections J through N of this section.
J. Time for decision when Planning Board reviews conditional uses or site
plans simultaneously with subdivisions. Whenever the Planning Board
reviews conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with subdivisions,
the longer or longest period of time for action in any such case shall
apply to all such cases.
K. Time for decision when Planning Board reviews applications for
subdivision, site plan or conditional use approval that includes request
for variance. Whenever an application to the Planning Board for
approval of a subdivision plat, site plan or conditional use includes a
request for a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60, the Planning
Board shall grant or deny approval of the application within 120 days
after the date of submission of a complete application to the
administrative officer. In the event that the developer elects to submit
separate consecutive applications, the aforesaid provision shall apply to
the application for approval of the variance or direction for issuance of
a permit. The period for granting or denying and subsequent approval
shall be as otherwise provided in this act. [Amended 8-13-1984 by
Ord. No. 84-24]
L. Time for decision when Planning Board reviews application for
conditional use that includes request for site plan approval. Whenever
the Planning Board reviews an application for conditional use that
includes a request for site plan approval, the Planning Board shall grant
or deny approval of the application within 95 days after the date of
submission of a complete application to the administrative officer.
M. Time for decision when Board of Adjustment reviews subdivision, site
plan or conditional use in conjunction with use variance. Whenever an
application is made to the Board of Adjustment for subdivision, site plan
or conditional use approval in conjunction with the Board's review of a
use variance, the Board of Adjustment shall grant or deny approval of
the application within 120 days after the date of submission of a
complete application to the administrative officer.
N. Extension of time for decision. Any time period for action by the
Planning Board may be extended with the consent of the applicant or
appellant.
O. Failure to make decision within time. The failure of the Planning Board
to act within such time period or extension thereof shall constitute a
decision favorable to the applicant or appellant. A certificate of the
administrative officer as to such failure shall be issued on request of the
§ 200-77 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-77
1:700
§ 200-78. Supplemental review requirements for planned
residential neighborhood (PRN) developments and planned
developments.
applicant or appellant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of written
endorsement or other evidence of approval required by this Part 3 and
shall be accepted as such by the County Clerk for purposes of filing
subdivision plats.
A. General.
(1) Planned residential neighborhood (PRN) and planned development
applications, upon receipt of favorable findings for a planned
development by the Planning Board as stipulated in Part 4, Zoning,
of this chapter, shall be reviewed, where applicable, in accordance
with the subdivision or site plan procedures and design regulations
as they may apply to the application.
(2) For all planned residential neighborhood and planned development
applications, any bylaws describing the rights and obligations of
homeowners and tenants in the development shall include design
criteria and regulations governing the architectural appearance,
materials, location, typical dimensions and maximum size of
structures, finishes and construction details for accessory decks,
patios and fences, where applicable, and shall be approved by the
Planning Board as part of the development application. [Added
4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 93-10]
B. Common open space.
(1) The final plan for a development containing common open space
shall delineate and dimension such open space and shall designate
the name of the person responsible for the maintenance thereof.
The documents creating responsibility for such maintenance shall
be approved by the Planning Board and filed with the Township Tax
Assessor and the Mercer County Clerk.
(2) In a planned development to be developed in one phase, all
proposed improvements of the common open space, as indicated on
the approved final plan, including recreational facilities, buildings
and landscaping, shall be completed before more than 25% of the
certificates of occupancy of dwelling units or square feet of
nonresidential structures will be granted by the Township.
(3) For planned developments staged over time into different phases,
all proposed improvements of the common open space within a
phase of the development as indicated on the approved preliminary
plan shall be at a minimum 80% completed, with performance
bonds posted for the remaining 20% of common open space
improvements and at least 25% of the certificates of occupancy of
dwelling units or square feet of nonresidential structures in a phase
§ 200-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-78
1:701
shall be issued, prior to the Planning Board granting final approval
to a succeeding phase of development. The Planning Board shall
determine the extent of common open space completion based
on a field inspection report prepared by the Township Engineer
indicating percentages of quantities of work completed as
measured against proposed improvements shown on the final plan
of each section.
C. Obligation of successive owners in planned developments.
(1) In the event of any conveyance or transfer of any property within a
planned development, the Planning Board shall be given notice of
such intended conveyance or transfer prior to any actual
transference thereof. Such notice shall be accompanied by the
following information:
(a) A precise description of the interest being transferred.
(b) The obligations to be assumed by the transferee.
(c) A copy of any agreement entered into between the transferor
and the transferee.
(d) An agreement that the transferee agrees to be bound by all of
the applicable provisions of prior Planning Board approvals.
(e) Such other information as may be required by the Planning
Board.
(2) The Planning Board, following receipt of such notice and
supporting information, shall consider the effect of the proposed
conveyance or transfer on the completion and implementation of
any terms, conditions and obligations imposed pursuant to the
approvals granted by the Planning Board and may require such
additional assurances as it shall deem necessary to protect the
public interest and the integrity of the approved planned
development plan.
(3) The terms, conditions and obligations of any Planning Board
approvals shall be binding on the original developer, their
successors and assigns, provided that no obligation, term or
condition may be assigned without the prior written consent of the
Planning Board.
D. Additional documentation in support of preliminary and/or final
approvals. The Planning Board may require additional documentation
and study by the applicant in support of a planned development
application for preliminary or final approval. Such documentation may
be based on earlier data submitted by the applicant in order to gain
favorable findings of approval as required by Part 4, Zoning, of this
chapter, updated as appropriate for the development application. The
§ 200-78 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-78
1:702
§ 200-79. Application by corporation or partnership.
Board may require, but shall not be limited to, one or all of the
following:
(1) In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, information indicating that the
terms and conditions intended to protect the interests of the public
and of the residents, occupants and owners of the proposed
development in the total completion of the development are
adequate.
(2) For the particular stage for which approval is sought, information
that indicates the stage is substantially self-functioning and selfsustaining
with regard to access, utility services, parking, common
open space, all amenities and other similar physical features and
shall be capable of occupancy, operation and maintenance upon
completion of construction and development.
(3) That each stage for which approval is sought is properly related to
every other segment of the planned development and to the
community as a whole and to all necessary community services
which are available or which may be needed to serve the planned
development in the future.
(4) That adequate protection is provided to ensure the proper
disposition of each stage for which approval is sought through the
use of maintenance and performance guaranties, covenants and
other formal agreements.
(5) That the applicant demonstrate through a market feasibility study
and other possible study techniques the demand for the principal
proposed uses within each stage for which approval is sought, the
probable rental prices or sales costs for such facilities and other
relevant market data.
(6) That the applicant provide a cost benefit analysis or other similar
study to review the relative estimated municipal costs, services and
ratables which might be anticipated for the stage of development
for which approval is sought.
(7) That the applicant provide a circulation study indicating the effect
of the planned development on its surrounding areas, including
estimates of total automotive trips generated, peak hour demand,
present anticipated traffic volumes, existing street capacities and
other elements which may influence and be influenced by the
proposed planned development.
A. A corporation or partnership applying to the Planning Board or the
Board of Adjustment for permission to subdivide a parcel of land into six
or more lots or for approval of a site to be used for commercial purposes
shall list the names and addresses of all stockholders or individual
§ 200-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-79
1:703
§ 200-80. Sales map. [Added 11-30-1987 by Ord. No. 87-45]
partners owning at least 10% of its stock of any class or at least 10% of
the interest in the partnership, as the case may be.
B. Disclosure of 10% ownership interest of corporation or partnership
which is 10% of applying corporation or partnership. If a corporation or
partnership owns 10% or more of the stock of a corporation or 10% or
greater interest in a partnership, subject to disclosure pursuant to
Subsection A, that corporation or partnership shall list the names and
addresses of its stockholders holding 10% or more of its stock or of 10%
or greater interest in the partnership, as the case may be, and this
requirement shall be followed by every corporate stockholder or
partner in a partnership, until the names and addresses of the
noncorporate stockholders and individual partners, exceeding the 10%
ownership criterion established in this Part 3, have been listed.
C. Disapproval of application. The Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or
governing body shall not approve the application of any corporation or
partnership which does not comply with Subsections A and B of this
section.
D. Penalty. Any corporation or partnership which conceals the names of
the stockholders owning 10% or more of its stock or of the individual
partners owning a 10% or greater interest in the partnership, as the
case may be, shall be subject to a fine of $1,000 to $10,000, which shall
be recovered in the name of the municipality in any court of record in
the State in a summary manner pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement
Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq.).
A. Display of sales map. Except for minor site plan and minor subdivision,
a developer who has obtained final approval shall maintain a sales office
upon the issuance of the first construction permit and display therein in
a prominent fashion the officially approved preliminary plat and the
final plat and in addition thereto a sales map which may be observed
and reviewed by any and all persons calling at such office.
B. Basis of sales map. The sales map shall be based upon the final plat as
well as official tax map information at a scale of not more than 100 feet
to the inch. The map shall show the development plan and all land
contiguous thereto for a distance of 2,000 feet within or without the
Township.
C. Provisions. The sales map shall clearly show and include for that area
within 2,000 feet of the development the following information:
(1) The location of connector streets to the proposed street(s) within
the development.
(2) The location of all state, county and municipal roads, both in
existence and/or proposed by any governmental agency having
jurisdiction to establish such roads. If any such roads are evidenced
§ 200-79 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-80
1:704
§ 200-81. Conditional approvals. [Added 12-27-1988 by Ord. No.
88-57]
upon the Township Master Plan or Mercer County Master Plan or
State Transportation Master Plan, the same shall be indicated upon
the sales map.
(3) The location of all railroads, rights-of-way, airports, heliports and
airport runways, overhead easements for transmission of power or
otherwise, rights-of-way for public utilities and location of public
utility plans.
(4) The location of all sanitary landfill operations which are in
existence, proposed or which have been closed.
(5) The location of all existing and proposed in accordance with the
Master Plan schools, parks, playgrounds, open space and public
buildings.
(6) The location of all streams, ponds, floodplains, stormwater
facilities, greenbelts and watercourses.
D. Waiver of restrictions with notation. All zoning restrictions or
improvements applicable to the development shall be shown with
notation as to which restrictions have been waived, relaxed or varied by
a Township agency.
E. Zoning district classification. All contiguous property to the tract shall
have prominently displayed thereon the zoning district classification,
whether such property is within or without the Township, as well as any
Township restrictions on construction of accessory structures.
F. Property taxes displayed. There shall be displayed upon said sales map
a reasonable estimate of the amount of property taxes to be levied upon
the proposed property to be sold in the upcoming year.
G. Distribution of sales map. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy by the Township or the conveyance of a lot (improved or
unimproved) by the developer, the developer shall file with the
Construction Official of the Township an acknowledgment executed by
the contract purchasers that states that said purchasers acknowledge
receipt of a sales map and a plain-language statement clearly
explaining such sales map, which must set forth verbatim the provisions
of Subsection C herein at the time of contract between the developer
and purchaser(s) as defined in this section. [Added 10-30-1989 by
Ord. No. 89-31]
A. Conditions precedent. Whenever any application for development is
approved subject to specified conditions, intended to be fulfilled before
the approval becomes effective, said conditional approval shall lapse
and become null and void unless all specified conditions are fulfilled
within 190 days of the date of conditional approval.
§ 200-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-81
1:705
§ 200-81.1. Electronic submission of documents. [Added 6-3-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-15]
B. The fulfillment of all conditions precedent shall be reported, in writing,
to the municipal agency, which may cause such reports to be verified in
an appropriate manner. Only upon fulfillment of all conditions shall any
subdivision map or site plan be signed or any required building permit,
occupancy permit or zoning permit be issued.
C. Conditions subsequent. Whenever any application for development is
approved subject to conditions which by their terms are incapable of
being fulfilled or are not required to be fulfilled prior to the final
approval of the application, the performance of which are not
guaranteed by bonds or securities of any type, failure to fulfill any such
conditions within six months from the date of the resolution
memorializing final approval of the application for development shall be
grounds for the issuance of a stop-work order by the enforcing official
and the withholding of any zoning permit, certificate of occupancy or
any other approval until such condition or conditions are fulfilled.
D. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as preventing the
municipal agency from specifying a longer period of time within which
any specific condition must be fulfilled or from granting, upon an ex
parte application, an extension of time for good cause shown.
E. The fulfillment of all conditions shall be reported, in writing, to the
municipal agency, which may cause such reports to be verified in an
appropriate manner. Only upon fulfillment of all conditions shall any
subdivision map or site plan be signed or any required building permit,
occupancy permit, zoning permit or other required approval be issued.
A. The following documents shall be submitted electronically and by hard
copy:
(1) Approved site plans and subdivision plats being submitted for
signature by Planning Board officials.
(2) As-builts upon project completion but in any event prior to release
of bonds.
B. All electronic submissions shall be formatted using AutoCAD for plans
and, for text, using either MS Word or Adobe Acrobat Portable
Document Format (PDF).
§ 200-81 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-81.1
1:706
ARTICLE XVII
Improvement Guaranties
§ 200-82. Guaranties required; surety; release. [Amended
11-16-1981 by Ord. No. 81-35; 8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 82-34;
5-14-1984 by Ord. No. 84-15; 6-9-1986 by Ord. No. 86-10;
10-27-1986 by Ord. No. 86-27; 10-1-1990 by Ord. No. 90-24;
2-24-1992 by Ord. No. 92-02; 11-30-1992 by Ord. No. 92-33;
3-8-1999 by Ord. No. 99-02; 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07;
10-29-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-26]
A. For the purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance of on-tract
improvements and buffer landscaping, as a condition of all final site
plan, subdivision, and/or zoning permit approvals, the Board of
jurisdiction and/or Zoning Officer shall require, as appropriate, and the
Township Council shall accept, in accordance with the standards
adopted hereinafter:
(1) Performance guarantee. The furnishing of a performance
guarantee by the developer in favor of the Township in an amount
not to exceed 120% of the cost of improvements required by an
approval or developer's agreement, ordinance, or regulation to be
dedicated to a public entity, and that have not yet been installed.
The performance guarantee shall also include, within an approved
development, privately-owned perimeter buffer landscaping, as
required by local ordinance or imposed as a condition of approval.
At the developer's option, the value of the privately-owned
perimeter buffer landscaping improvements may be posted as a
separate performance guarantee.
(2) Method of calculation. The cost of improvements shall be
determined by the Township Engineer, based on an itemized cost
estimate prepared by the developer for the review and approval of
the Township Engineer, according to the method of calculation set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4, for the following improvements as
shown on the approved plans or plat: streets, pavement, gutters,
curbs, sidewalks, street lighting, street trees, surveyor's
monuments, as shown on the final map and required by "the map
filing law," P.L. 1960, c.141 (N.J.A.C. 46:23-9.9 et seq.; repealed by
section 2 of P.L. 2011, c.217) or N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 through
46:26B-8, sanitary sewers, community septic systems, drainage
structures, public improvements of open space, the privatelyowned
perimeter buffer landscaping and any grading necessitated
by the preceding improvements. The developer shall prepare an
itemized cost estimate of the improvements covered by the
performance guarantee for the review and approval of the
Township Engineer, which itemized cost estimate shall be
appended to each performance guarantee posted by the developer.
(3) Performance guarantees shall be approved by the Township
Attorney as to form, sufficiency and execution. The developer shall
§ 200-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-82
1:707
execute any agreement(s) with the Township required by the
Township Attorney confirming the conditions set forth herein prior
to the Township's acceptance of said performance guarantee. A
letter of credit shall be an acceptable form of performance
guarantee, if approved by the Township Council, and only under the
following conditions:
(a) It is irrevocable for an initial period of at least one year with
automatic one-year renewals, unless the bank notifies the
Township, in writing, at least 90 days before the initial date of
expiration or each anniversary of such date that it will not be
renewed.
(b) If the letter of credit is not renewed:
[1] The Township shall have the right to immediately draw a
draft on sight if the developer's performance is not
satisfactory as of that date, or to draw a draft 30 days after
receipt of said notice if after notification by the
municipality that the letter of credit will not be renewed
the developer fails to submit a satisfactory replacement
performance guarantee.
[2] The developer agrees to immediately cease and desist all
such work upon receipt of notification from the
municipality that the letter of credit will not be renewed,
and until such time as a satisfactory replacement
performance guaranty is submitted.
(4) Maintenance guarantee. As a condition precedent to the release of
a performance guarantee, the developer shall furnish a
maintenance guarantee in favor of the Township in an amount not
to exceed 15% of the cost of the improvements which are being
released, in addition to the following private site improvements:
stormwater management basins, in-flow and water quality
structures within the stormwater management system, and the outflow
pipes and structures of the stormwater management system, if
any. Costs shall be determined by the Township Engineer according
to the method of calculation set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4 based
on an itemized cost estimate prepared by the developer for the
review and approval of the Township Engineer, for any and all
bondable items as permitted therein. The term of the maintenance
guarantee shall be for a period not to exceed two years, and shall
automatically expire at the end of the established term.
B. Temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee. In the event that the
developer shall seek a temporary certificate of occupancy for a
development, unit, lot, building, or phase of development, as a
condition of the issuance thereof, the developer shall furnish in favor of
the Township a temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee, in the
amount of 120% of the cost of installing improvements which: remain to
§ 200-82 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-82
1:708
be completed or installed under the terms of the temporary certificate
of occupancy; are required to be completed or installed as a precedent
to the issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy; and are not
covered by an existing performance guarantee.
(1) Upon the posting of a temporary certificate of occupancy
guarantee, all sums posted under a performance guarantee which
relate to the improvements or items which remain to be completed
or installed shall be released, so that a developer shall not be
required to post more than one guarantee or bond of any type with
respect to the same line item for the same unit, lot, building, or
phase.
(2) Method of calculation. The scope and amount of such a guarantee
will be determined by the Township Engineer, based on a
preliminary itemized cost estimate prepared by the developer for
those items to be included in the temporary certificate of
occupancy guarantee. The request for a temporary certificate of
occupancy by the developer is to indicate those items which the
developer believes to be eligible for release from the existing
performance guarantee, if any.
(3) The temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee shall be released
upon the issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy as to
those improvements to which it relates.
C. Safety and stabilization guarantee. The developer shall furnish a safety
and stabilization guarantee in favor of the Township to return the
property to a safe and stable condition, or to otherwise implement
measures to protect the public from access to an unsafe or unstable
condition.
(1) A safety and stabilization guarantee shall be available to the
Township only in the circumstance that:
(a) Site disturbance has commenced and, thereafter, all work on
the development has ceased for a period of at least 60
consecutive days following such commencement for reasons
other than force majeure; and
(b) Work has not recommenced within 30 days following the
provision of a written notice by the Township to the developer
of the Township's intent to claim payment under the guarantee.
(c) The Township shall provide the written notice to a developer by
certified mail or other form of delivery providing evidence of
receipt. The Township shall not provide written notice of its
intent to claim payment under this guarantee until the
aforementioned sixty-day period has elapsed.
(2) Method of calculation. The amount of such a guarantee shall be
$5,000 where the overall bonded improvements are $100,000 or
§ 200-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-82
1:709
less. Where the overall bonded improvements are $100,000 or
more, then the Township Engineer shall calculate the bond amount
as follows: $5,000 for the first $100,000 of bonded improvement
costs, plus 2.5% of bonded improvement costs in excess of
$100,000 up to $1,000,000, plus 1% of bonded improvement costs
in excess of $1,000,000.
(3) At the developer's option the safety and stabilization guarantee can
be furnished as a line item in the performance guarantee in lieu of a
separate guarantee.
(4) The Township shall release the safety and stabilization guarantee
upon the Township Engineer's determination that the development
of the project site has reached a point that the improvements
installed are adequate to avoid any potential threat to public safety.
D. Other governmental agencies. In the event that other governmental
agencies or public utilities will automatically own the utilities to be
installed or the improvements are covered by a performance or
maintenance guarantee to another governmental agency, no
performance or maintenance guarantee, as the case may be, shall be
required by the Township for such utilities or improvements.
E. The developer shall construct and install the improvements no more
than three years from the date of the recording of the subdivision plat
or deed, if a subdivision is involved, or complete execution of the
performance guarantee agreement with the Township, whichever is
earlier. The time allowed for installation of the bonded improvements
for which the performance guarantee has been provided may be
extended by the Township Council, by resolution upon recommendation
of the Township Engineer. As a condition or as part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guarantee shall be increased
or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the
cost of the installation, which cost shall be determined by the Township
Engineer according to the method of calculation set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.4, based on an itemized cost estimate prepared by the
developer for the review and approval of the Township Engineer, as of
the time of the request of passage of the resolution of extension.
F. Failure to perform; municipal completion. If the required improvements
are not completed or corrected in accordance with the performance
guarantee, the developer and surety, if any, shall be liable thereon to
the Township for the reasonable cost of the improvements not
completed or corrected, and the Township may, either prior to or after
the receipt of the proceeds thereof, complete such improvements. Such
completion or correction of improvements shall be subject to the public
bidding requirements of the Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A.
40A:11-1, et seq.
G. Conformance with municipal standards. All improvements shall be in
accordance with the design standards of the Township Code or as
§ 200-82 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-82
1:710
authorized by a design exception granted by the reviewing board, and
shall be subject to inspection and approval by the Township Engineer.
H. Release or reduction of performance guarantee.
(1) Upon substantial completion of all required improvements, the
developer may request of the governing body, in writing, by
certified mail addressed in care of the Township Clerk, that the
Township Engineer prepare, in accordance with the itemized cost
estimate prepared by the Township Engineer and appended to the
performance guarantee pursuant to this chapter, a list of all
uncompleted or unsatisfactorily completed improvements. If such a
request is made, the developer shall send a copy of the request to
the Township Engineer and, where applicable, to the homeowners'
association and each member of its Board of Directors, by certified
mail. The request shall indicate which improvements have been
completed and which improvements remain uncompleted in the
judgment of the developer. Thereupon the Township Engineer shall
inspect all improvements covered by the developer's request and
shall file a detailed list and report, in writing, with the Township
Council, and shall simultaneously send a copy thereof to the
developer not later than 45 days after receipt of the developer's
request.
(2) The list prepared by the Township Engineer shall state, in detail
with respect to each improvement determined to be incomplete or
unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the incompleteness of each
incomplete improvement or the nature and extent of, and remedy
for, the unsatisfactory state of each completed improvement
determined to be unsatisfactory. The report prepared by the
Township Engineer shall identify each improvement determined to
be complete and satisfactory together with a recommendation as to
the amount of reduction to be made in the performance guarantee
relating to the completed and satisfactory improvement, in
accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the
Township Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee
pursuant to this Chapter.
(3) The Township Council, by resolution, shall either approve the
improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by the
Township Engineer, or reject any or all of these improvements upon
the establishment in the resolution of cause for rejection, and shall
approve and authorize the amount of reduction or release to be
made in the performance guarantee relating to the improvements
accepted, in accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared
by the Township Engineer and appended to the performance
guarantee pursuant to this chapter. This resolution shall be
adopted not later than 45 days after receipt of the list and report
prepared by the Township Engineer. Upon adoption of the
resolution by the Township Council, the developer shall be released
from all liability pursuant to its performance guarantee, with
§ 200-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-82
1:711
respect to those accepted improvements, except for that portion
sufficient to secure completion or correction of the improvements
not yet approved; provided that 30% of the amount of the
performance guarantee posted and safety and stabilization
guarantee posted, as applicable, may be retained to ensure
completion and acceptability of all improvements.
(4) For the purpose of releasing the developer from liability pursuant
to its performance guarantee, the amount of the performance
guarantee attributable to each approved bonded improvement
shall be reduced by the total amount for each such improvement, in
accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the
Township Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee
pursuant to Subsection A of this section, including any contingency
factor applied to the cost of installation. If the sum of the approved
bonded improvements would exceed 70% of the total amount of the
performance guarantee, then the municipality may retain 30% of
the amount of the total performance guarantee and safety and
stabilization guarantee to ensure completion and acceptability of
bonded improvements, as provided above, except that any amount
of the performance guarantee attributable to bonded
improvements for which a temporary certificate of occupancy
guarantee has been posted shall be released from the performance
guarantee, even if such release would reduce the amount held by
the municipality below 30%.
(5) If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the
Township shall require the developer to complete or correct such
improvements, and, upon completion or correction, the same
procedure of notification, as set forth in this chapter, shall be
followed.
(6) Any partial reduction granted in the performance guarantee
pursuant to this Chapter shall be applied to the cash deposit in the
same proportion as the original cash deposit bears to the full
amount of the performance guarantee. The Township shall retain
the entire value of any remaining safety and stabilization guarantee
as cash.
(7) Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
developer to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the
governing body or the Township Engineer.
I. Inspection fees. The developer shall reimburse the Township for all
reasonably anticipated inspection fees paid to the Township Engineer
for the inspection of improvements, as provided in Chapter 82, Fees,
provided that the developer shall deposit with the Township all or a
portion of the reasonably anticipated inspection fees to be paid to the
Township Engineer for such inspection as outlined therein.
§ 200-82 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-82
1:712
§ 200-82.1. Successor developer guarantee. [Added 10-29-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-26]
J. Phasing in sections. In the event that final approval is by stages or
sections of development pursuant to Subsection a. of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-38, the provisions of this section shall be applied by stage or
section.
K. Dedication and acceptance. To the extent that any of the improvements
have been dedicated to the Township on the subdivision plat, site plan
and/or zoning permit, the Township shall be deemed, upon the release
of any performance guarantee required hereunder, to accept dedication
for public use any improvements made thereunder, provided that such
improvements have been inspected and have received final approval by
the Township Engineer. Similarly, maintenance responsibility shall
remain with the developer, to be governed by any conditions of final
approval of a development application, until the final release of any
performance guarantee required hereunder.
A. If the property that is the subject of the approval and/or permit is sold
or otherwise conveyed to a successor developer prior to the completion
and acceptance of all improvements, an assignment of developer's
agreement and replacement guarantee(s) as required by this chapter
shall be required from the successor developer. As a condition
precedent to the release of a permit update under the State Uniform
Construction Code, for the purpose of updating the name and address
of the owner of property on a construction permit, and all other changes
to information previously submitted to the Township Division of Code
Enforcement, an assignment of developer's agreement and
replacement guarantee(s) and associated agreement as required by this
chapter, shall be required from the successor developer and accepted
by Township Council.
B. Within 30 days of its acceptance of an assignment of developer's
agreement and replacement guarantee(s) and associated agreement as
required by this chapter, the Township Council, by resolution, shall
release the predecessor developer from liability pursuant to its
guarantee.
§ 200-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-82.1
1:713

ARTICLE XVIII
Off-Tract Improvements
§ 200-83. Off-tract water, sewerage and drainage improvements
required. [Amended 7-22-1996 by Ord. No. 96-13]
As a condition of final subdivision or site plan approval, the board of
jurisdiction shall require an applicant to pay its pro rata share of the
cost of providing reasonable and necessary water, sewerage and drainage
facilities, and easements therefor, located outside the property limits of the
development but necessitated or required by construction or improvements
within such development. The proportionate or pro rata amount of the cost
of such facilities that shall be borne by each developer or owner shall be
based on the criteria established herein.
§ 200-84. Water, sewerage and drainage improvements to be
constructed at the sole expense of the developer. [Amended
7-22-1996 by Ord. No. 96-13]
In cases where the reasonable and necessary need for an off-tract water,
sewerage or drainage improvement or improvements is necessitated or
required by the proposed development application and where no other
property owners receive a special benefit thereby, the applicant may be
required, as a condition of approval, at the applicant's sole expense, to
provide for and construct such improvements as if such were an on-tract
improvement, in the manner provided hereafter and otherwise provided by
law.
§ 200-85. Other water, sewerage and drainage improvements.
[Amended 8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 82-36; 9-24-1984 by Ord. No. 84-29;
7-22-1996 by Ord. No. 96-13]
In cases where the need for any off-tract water, sewerage or drainage
improvement is necessitated by the proposed development application and
where it is determined that properties outside of the development will also
be benefited by the improvement, the following criteria shall be utilized
in determining the proportionate share of such improvements to the
developer.
A. Sanitary sewers. Distribution facilities, including the installation,
relocation or replacement of collector, trunk and interceptor sewers,
and the installation, relocation or replacement of other appurtenances
associated therewith. The applicant's proportionate share shall be
computed as follows:
(1) The capacity and the design of the sanitary sewer system shall be
based on all applicable New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection regulations and all West Windsor Township Sewer
Design Standards, including infiltration standards, and all other
Township stormwater drainage standards.
§ 200-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-85
1:715
(2) The capacity of the existing system to service the entire improved
drainage area shall be computed as follows:
(a) If the system is able to carry the total developed drainage
basin, no improvement or enlargement cost will be assigned to
the developer.
(b) If the existing system does not have adequate capacity for the
total developed drainage basin, the prorated enlargement or
improvement share shall be computed as follows:
Total enlargement or improved
cost
= Total tributary gpd
Developer's cost Development gpd
(c) If it is necessary to construct a new system in order to service
the proposed development, the prorated enlargement share to
the developer shall be computed as follows:
Total project cost = Total tributary gpd to new
system
Developer's cost Development tributary gpd
(3) The plans for the improved system or extended system shall be
prepared by the developer's engineer. All work shall be calculated
by the developer and subject to the approval of the Township
Engineer.
B. Drainage improvements. For stormwater and drainage improvements,
including the installation, relocation or replacement of storm drains,
culverts, catch basins, manholes, rip-rap or improved drainage ditches
and appurtenances thereto and relocation or replacement of other
storm drainage facilities or appurtenances associated therewith, the
applicant's proportionate share shall be determined as follows:
(1) The capacity and the design of the drainage system to
accommodate stormwater runoff shall be based on a method
described in Urban Hydrology for Small Watershed Technical
Release 55, Soil Conservation Service USDA, January 1975, as
amended, or a successor method, computed by the developer's
engineer and subject to the approval of the Township Engineer.
(2) The capacity of the enlarged, extended or improved system
required for the subdivision or site plan and areas outside of the
developer's tributary to the drainage system shall be determined by
the developer's engineer, subject to approval of the Township
Engineer. The plans for the improved system shall be prepared by
the developer's engineer and the estimated cost of the enlarged
system calculated by the Township Engineer. The prorated share
for the proposed improvement shall be computed as follows:
§ 200-85 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-85
1:716
§ 200-86. Escrow accounts. [Amended 7-22-1996 by Ord. No. 96-13]
Where the proposed off-tract water, sewerage or drainage improvement
is to be undertaken at some future date, the moneys required for the
improvement shall be deposited to the credit of the Township in a separate
account until such time as the improvement is constructed. If the offtract
improvement is not begun within 10 years of deposit, all moneys and
interest shall be returned to the applicant.
§ 200-87. Computation of pro rata share. [Amended 7-22-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-13]
In any case in which an applicant shall not provide the approving authority
with the estimates of a consulting engineer with regard to estimated
improvement costs and all other information necessary to proportion costs,
the approving authority may rely on the estimates of the Township Engineer
and/or planner in order to prorate costs.
§ 200-88. Off-tract street improvements. [Added 9-24-1984 by Ord.
No. 84-29; 8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 89-33; 12-16-1991 by Ord. No.
91-36; 7-22-1996 by Ord. No. 96-13]
Total enlargement or improvement
cost
of drainage facilities
= Total tributary cfs
Developer's cost Development cfs
A. Assessment for required off-tract street improvements. As a condition
of final subdivision and site plan approval, the board of jurisdiction shall
require an applicant to pay its pro rata share of the cost of providing
reasonable and necessary street improvements located outside the
property limits of the development but necessitated or required by
construction or improvements within such development. Such
improvements may be to municipal and county streets and roads and to
intersections of such streets and roads with state highways. Street
improvements shall include, but not be limited to, street widening,
alignment, channelization of intersections, construction of barriers,
new or improved traffic signalization, signs, curbs, street drainage,
sidewalks, trees, utility improvements uncovered elsewhere, the
construction or reconstruction of new or existing streets and other
associated street or traffic improvements.
B. Manner of calculating pro rata share. Except as otherwise provided in
Subsections C and D of this section, each applicant's pro rata share
shall be calculated by use of the following formula for each street
improvement shown on the Timed Growth Control Staging Sub-Plan
Element to the Land Use Plan of West Windsor Township and scheduled
to be built within 10 years from the date of final approval or, for
developments to be built in phases which the board of jurisdiction
§ 200-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-88
1:717
determines should be treated as separate developments for purposes
hereof, 10 years from the date site work for each phase begins:
Pro ratashare = Applicant's projected
p.m.
peak hour traffic using
improvement at end of
ten-year period
X Cost of improvement
Total additional
projected p.m. peak hour
traffic using
improvement at end of
ten-year period
(1) The ten-year period shall begin on the date final approval is
granted, except that, for developments proposed to be built in
phases, the developer's pro rata share shall be calculated
separately for each phase for which the board of jurisdiction in the
approval designates as warranting separate treatment because of
the length of time of the phasing schedule and other pertinent
factors and, in such case, the ten-year time period shall be treated
as beginning on the date site work for each such phase commences.
(2) Total additional projected p.m. peak hour traffic shall be calculated
on the basis of traffic from all projected development in the
Township and projected additional traffic passing through the
Township from the beginning to the end of the ten-year period. In
each case, the projected traffic shall be that traffic projected to use
the road link or intersection to be improved.
(3) Traffic projections for both the applicant's development and for
total future traffic growth shall be made by the Township's traffic
consultant, using the most current I.T.E. trip generation manual
and such other guidelines and factors as he or she deems
appropriate. The applicant may provide estimates for the
development's traffic generation, which the Township's traffic
consultant may use, at his or her option, for the calculation. The
Township's traffic consultant's trip generation estimate shall be
presumed to be correct.
(4) A separate pro rata calculation shall be done for each street
improvement shown on the Timed Growth Control Staging Subplan
Element to the Land Use Plan of West Windsor Township
scheduled to be made during the ten-year calculation period.
(5) The cost of each improvement shall be calculated by the Township
Engineer on the basis of the cost estimates set forth in the Timed
Growth Control Staging Sub-plan Element to the Land Use Plan of
West Windsor Township and of such further calculations, using
§ 200-88 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-88
1:718
generally accepted construction cost estimators and such other
sources as are useful, as he or she deems appropriate.
(6) The cost of each improvement shall be reduced by the amount
attributable to making a partial improvement necessary to improve
existing conditions so that the intersection or road link, as the case
may be, operates at Level of Service D or better.
C. Pro rata share for special projects. Each applicant's pro rata share of
the Meadow Road overpass and of the realigned Alexander Road
Amtrak bridge, set forth in more detail in the Timed Growth Control
Staging Sub-plan Element to the Land Use Plan of West Windsor
Township and treated as special projects herein, shall be calculated by
use of the following formula:
Applicant's projected
p.m. peak hour traffic
using special project
at
scheduled project
completion date
X Cost of special project
Pro rata
share =
Total additional
projected p.m. peak
hour traffic using
special project at
scheduled special
project completion
date
(1) Total additional projected p.m. peak hour traffic shall be calculated
on the basis of traffic from all actual and projected development in
the Township and from actual and projected traffic passing through
the Township from the date of adoption of this Part 3 to the date of
scheduled completion of the special project. The date of scheduled
completion shall be treated as the last day of the last year of the
subprogram set forth in the Timed Growth Staging Sub-plan
Element of the Land Use Plan of West Windsor Township of which
the special project is a part. In each case, the projected traffic shall
be that traffic projected to use the Meadow Road overpass
(including the entire interchange complex with Route 1) or Amtrak
bridge, as the case may be.
(2) Traffic projections and costing of improvements shall be made in
the manner set forth in Subsections B(3) and B(5) of this section.
§ 200-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-88
1:719
(3) A separate pro rata calculation shall be made for the Meadow Road
overpass and Amtrak bridge, whether or not such improvement has
been made as of the time of final approval or, in the case of a
development being built in phases designated for separate
treatment by the board of jurisdiction, the date site work for a
phase commences.
(4) Pro rata share for projects utilizing timed growth ordinance
provisions authorizing development at earlier time than otherwise
permitted.225
(a) Each applicant's pro rata share for a development which the
applicant has chosen to develop at an earlier date than
permitted by Part 4, Zoning, Article XXVIII, Timed Growth
Controls, § 200-157 et seq., by utilizing the exemption for
affordable housing projects set forth in § 200-158, an
exemption set forth in § 200-162, a right to accelerate the
exercise of additional rights set forth in section § 200-160 or
the option to choose an alternative basic rights level set forth
in § 200-164 shall be calculated by use of the formula and
standards set forth in Subsection B of this section. In addition,
each applicant for such development shall pay in accordance
with the following formula its pro rata share for each street
improvement shown on the Timed Growth Control Staging
Sub-Plan Element to the Land Use Plan of West Windsor
Township located within the timed growth district within which
the development is located, but not scheduled to be
constructed within the ten-year period set forth in Subsection
B of this section.
225. Editor's Note: This Subsection C(4) includes references to former Art. XXVIII, Timed
Growth Controls, and/or sections formerly included in that article. Said timed growth
controls were declared invalid by the Superior Court of New Jersey in an order dated
12-4-1997. See the Note included on Art. XXVIII for additional details regarding the court
action.
§ 200-88 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-88
1:720
Applicant's projected
p.m. peak hour traffic
using improvement
at
end of last year in
which applicant's
additional rights
accrue
X Cost of improvement
Pro rata
share =
Total additional
projected p.m. peak
hour traffic using
improvement at end
of last year in which
applicant's additional
rights accrue
(b) In applying this formula, the principles set forth in Subsections
B(1) through B(6) of this section shall be utilized, except that
the time period to be used shall be the end of the last year in
which the applicant's additional rights accrue, as determined
by § 200-159B of Part 4, Zoning, of this chapter, rather than 10
years from the date of final approval or from the date site work
begins on a phase which the board of jurisdiction determines
should be treated as a separate development.
D. Calculation procedure.
(1) Provision of data used for Subsections B and C calculations. The
Township traffic consultant shall provide the applicant, at the
applicant's request, with the following as to each off-tract street
improvement projected to be used by traffic generated by the
applicant's development: a description of the off-tract street
improvement, existing peak hour flow, projected growth of such
flow, total cost of the off-tract street improvement, such other data
as the traffic consultant has used in making the pro rata calculation
and the applicant's pro rata share of the cost of the off-tract street
improvement. The cost of the traffic consultant's services shall be
borne by the applicant pursuant to Chapter 82, Fees.
(2) Look-Up Table. In lieu of having its pro rata share calculated
pursuant to Subsections B, C, D and E(1), the applicant may pay its
pro rata share in accordance with the schedule of rates in the
Timed Growth Control Staging Subplan Element to the Land Use
Plan of West Windsor Township. The Planning Board shall calculate
§ 200-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-88
1:721
such rates so as to assure that the applicant's pro rata obligation
as calculated by using such schedule will not be less than that
calculated by using the formulas set forth in Subsections B and C.
Such schedule shall be updated annually by the Planning Board
as part of the annual review set forth in Subsection O, including
running the model necessary therefor.
E. Credit for on-site street improvements not necessitated by the
development. Where the board of jurisdiction requires an applicant to
oversize an on-site street improvement to benefit the general public and
other future applicants, the applicant shall be given a credit equal to
the difference between the cost of the on-site street improvement
required by the development itself and the total cost of the on-site
street improvement required by the board of jurisdiction. It shall be the
applicant's burden of demonstrating to the satisfaction of the board of
jurisdiction that the improvement is oversized and the magnitude of the
difference in cost.
F. Credit for certain off-tract street improvements constructed by the
applicant. If the applicant constructs off-tract improvements subject to
Subsection B pursuant to the final approval of the board of jurisdiction,
the actual cost to it of such improvements shall be a credit against the
applicant's total pro rata share.
G. When payment is due; failure to pay. Ten percent of the applicant's pro
rata share shall be payable upon the issuance of the first building
permit, and the balance due shall be payable upon the issuance of
certificates of occupancy so that at any given time the amount paid as a
percentage of the total amount due is at least as great as the floor area
covered by the certificates of occupancy as a percentage of the total
floor area approved, in the case of nonresidential development, or of
the number of dwelling units for which certificates of occupancy have
been issued as a percentage of the total number of dwelling units
approved, in the case of residential development. In the case of
developments being constructed in phases for which separate pro rata
share calculations are undertaken pursuant to Subsection B, the
payment obligation shall accrue on a phase-by-phase basis. As of the
date of each payment, each payment shall be adjusted by multiplying it
by a fraction, the numerator of which is the index as of the date each
payment is made and the denominator of which is the index of the date
Township Council authorizes execution of this agreement. As used
herein, "the index" means the highway bid price index for the State of
New Jersey, as published by McGraw Hill Publishing Co., or its
successor, in the Dodge Building Cost indexes for United States and
Canadian Cities, and shall be the average of the Philadelphia area and
the New York Metropolitan area. If, as of any relevant date the index is
no longer published or issued, the Federal Highway Administration's
bid price index or other such index as accurately reflects the cost of
constructing road improvements in New Jersey shall be used in place
§ 200-88 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-88
1:722
thereof. If the applicant fails to pay the amounts due and owing, the
Township may stop construction until payment is made.
H. Trust account. All payments made to this section shall be placed in an
interest-bearing trust account administered by the Township.
Disbursements from this trust account shall be made following the
written approval of the County of Mercer and of the Township.
I. Use of funds.
(1) Funds collected pursuant to Subsection B shall be returned to the
applicant if they have not been obligated for use for the street
improvement for which they were collected (or for such other
street improvements which in the opinion of the Township Engineer
provide equal or greater benefit to the applicant or which are
mutually agreed upon) within 10 years of the date of receipt of the
last payment due or, in the case of a development to be built in
phases for which separate pro rata share calculations are made,
within 10 years of receipt of the last payment due for that phase.
Funds collected pursuant to Subsection C shall be returned to the
applicant if they have not been obligated for use for the special
project for which they were collected (or for such other street
improvements which in the opinion of the Township Engineer
provide equal or greater benefit to the applicant or which are
mutually agreed upon) by the end of the time frame set forth in
Subsection C(1) or 10 years from the date of receipt of the last
payment due, whichever is later. The additional funds collected
pursuant to the formula set forth in Subsection D shall be returned
to the applicant if they have not been obligated for use for the
street improvement for which they were collected (or for such
other street improvements which in the opinion of the Township
Engineer provide equal or greater benefit to the applicant or which
are mutually agreed upon) within the time frame set forth in such
formula or 10 years from the date of receipt of the last payment
due, whichever is later. No later than September 1 of each year, or
as soon thereafter as is practicable, the Township Engineer shall
report to the Planning Board the Township Engineer's intent to
utilize funds collected for one street improvement for another
improvement, pursuant to this subsection.
(2) Funds in the trust account may be used without permission of or
notice to the applicant. They may be used for payment to
contractors or others for actual construction, reimbursement to
third parties for work performed, the public share of multijurisdictional
improvements, planning, engineering feasibility
studies and inspections, contract administration, attorneys' fees
and other soft costs, easement acquisition and for any other
purposes relating to construction.
J. Payment under protest. Where an applicant pays the amount
determined as its pro rata share under protest, it shall institute legal
§ 200-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-88
1:723
action within one year of such payment in order to preserve the right to
a judicial determination as to the fairness and reasonableness of such
amount. In the event that the applicant fails to institute legal action
within one year of such payment, it shall be deemed to have waived its
right to challenge its pro rata share.
K. Developer's agreement.
(1) A condition to any final approval shall be that the applicant enter
into an agreement with the Township in recordable form granting a
lien upon the real estate subject to the application in the amount of
the total payments due. The agreement shall also provide for the
following:
(a) Payment of the fee representing the applicant's pro rata share
of road and street improvements, inclusive of land acquisition
costs, if any, in accordance with the standards set forth in this
section and in the Timed Growth Control Staging Sub-plan to
the Land Use Plan of West Windsor Township, including
provision for adjustment of such fee due to inflation or other
factors.
(b) An installment payment schedule, if requested by the
applicant, based upon the phasing of the development.
(c) The limit of the applicant's off-tract improvement liability upon
payment of the fee.
(d) A description of structural improvements to be made by or at
the expense of the developer and the timing or sequencing of
such installation.
(e) The terms and conditions under which the escrowed funds
shall be established, maintained and released.
(f) Such other matters as may be recommended by the Planning
Board or the Township Council or are otherwise appropriate.
(2) The developer's agreement shall be recordable at the Township's
option.
L. Public share. The public share of the cost of the street improvements
subject to Subsections B through D of this section shall be that portion
of the costs for which applicants are not responsible under such
Subsections B through D; namely, the share attributable to additional
traffic passing through the Township and the cost of the improvements
described in Subsection B(6). The public share can be met by the
funding or construction of improvements by the Township, county or
state or by use of other non-applicant sources.
M. Exemption for public buildings. Development applications made by a
municipal agency for the construction of a public building shall be
exempt from this section.
§ 200-88 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-88
1:724
§ 200-89. Delaware and Raritan Canal/Duck Pond Run Interceptor
Sewer Improvement District program established. [Added
10-17-1988 by Ord. No. 88-23; amended 12-12-1988 by Ord. No.
88-38]
N. Periodic review of capital improvement program, traffic projections and
Look-Up Table. In conjunction with the periodic review of the timed
growth program required by § 200-165 and the traffic capacity analysis
required by § 200-161A(1) of Part 4, Zoning, of this chapter, the
Planning Board shall, at least once each calendar year, review the
status of construction of improvements to determine whether it is
consistent with the Timed Growth Control Staging Sub-Plan Element to
the Land Use Plan of West Windsor Township; the appropriateness of
adding street improvements to or deleting them from the capital
improvement program; specification of which road improvements fall
within the Subsection B ten-year time frame; the cost of all street
improvements, including administrative expenses, traffic projections
used in formulating the capital improvement program and in
undertaking the calculations set forth in Subsections B through D; and
the Look-up Table. Such review shall be described in the report to the
Mayor, Township Council and Administration, which shall include
recommended elements of the capital budget and amendments to Part
1, Site Plan Review, Part 2, Subdivision, and Part 4, Zoning, of this
chapter.226
O. TID #1 escrow account. The Township shall maintain the TID #1
escrow account for funds collected for the TID #1 program repealed
hereby and shall use such funds for TID #1 improvements in
accordance with the TID subplan element and ordinance provision (§
200-174 of Part 4, Zoning, of this chapter) in effect during the life of the
program and the developer's agreements entered into pursuant
thereto.
A. An interceptor sewer improvement district (hereinafter, "the district")
as set forth on the map attached hereto (hereinafter, "the System Map")
and showing the Delaware and Raritan Canal Interceptor and the Duck
Pond Run Interceptor, including its north and south branches
(hereinafter, "the interceptor system") is hereby established.227
B. The Planning Board shall require property owners seeking development
approvals within the district, as a condition of their development
approvals, to build the portion of the interceptor system passing
through their properties within the limits specified by the Township
Engineer. Development approval may also be conditioned on
arrangements by the developer or others being in place for the
construction of any downstream portion of the interceptor system
which is necessary in order to transmit the sewage from their
226. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
227. Editor's Note: The System Map is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 200-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-89
1:725
development through the interceptor system and ultimately to the
Stony Brook Interceptor of the Stony Brook Regional Sewerage System
at or near Alexander Road.
C. The alignment of the interceptor system shall be as shown on the
System Map, as it may be modified from time to time. The interceptor
system shall be constructed in accordance with the Sewer Master Plan
and in accordance with Township requirements and standards as they
may be modified from time to time. No construction shall be permitted
unless the plans and specifications have been approved by the
Township Engineer. Upon completion and acceptance by resolution of
the Township Council, the completed portion or portions of the
interceptor system shall become part of the Township's local sewerage
collection system.
D. The cost of constructing the interceptor system shall be allocated
among the property owners within the district connecting directly to
the interceptor system in accordance with the following: each such
property owner shall be responsible for its fair share of the total
construction costs. Construction costs shall be limited to the survey for
easement delineation, permit fees and hard costs of construction
(including utility relocation, soil testing and site restoration), but shall
not include the costs of engineering, legal and other professional
services (other than for the easement survey and soil testing),
inspection fees and administrative costs. The construction cost shall be
allocated in accordance with the following methodology:
(1) The total construction cost of the interceptor system and the cost of
construction for each segment incurred by each property owner (or
group of property owners) shall be estimated by the Township
Engineer. If a group of contiguous property owners agree between
or among themselves to be treated by the Township as a single
property owner, the term "property owner" as used herein may be
used to refer to a group of property owners.
(2) As each property owner constructs its segment of the interceptor
system, the Township Engineer shall certify the direct construction
cost of that segment and of that property owner and shall adjust, if
necessary, the total construction cost figures [Subsection D(1)
above].
(3) The total sewage volume to be generated from within the district
and the estimated flows from each property owner (from his or her
own property and from any other properties which contribute flows
into his or her collection lines) shall be estimated and revised from
time to time by the Township Engineer based on present or
projected land use regulations and development constraints.
(4) As each developer receives its preliminary development approvals,
the Township Engineer shall certify flow figures per unit or other
building type and total flow figures for each developer based on the
§ 200-89 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-89
1:726
then applicable New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection sewage flow generation figures and shall adjust, if
necessary, the total flow figures [Subsection D(3) above]. For
properties developed in whole or in part as of the effective date of
this subsection, the Township Engineer shall certify flow from the
lines as of such date.
(5) Each property owner's allocated fair share of the total construction
cost shall be determined by multiplying the total construction cost
by each property owner's projected percentage of the total sewage
flow generated within the district. This becomes the property
owner's cost based on flow. Initially this will be an estimated
number, but it shall be recalculated for each property owner when
certified cost and approved unit and flow figures are determined.
Once established for a property owner, this figure shall not be
modified because of upstream recalculations.
(6) Property owners whose cost based on flow is less than their
certified construction cost figures will have paid more than their
allocated fair share and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the
differential from the property owners described in Subsection D(7)
below. This amount shall be repaid as described in Subsection D(8)
below.
(7) Property owners whose cost based on flow is more than their
certified construction cost figures, if any, will have paid less than
their allocated fair share and shall be required to reimburse the
differential to the property owners described in Subsection D(6)
above. This amount shall be paid to such property owners in
proportion to their then outstanding reimbursement entitlements
[as adjusted under Subsection D(9) below], and the balance, if any,
shall be held by the Township for distribution to upstream property
owners.
(8) Each property owner within the district (except for the most
downstream property owner) shall also be required to pay to each
downstream property owner a benefit cost calculated by
multiplying the paying property owner's benefit ratio by each
downstream property owner's then applicable reimbursement
amount.
(a) The benefit ratio is calculated separately relative to each
downstream property owner by determining the paying
property owner's proportion of the projected total flow in each
downstream property owner's segment of the interceptor
system. For this purpose, the downstream property owner is
assumed to be connected at the upstream point of its line.
(b) Each downstream property owner's then applicable
reimbursement amount shall be its original reimbursement
amount from Subsection D(6) above, increased by benefit costs
§ 200-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-89
1:727
paid or payable to property owners downstream of it and
reduced by reimbursement amounts paid or payable from
intervening upstream property owners. Interest shall be added
to the unpaid reimbursement amount as provided in
Subsection D(10) below.
(9) After the location where the interceptor system splits between the
north branch and the south branch of the Duck Pond Run
Interceptor, the obligation to repay the total of the reimbursement
amounts then owed to the property owners who constructed the
Delaware and Raritan Canal Interceptor shall be divided between
the property owners of the north branch and the property owners
of the south branch in the ratio which the total reimbursement
obligation of each branch is of the total reimbursement obligation
of both branches. For this purpose, the cost of installing the line
under Route 1 shall be added to the north or the south branch,
depending on whether the property owner who assumes this
obligation is to be served by the north or south branch.
(10) The computations shall include an interest rate adjustment.
Annually on January 2 of each year, commencing in 1988, the
reimbursement payments and the reimbursement amount
remaining unpaid shall be recalculated using an interest rate
adjustment, but no interest shall be due on interest. The interest
rate to be used shall be the prime rate of the Chase Manhattan
Bank of New York plus 1%.
(11) The Township Council may from time to time make such
adjustments as may be required to implement and administer this
system in accordance with the standard of maintaining an
equitable cost allocation system.
E. As a condition of the approval of any development within the district or,
in the case of developed parcels, as a condition of connecting to the
interceptor system, the Township Engineer (or another representative
of the Township designated for this purpose) shall compute (using the
methodology described in Subsection D) the amount which each such
property owner is obligated to reimburse and pay to other property
owners in the district. In the case of development approvals, each
property owner's payment obligation shall be prorated based on the
number of units or on the building area in the development, and
payment shall be required as a condition precedent to the issuance of
building permits. In the case of developed parcels, payment shall be
required upon connection to the interceptor system. If such parcels are
further developed at a later date, they shall be treated at such time as
separate development applications in accordance herewith, except that
for parcels partially developed under an approved development plan,
the property owner shall, upon connection to the interceptor system,
pay that proportion of the amount due which is the same proportion as
the total number of units or square footage for which building permits
have been issued to the total approved units or square footage and shall
§ 200-89 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-89
1:728
pay the remainder upon issuance of building permits in the manner set
forth herein. Within 30 days of the receipt of payment, the Township
shall disburse the amounts payable. Similar computations, notices and
payments shall be processed as building permits for additional units or
building area in the development are issued.
F. A property owner shall be entitled to reimbursement from any later
property owner connecting into the system based on a land use
application filed by the later connectors with the Township or any
subdivision thereof on or before December 31, 2014. [Amended
4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-04]
G. The Township's sole financial responsibility shall be to act as the
receiving and disbursing agent of the funds required to be collected
from and paid to upstream and downstream property owners within the
district.
H. The Township of West Windsor does not assume any obligation to build
any portion of the interceptor system or guarantee that any upstream
portion of the interceptor system will ever be built.
I. The Township of West Windsor does not assume any financial
responsibility for making public funds available to satisfy the
reimbursement rights for the property owners who shall be entitled to
reimbursement on account of the costs they incur in building portions
of the interceptor system.
J. A condition of final approval for a development located within the
district shall be that the applicant enter into an agreement with the
Township of West Windsor setting forth the applicant's obligations
under this section. The agreement shall be in recordable form and shall
be subject to the review and approval of the Township Attorney.
K. For affordable housing developments located within the district:
[Added 9-26-1994 by Ord. No. 94-46]
(1) The Township of West Windsor at the request of the developer shall
undertake to satisfy the conditions imposed on the developer under
Subsection B of this section relative to the portion of the
interceptor system serving the developer's property and with
respect to any downstream portion of the interceptor system. The
developer may request either that the Township be responsible for
the actual construction or, if the developer itself wishes to
undertake the construction, that the Township finance the
construction costs. In either event, the Township shall be
reimbursed by the developer as hereinafter provided.
(2) The developer shall immediately reimburse the Township for any
costs which the Township incurs which would not be eligible
construction costs under Subsection D of this section if incurred by
the developer and shall reimburse the Township for all other costs
incurred by the Township as hereinafter provided.
§ 200-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-89
1:729
(3) The obligations of the developer and the Township shall be set forth
in a developer's agreement which at a minimum will define the
elements of the construction costs, require a preliminary and final
preconstruction budget and a post construction accounting to
produce a final construction cost figure. The developer's agreement
shall also include a reimbursement formula whereby the Township
is reimbursed for the construction costs expanded or advanced and
for all other cost incurred by it (including financing expenses,
interest on borrowed funds and interest on Township funds)
amortized over the number of market rate units and paid as
certificates of occupancy are issued. This payment shall be a
precondition to the developer's entitlement to a certificate of
occupancy.
(4) The developer's agreement shall be recorded and the amount owed
to the Township shall be a lien on the developer's property in the
project, which may be prorated over the number of units or lots
which the developer has not yet conveyed; but the affordable units
shall be free of this lien, provided that the developer is not in
default of its reimbursement obligation to the Township. The
developer's agreement shall include such other provisions as the
parties shall determine to be necessary to protect their respective
interests.
(5) If the Township has undertaken the actual construction, the
construction costs paid as certified by the Township Engineer shall
be the developer's construction costs for purposes of the
methodology in Subsection D. Except for this linkage, the
developer's obligation to reimburse the Township shall be
independent of the developer's obligation to reimburse other
property owners or to be reimbursed by other property owners as
computed in accordance with the methodology of Subsection D or
with the proration of the payment of that obligation under
Subsection E; provided, however, that if the developer receives
reimbursement from other property owners at a time when the
developer has not discharged its reimbursement obligation to the
Township, all such reimbursement amounts shall be paid to the
Township to reduce the developer's obligation to the Township.
§ 200-89 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-89
1:730
ARTICLE XIX
Improvements
§ 200-90. General.
Prior to the granting of final approval, the developer shall have installed
improvements required by the Planning Board or have posted a
performance guaranty or surety sufficient to cover the costs of said
improvements. The Planning Board may solicit local, county, state, federal,
public or semipublic agencies and knowledgeable individuals on what
improvements shall be required. Improvements recommended by other
agencies, such as a utilities authority, county, state or other governmental
agencies, may be required by the Planning Board as a condition of final
approval. The following construction standards and improvements are
necessary to protect the health, safety, welfare and convenience of the
residents and public as well as needed to meet local, county, regional, state
and national goals and objectives. It is recognized, however, that in peculiar
situations, all of the improvements listed below may not be appropriate or
needed.
§ 200-91. Construction, maintenance and installation standards for
specific improvements.
A. Streets.
(1) The developer shall submit plans, profiles, cross sections and
design for the work to the Township Engineer for approval prior to
the start of any construction and, at the developer's own expense,
grade all streets for their full width, in conformity with the terrain
and good engineering practices, shall have all underground utilities
installed prior to any street paving construction, shall construct
adequate underground pipe drainage systems to carry off surface
waters, shall construct streets in accordance with specifications
shown below and shall install a base course.
(2) The paved roadway areas shall be constructed in accordance with
the following:
(a) Arterial streets: (as determined by the appropriate agency).
(b) Collector streets:
[1] Six-inch bituminous stabilized base course.
[2] Two-inch type FABC-1 surface course.
(c) Minor streets:
[1] Four-inch bituminous stabilized base course.
[2] Two-inch type FABC-1 surface course.
§ 200-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-91
1:731
(3) Prior to placing the surface course, the base course shall have a
tack coat of bituminous material. All of the above construction shall
be in accordance with current New Jersey Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications and supplements thereto
on file in the office of the Township Engineer. The standard
specifications are further supplemented to require that, prior to
placing final surface course, the intermediate base course shall be
open to traffic and shall so remain for at least one winter season.
Thereafter, the Township Engineer shall inspect the pavement and
will require areas of pavement failure to be removed and replaced;
settled areas shall be leveled with hot mixed bituminous concrete.
The Township Engineer may require compacted select fill or
approved subbase material as needed to replace native subgrade
material.
(4) All traffic lanes, both moving and parking, shall be striped in
accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as
amended (United States Department of Transportation, Federal
Highway Administration, 1971).
(5) Construction standards, as specified herein, shall also apply to any
private street as may be part of a development application
receiving preliminary approval by the Planning Board. [Added
8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 82-34]
(6) Fire lanes located in other than those paved portions of a lot shall
be designed such that the subsurface base is at least 20 feet wide,
of twelve-inch-thick quarry blend over a quality subsoil necessary
and sufficient to support a thirty-ton fire apparatus vehicle. The
subsurface base may be covered with at least two inches of topsoil
prior to the placement of sod or alternative paving block or similar
decorative paving may be used. Final design shall be approved by
the Township Engineer.
(7) Underdrains shall be installed if and where directed by the
Township Engineer.
B. Parking areas. [Added 4-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-08]
(1) Parking areas and driveways (excluding single-family residential
dwellings) that are not subject to heavy truck movement shall be
constructed with not less than three inches of compacted
bituminous concrete stabilized base course (NJDOT Mix I-2) and
two inches of compacted bituminous concrete surface course
(NJDOT Mix I-5). The subgrade shall be as approved by the
Township Engineer.
(2) Areas that are subject to heavy truck movement, including fire
apparatus, shall be constructed in accordance with the standards
for a minor street.
C. Residential driveways. [Added 4-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-08]
§ 200-91 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-91
1:732
(1) All garage door aprons shall be concrete and shall be higher than
the curb at such elevation not less than 1/4 inch pitch per foot from
the top of the curb to the apron of the garage door. Said elevation
shall be approved by the Township Engineer prior to the issuance
of a Building Permit.
(2) The garage floor shall be 1 1/2 inches higher than the elevation of
the garage door apron, as set forth in Subsection A of this section.
Said elevation shall be approved by the Construction Official prior
to the issuance of a Building Permit.
D. Curbs.
(1) Curbs shall be constructed of portland cement air-entrained
concrete, Class B, having a standard strength of 4,500 pounds per
square inch.
(2) Depressed curbs at driveways shall have a full depth of 18 inches.
E. Sidewalks. Shall be constructed of portland cement air-entrained
concrete, Class C, having a standard strength of 4,000 pounds per
square inch.
F. Water mains. Water mains are to be installed in accordance with the
following:
(1) Engineering requirements for all water main installations are to
comply with the rules and regulations of the New Jersey State
Department of Health.
(2) All pipe shall be not less than Class 150 cast-iron pipe of the size
determined by the Township Engineer, but in no case less than six
inches in diameter, and meeting the current specifications of the
American Water Works Association. PVC water mains with push-on
joints may be used if approved by the applicable public utility.
[Amended 10-7-1985 by Ord. No. 85-25]
(3) All joints shall be lead or mechanical joint.
(4) The depth of pipe from the finished surface or roadway or grade
shall be not less than four feet from the top of the pipe.
(5) Fire hydrants shall be generally located not more than 800 feet
apart and spotted, where practicable, as follows: near streetlights,
near inlets, near street intersections and on property lines.
(6) Valves shall be installed with all fire hydrants and at such other
locations in the lines as directed by the Township Engineer.
(7) House service connections, from the main to the curb stop and box,
must be installed at all lots prior to placing any foundation or
surface on the roadway.
§ 200-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-91
1:733
(8) No installation shall be covered until inspected and approved by
the Township Engineer.
G. Sewers.
(1) Where required by the Planning Board, sanitary sewers, including
service laterals and cleanouts at curbside, shall be installed in all
streets and easements before the base materials for the streets are
in place or the fine grading of the easement is complete, whether or
not such sewers can be put to immediate use.
(2) Where in the opinion of the Health Officer so expressed to the
Planning Board the subsurface soil characteristics and/or the
percolation rate are such to permit subsurface disposal of sewage
from individual dwellings as a temporary expedient until the
sewers installed in the streets can be connected to the Township
sewer system, such temporary subsurface disposal facilities may be
permitted and constructed in addition to the sewers in the streets
and easements. Sewerage facilities for individual dwellings shall
conform with the code promulgated by the New Jersey Department
of Health under the provisions of Chapter 199, P.L. 1954,228 and
current Township regulations.229
(3) Sewers in the streets and easements are to be constructed in
accordance with the following:
(a) Standards. All sewers, manholes, appurtenances and
equipment shall be designed, constructed and installed in
accordance with the requirements of the Department of
Environmental Protection, the approval of which shall be noted
on plans and specifications submitted as part of the data
required and in accordance with the most recent approved
specifications and details of the Township.
(b) Pipe material. Pipe shall be vitrified clay, PVC-SDR35 or cast
iron, of the class, type and strength of each required for the
particular use and location.
(c) Pipe dimensions. The minimum inside diameter shall be eight
inches for sewers in roadways or easements and four inches for
house connections; the diameter and slope (gradient) being
such as to maintain theoretically a velocity of two feet per
second when flowing half full (or full) with an assumed n =
0.013. Without special permission of all approving authorities,
pipes larger in diameter with flatter slopes shall not be
permitted if the project rate of flow does not theoretically fill
the pipe half full.
228. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq.
229. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 200-91 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-91
1:734
(d) Joints. Sections of pipe shall be joined by slip-type rubber
gasketed joints, mechanical joints and such other gasketed
joints as approved. Hot poured bituminous joints and caulked
lead joints may be used, if approved, where conditions are such
that preformed gasketed joints are not applicable.
(e) Watertight caps or plugs. Termination of service laterals or any
other temporary or permanent opening into the system shall be
sealed by an acceptable means against the entrance of surface
and ground water. Such sealed caps or plugs shall be so
installed as to be watertight against any such internal pressure
as might be applied in the testing of the sewer, as well as
external subsurface water infiltration. Terminations of laterals
shall be referred to "S" cuts on curbs or to other permanent
monuments to facilitate locating the ends in the future.
(f) Manholes. Manholes may be either precast or built in place. No
more than four courses of brick may be used for casting grade
adjustments. No deviation from the approved standards will be
permitted which may adversely affect watertightness,
structural strength, safe use or maintenance of the manhole or
the pipes connecting thereto.
(g) Service connections.
[1] Laterals for sanitary sewers shall be constructed from
mains to a point two feet beyond the underground utility
easement in front of the realty improvement to be
sewered.
[2] The owner shall, at the time said owner deeds the streets
within a development to the Township, give a bill of sale to
the municipality, transferring title to all sewer utility
improvements within street line limits and within
easement limits absolutely free to the Township of West
Windsor.
H. Street signs.
(1) All street signs shall have reflectorized white letters on a green
background (e.g., Type E-450 or equal). Both signs and poles shall
either be of nonferrous metal or galvanized steel. Neighborhood or
directional signs shall be installed on major roads to aid in
circulation.
(2) All signs shall be mounted on two-inch-diameter posts embedded in
concrete.
(3) Street signs shall be approved by the Township Engineer prior to
ordering by the developer.
§ 200-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-91
1:735
(4) Street signs shall comply with the requirements contained within
the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. [Amended
10-19-1987 by Ord. No. 87-39]
(5) Street signs shall be installed by the developer upon the completion
of the base course of each roadway within the development. No
certificates of occupancy will be issued until the signs are installed
and approved by the appropriate Township officials. [Amended
10-19-1987 by Ord. No. 87-39]
(6) No decorative street signs are permitted within the Township of
West Windsor. [Amended 10-19-1987 by Ord. No. 87-39]
I. Sidewalks. All required sidewalks for minor or local streets and major
arterial streets shall be four feet wide by four inches thick, except at
driveways and aprons, where they shall be six inches thick with welded
wire fabric reinforcing. All required sidewalks for collector streets and
minor arterial streets shall be five feet wide by four inches thick, except
at driveways and aprons, where they shall be six inches thick with
welded wire fabric reinforcing. In addition, all sidewalks shall be
constructed in accordance with applicable provisions of the Americans
with Disabilities Act of 1990. [Amended 4-20-1990 by Ord. No.
90-12]
J. Streetlights.
(1) All streetlights shall be installed at least at all street intersections
and as may be required by the Township Engineer. They must be
shielded so that no direct light or glare is visible from house or
apartment windows and they do not produce glare in the eyes of a
motorist.
(2) Poles shall be laminated, gray wood.
K. Topsoil protection. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as
spoil. Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be
redistributed so as to provide at least six inches of cover in all areas of
the subdivision and shall be stabilized, seeded or planted so as to
remain in place.230
L. Monuments. All monuments are to be of the size and shape required by
the Map Filing Law (1960), N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq., or other
applicable statutes, on both sides of all new streets.
M. Storm drainage systems.
(1) All storm drainage systems consisting of catch basins, underground
sewers, paved swales, box culverts, rip-rap or otherwise stabilized
stream banks, dams, retention basins and swales and other devices
shall be installed so that all stormwater is led to and confined in
230. Editor's Note: See Ch. 143, Soil Removal.
§ 200-91 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-91
1:736
natural drainage channels without causing erosion. Bicycle-safe
storm sewer gratings shall be provided. They shall also be designed
in accordance with the standards established in Article XX of this
Part 3. [Amended 12-27-1988 by Ord. No. 88-51]
(2) Concrete pipe is preferred to box culverts for drainage under
roads. In such cases, an easement of appropriate width extending
at least 50 feet beyond the right-of-way line shall be granted on
either side, and the pipe shall be covered for the full width of the
right-of-way and 20 feet beyond.
N. Additional elements necessitated by topography. Retaining walls,
cribbing, ground cover, diversionary swales and guide rails shall be
installed as necessary to prevent erosion, hazard and unusual problems
of maintenance. [Amended 4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12]
O. Electrical, telephone lines and similar utilities. All such lines shall be
underground from existing utility poles and shall be as further
restricted in § 200-103K. [Amended 4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12]
P. Landscape standards. Every applicant for subdivision or site plan
approval shall comply with the following minimum standards, except
that, with respect to the alternative design concepts set forth below, the
applicant may choose between the concepts or present an alternate
design equal or superior to the design concepts in terms of quantity of
landscaping materials and suitability to the site and to the proposed
development. The board of jurisdiction may require additional
landscaping if necessary to create an appropriate landscaping scheme
for the site, given the nature of the site and the proposed development
thereof. Where subdivisions only are applied for, the minimum
standards shall apply only to street trees and to common open space
and areas proposed to be dedicated to the public. The graphics included
herewith illustrate design principles set forth below. [Added
5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 88-9]
(1) General. Landscape plans shall conform to the following general
design principles.
(a) Use landscaping to accent and complement buildings. For
example, groupings of tall trees to break up long, low buildings
and lower plantings for taller buildings.
(b) Locate landscaping to provide for climate control. For example,
shade trees on the south to shield the hot summer sun and
evergreens on the north side for windbreaks.
(c) Provide for a variety and mixture of landscaping. The variety
shall consider susceptibility to disease, colors, season,
textures, shapes, blossoms and foliage.
(d) Local soil conditions and water availability shall be considered
in the choice of landscaping.
§ 200-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-91
1:737
(e) Consider the impact of any proposed landscaping plan at
various time intervals so that, for example, shrubs do not grow
and eventually block sight distances or encroach upon roads or
sidewalks.
(f) All landscape plants shall be typical full specimens conforming
to the American Association of Nurserymen Standards and/or
Landscape Plans and Specifications for quality and installation.
(g) Assure that no aspect of the landscape design inhibits access to
the development by emergency vehicles.
(2) Street trees. Street trees shall be provided for all streets and shall
be in accordance with the West Windsor Township Comprehensive
Master Street Tree Plan standards231 for location, species selection
and spacing. One of the following street tree planting concepts or
an alternative concept complying with the standards set forth
above shall be used.
(a) Living garden community concept:
[1] Use street trees as contextural and unifying element of
human outdoor living space, reinforcing human scale,
activities and relationships.
[2] The designer shall, in coordination with the Shade Tree
Commission, develop a concept for a specific development
and a street tree theme which will reinforce this concept
(i.e., New England village, sugar maples). [Amended
4-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-02]
[3] Place trees in the right-of-way between the curb and
sidewalk.
[4] Spacing between trees shall be determined based upon
species and the desired concept. In general, trees should
be between 30 and 50 feet on center.
[5] The use of more than one variety of street tree along a
roadway shall be provided in order to avoid problems
associated with monoculture.
[6] Trees shall be planted in groupings of similar varieties.
Use trees of similar form, height and character along a
roadway to promote uniformity and allow for smooth visual
transition between species.
[7] Tree variety selection shall be based upon on-site
conditions and tree suitability to these conditions. A Street
Tree Selection Guide and Matrix is provided in the Street
231. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 170, Trees.
§ 200-91 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-91
1:738
Tree Master Plan in conjunction with an approved Street
Tree List and shall be followed.
[8] Trees should be a minimum of three inches to 3 1/2 inches
caliper (based upon American Nurserymen Standards).
Within sight triangles, a single tree may be permitted only
with site-specific approval of the Township Engineer. Such
trees, including those at driveways, shall be of such size as
will enable them to be immediately pruned up to seven feet
branching height upon planting. [Amended 12-11-1989
by Ord. No. 89-59]
(b) Formal allee of street trees:
[1] Use uniform street tree varieties.
[2] Coordinate new plantings with existing street tree
plantings where applicable. A uniform canopy from both
sides shall be provided.
[3] Use tree species tolerant of road salts and low
maintenance.
[4] The location of street trees shall be within the right-of-way
30 feet to 50 feet on center, three feet to six feet from the
curbline.
[5] Consider the use of double and triple rows of street trees
for special emphasis.
[6] Trees should be a minimum of three inches to 3 1/2 inches
caliper (based upon American Association of Nurserymen
Standards). Within sight triangles, a single tree may be
permitted only with site-specific approval of the Township
§ 200-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-91
1:739
Engineer. Such trees, including those at driveways, shall
be of such size as will enable them to be immediately
pruned up to seven feet height upon planting. [Amended
12-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-59]
(c) Naturalized street tree planting:
[1] Vary street varieties, spacing three feet to 15 feet from the
curbline and sizes 2 1/2 inches to 3 1/2 inches caliper.
[Amended 12-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-59]
[2] The total number of street trees shall average one for
every 35 linear feet measured at the curbline.
[3] Planting design shall accentuate views and integrate
contrasting landscape elements.
[4] Trees within a sight triangle shall be of such size as will
enable them to be pruned up to seven feet branching
height upon planting. Planting within a sight triangle must
be approved by the Township Engineer.
[5] If existing trees are preserved within five feet of the curb,
the requirements for street tree planting may be reduced.
(3) Culs-de-sac. Cul-de-sac islands provide an opportunity to create
visual interest, soften the harshness of a large paved area, increase
groundwater recharge, screen headlight glare into residences and
preserve existing vegetation.
(a) The following standards apply:
[1] All plant material must exhibit a mature height under 30
inches or above seven feet with no more than three trunks,
in order to allow for proper visibility.
§ 200-91 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-91
1:740
[2] All plants shall be tolerant of harsh, dry roadside
conditions.
[3] Ground cover plantings shall be consistent with the degree
of maintenance expected for the cul-de-sacs and of
sufficient density to entirely cover the ground plane.
(b) One of the following cul-de-sac planting concepts or an
alternative concept complying with the standards set forth
above shall be used.
[1] Use a specimen tree of five inches to six inches caliper
with low shrub or ground cover planting.
[2] Use three or more trees of varying size (2 1/2 inches to six
inches caliper), with low shrub or ground cover and gentle
berming.
[3] Use cul-de-sac islands to preserve existing stands or
groves of trees. Assure protection during construction.
Indicate ground cover treatment.
(4) Stormwater. Stormwater management areas include retention and
detention basins, drainage ditches and swales and wetlands areas.
Sensitively designed basins and swales can benefit the health,
welfare and safety of West Windsor Township residents. This may
involve integration of these areas as aesthetic landscape features,
naturalized wetland areas or active and passive recreation areas, in
addition to their stormwater management function.
(a) Stormwater detention areas. One of the following landscape
concepts for stormwater detention areas or an alternative
concept complying with the standards set forth above shall be
used.
[1] Reforestation. This landscaped treatment is appropriate
for detention basins and drainage areas that are not highly
visible or are adjacent to areas of mature woodlands,
§ 200-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-91
1:741
Greenbelt or wetlands. It reverts the disturbed area to a
revegetated, stable, low-maintenance, natural landscape
asset over time.
[a] The area shall be graded creatively to blend into the
surrounding landscape and imitate a natural
depression with an irregular edge. This shall include
gentle berming. Linear, geometric basins are
unacceptable.
[b] The quantity of trees to be planted on the interior of
the basins shall be equal to the number of trees that
would be necessary to cover the entire area, based
upon a 20 foot by 20 foot grid to the high-water line or
outflow elevation. Of this number, 10% shall be 2 1/2
inches to three inches caliper, 20% shall be one inch to
two inches caliper and 70% shall be six feet to eight
feet height whips.
[c] The trees shall be planted in groves and spaced five
feet to 15 feet on center.
[d] The ground plane shall be seeded with a
naturalization, wildflower and/or meadow grass mix.
The specific blend shall be approved by the Township
Landscape Architect.
[e] All woody and herbaceous plants shall be species
indigenous to the area and/or tolerant of typical wet/
dry floodplain conditions.
[f] Planting shall not be located within 20 feet of low flow
channels to allow for maintenance.
[g] The perimeter area (slopes above the high water line)
shall include shade trees (approximately 80 per 1,000
linear feet), evergreen trees (approximately 40 per
1,000 linear feet), ornamental trees and shrubs
screening drainage structures and creating visual
interests.
[h] Provisions for emergency access as well as general
maintenance of the basins shall be reviewed by the
Township Engineer. Plantings shall be designed to
disguise yet not hinder vehicular access.
[i] Plantings are not permitted upon any dikes associated
with a detention basin unless approved by the
Township Engineer.
§ 200-91 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-91
1:742
[2] Recreation/open space feature. This landscape concept is
appropriate in situations where a basin is the largest or
only portion of open space in an area or is adjacent to
existing open space and recreational open space is
desired. It is also appropriate for smaller, highly visible
basins where a visually pleasing open area is desired. The
objective in these situations is to integrate the area into
the landscape using topography and plantings in order to
complement the function of the area and to provide a
visually interesting landscape feature and/or recreation
space.
§ 200-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-91
1:743
[a] The area shall be graded creatively to blend into the
surrounding landscape and imitate a natural
depression with an irregular edge. This shall include
gentle berming.
[b] Provide perimeter plantings, including shade trees,
formally or informally, evergreen trees to create and
screen views and small trees and shrubs to provide a
continuous landscape strip screening drainage
structures and creating visual interest.
[c] Integrate buffer plantings with perimeter plantings
where applicable.
[d] The following are guidelines for plant quantities:
Shade trees 80 per 1,000 linear feet
Evergreen trees 40 per 1,000 linear feet
Ornamental trees 10 per 1,000 linear feet
Shrubs 50 per 1,000 linear feet
[e] To provide recreational open space, concentrate
frequently flooded detention in a basin area (five- to
ten-year-storm volume) and provide a gently sloping,
less often flooded area (ten- to one-hundred-year
storm volume) as a recreational open field space.
Provide ball fields and/or open play areas integrated
with plantings in a park-like manner.
(b) Stormwater retention areas; open space/recreation features.
This landscape treatment can take on a variety of landscape
§ 200-91 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-91
1:744
forms, from formal reflecting pools and canals or entry
fountain features to natural park-like lakes and ravines.
[1] Water fountains/features are encouraged in the design of
research/office/manufacturing parks and developments,
especially along the Route 1 corridor.
[2] The water's edge shall be easily maintained and stable.
Possible treatments might include rip-rap, stone walls,
natural plantings, decking and bulkheads.
[3] The planting of the perimeter of the feature shall
accentuate views and interest and integrate pedestrian
paths, sitting areas and other uses.
[4] Plantings shall include formal or informally-massed
deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs to screen and
frame views with ornamental trees, shrubs and grasses
used for visual interest or special effects. A continuous
landscape area shall be provided.
[5] If used as a recreational feature, the connection to the
water must be addressed and controlled. The types of uses
shall be specified and the plantings and pedestrian spaces
shall be integrated with these uses.
[6] Plants with pervasive root systems shall not be located
where they may cause damage to drainage pipes or other
underground utilities.
[7] All engineered basin structures shall be designed to blend
into the landscape in terms of construction materials,
color, grading and planting.
(5) Open space. As a landscape feature and asset, open space is
encouraged in all developments, even when not required. The
§ 200-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-91
1:745
objectives of the landscape treatment of open space are to provide
the opportunity and space for active and passive recreation in all
areas of human activity and residence, to protect and enhance the
Township's natural amenities, such as wooded areas, water bodies,
streams and the Greenbelt, and to reinforce the rural image of West
Windsor Township. All open space areas shall be designated as one
of two types: preservation or recreation open space, as follows:
(a) Preservation open space. This treatment is appropriate in
areas adjacent to and inclusive of natural amenities to be
preserved, such as wooded areas, water bodies, streams,
wetlands and Greenbelt, as well as undevelopable areas. The
following standards shall apply:
[1] Use open space to preserve existing natural amenities
during site planning.
[2] Provide pedestrian walkways and bridges as necessary to
connect to open space on adjacent tracts of land.
[3] Cleared areas shall be renaturalized where appropriate.
[4] The planting quantities and sizes for renaturalized areas
shall be as per renaturalization standards.
[5] The ground plane shall be seeded with a naturalization
wildflower and/or meadow grass mix. The specific blend
shall be approved by the Township Landscape Architect.
(b) Recreational open space. Recreational open space includes
lands provided for active recreation and passive recreation and
as additions to park lands. It can take on many forms, from a
tot lot or tennis and swimming complex in a residential
development to an English landscape garden in an office
development. The landscape treatment of these areas shall
address safety, visual interest, microclimate and use. The
following standards shall apply:
[1] The proposed use of all open space areas shall be indicated
and comply with Township ordinances.
[2] Open space in commercial, office or manufacturing
developments shall include sitting and outdoor eating
areas. Provisions for other active and passive recreation
facilities is encouraged.
[3] Grading and plantings of the recreation area shall remain
consistent with the overall landscape design. The
landscape design shall consist of massed deciduous and
evergreen trees and berms to create spaces and views and
ornamental trees and shrub masses for visual variety,
interest and detail.
§ 200-91 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-91
1:746
[4] Plants shall be provided in a mix of sizes with shade trees
averaging 2 1/2 inches to three inches caliper, ornamental
and evergreen trees averaging six feet to eight feet in
height and shrubs 24 inches to 36 inches in height. For
office, commercial or manufacturing buildings with a floor
area greater than 10,000 square feet, large size trees shall
be provided near the building perimeter (within 75 feet) to
provide buffering, visual relief and scale. The quantity of
trees shall be equal to the quantity necessary to provide
trees 40 feet on center around the general perimeter of the
building.
[a] The tree size shall be based upon the height of the
building as follows:
Building Stories
Tree Size
(caliper in inches)
1 to 2 4 to 4 1/2
3 5 to 5 1/2
4 to 6 6 to 6 1/2
6+ 7
[b] These trees shall be located in a manner consistent
with architectural and site design and shall provide
maximum impact. Preserved or relocated existing
vegetation may be utilized to meet this requirement.
[5] In general, plants shall be provided at the following rate.
These quantities do not include plants necessary to
achieve screening, which shall be provided.
Type of Plant Number Per Acre
Shade trees 15
Evergreen trees 5
Flowering shrubs 3
Shrubs 20
[6] Irrigation of all open space/planted areas within
nonresidential developments shall be provided.
[7] All plants shall be tolerant of specific site conditions. The
use of indigenous species may be appropriate.
[8] Suggested improvements for residential recreation open
space areas include a tot lot (play structure with slide and
a separate swing set), an open air shelter, an open lawn
area for open field play, pedestrian pathways and benches.
§ 200-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-91
1:747
Other improvements shall be provided as required by
ordinance based upon population.
[9] The adjacent residences shall be partially screened from
play areas using berms and planting.
[10] If a recreation facility fronts onto a roadway, a post and
rail fence or other protective measures may be integrated
to provide protection and separation. The adjacent street
tree planting shall be continued along this area, and any
reverse frontage buffer planting shall be integrated with
open space planting.
[11] All open space should optimally be located centrally within
a development. In large developments, several smaller
facilities may be appropriate. Adequate access from
buildings, roadways and other open space areas shall be
provided. Pedestrian easements between lots, connecting
to open space areas in another development or a public
facility, shall be provided.
(6) Buffers. Landscaping buffers are areas provided to minimize and
screen any adverse impacts or nuisances on a site or from any
adjacent area. Included within any landscape buffer area shall be a
landscape strip consisting of trees, conifers, shrubs, berms and, if
appropriate, fences or walls and providing a completely planted
visual barrier. In areas of less than 25 feet width, the provisions of
the windbreak/heavy buffer requirements shall be followed.
Landscape buffers shall be provided as required by ordinance and
in the following areas:
§ 200-91 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-91
1:748
(a) Nonconforming use buffer. These buffers shall be provided
where a residential zone abuts an area currently used or zoned
for a different or higher intensity use. The following landscape
treatment shall be provided to assure complete visual
screening.
[1] Provide a buffer area as per zoning ordinance yard/setback
requirements.
[2] Preserve existing trees within the provided landscape
buffer area. If existing vegetation is insufficient, the
landscape strip shall be supplemented with new
understory plantings of shade-tolerant coniferous and
ornamental trees in naturalistic groupings in order to
provide a complete visual screen.
[3] Areas void of existing vegetation shall receive landscape
treatment, including berming and planting consisting of
groupings of predominantly evergreen trees, with
deciduous and ornamental trees and shrubs for visual
interest and variety.
[4] Berming shall be two feet to eight feet in height and
meander in a naturalistic manner without adversely
affecting natural drainage.
[5] Planting shall consist of evergreen trees of minimum
height six feet to eight feet planted 10 feet on center,
shade trees 2 1/2 inches to three inches caliper, flowering
trees four feet to five feet height and shrubs two feet
height, planted in naturalistic groupings of mixed plant
varieties and sizes.
(b) Reverse frontage buffer.
[1] Reverse frontage screening shall be required where
residential units and/or lots back onto any arterial or major
collector street. The following landscape treatments shall
be provided in order to screen private residential spaces
from the roadway.
[a] Provide a continuous landscape/sidewalk easement or
open space strip of not less than 50 feet width.
[b] Preserve existing trees within the provided landscape
buffer area. Supplement understory with shadetolerant
naturalistic massed plantings of evergreen
and ornamental trees in order to complete screening
of residences. Meander sidewalk into new plantings
and, as necessary, to preserve existing trees.
§ 200-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-91
1:749
[2] In areas void of existing vegetation the following standards
shall apply:
[a] Vertically and horizontally meandering berms shall be
incorporated to achieve a natural rolling park-like
landscape. Berms shall be two feet to eight feet in
height, averaging five feet. The width should vary with
side slopes of 1 to 5 to 1 to 3, without adversely
affecting natural drainage.
[b] Berms shall be overlapping where drainage swales are
required to pass through them. The final design must
be reflected upon the drainage plan.
[c] Sidewalk space shall meander through, around and
over the berms and plantings where possible. Such
sidewalks shall not exceed a maximum pitch of one
inch in 16 inches (vertical rise or change in grade to
horizontal run or distance).
[d] Between reverse frontage cul-de-sacs and other
appropriate locations, the landscape/sidewalk and
pedestrian easements depth shall be increased to
allow pedestrian space to expand into berms and
plantings for added interest and safety. Pedestrian
access easements shall be integrated into this space.
[e] If possible, expanded landscape space shall be
coordinated with intersections to take advantage of
the focal point created.
[f] Street trees 30 feet to 50 feet on center shall be
planted along the roadway.
[g] To reduce berming and create a spatial sense of entry,
berms at local road/minor arterial or collector road
intersections may terminate at the rear of the homes.
The houses shall then face the minor arterial or
collector road at a 45° angle.
[h] The berm shall be continuously planted with masses
and groupings of evergreen trees, shade and
ornamental trees, and shrubs. The design shall
maximize screening of residences and de-emphasize
the linearity of the roadway. The following quantities
shall be provided:
Type of Tree or Shrub
Quantity Per 1,000
Linear Feet
Street trees 20
Shade trees 50
§ 200-91 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-91
1:750
Type of Tree or Shrub
Quantity Per 1,000
Linear Feet
Evergreen trees 55
Ornamental trees 10
Shrubs 150
[i] Plants shall be provided in a mix of sizes with average
sizes of shade trees averaging two inches to 2 1/2
inches caliper, evergreen trees five feet to six feet
height, ornamental trees five feet to six feet height
and shrubs 24 inches to 36 inches height. A mixture of
larger and smaller sizes shall be provided.
[j] The ground plane shall be primarily lawn, with a
mulched planting bed and any other ground cover
treatment clearly indicated.
[k] Plant varieties tolerant of dry, sunny conditions shall
be used.
[l] Frost-free and lockable water spigots (one per lot)
shall be provided along the landscape easement in
order to allow for maintenance and irrigation. These
spigots shall be connected to the meter at the building
for each lot. Separate meters shall not be provided for
these spigots.
[3] Whenever a reverse frontage buffer is required, the
applicant shall convey a deed of easement therefor to the
Township. The easement shall prohibit the owner of the fee
interest from erecting any structures (such as tool sheds,
pools, fences or play equipment), storing or composting of
organic or inorganic materials or removing any of the
original materials within the easement area. The owner of
the fee interest shall be permitted to add new plantings
which are in keeping with the established planting design
or remove diseased or dead materials with the written
approval of the Township or the Township Landscape
Architect. The fee owner shall be responsible for
maintenance as specified in Subsection Q hereof. A note
shall be added to the final plat clearly referring to the
provisions of the easement mentioned herein. The
easement area shall be monumented in the field as
required by the Township Engineer and a note to this
effect shall be included in the final map. All deeds for
reverse frontage lots shall incorporate appropriate
restrictions, approved by the Planning Board Attorney,
preventing removal of berms and buffer plantings, both
§ 200-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-91
1:751
within and outside such landscape easements. [Added
9-19-1988 by Ord. No. 88-24]
(c) Filtered buffer.
[1] Filtered screening shall be required around the perimeter
of parking areas and where interior roads run parallel with
other roads, parking areas or the perimeter of a site in
order to screen unsafe distractions and avoid confusion.
The following standards shall apply:
[a] Provide landscape buffer area of 25 feet in width or as
per the requirements for front yards in Part 4, Zoning,
of this chapter, whichever is greater.
[b] Preserve existing trees within the landscape buffer
area. If existing vegetation is insufficient, the
landscape strip shall be supplemented with new
understory plantings of shade-tolerant coniferous and
ornamental trees in naturalistic groupings.
[c] In areas of necessary disturbance, existing quality
vegetation shall be relocated for use in other areas.
Detailed plans for tree removal and relocation must be
made on plans and in the field (tag trees) for review
and inspection.
[2] In areas void of existing vegetation, the following
standards shall apply:
§ 200-91 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-91
1:752
[a] Provide gentle berming with masses and groupings of
evergreen, shade and ornamental trees and shrubs.
The planting may be predominantly mixed varieties of
shade trees and evergreen shrubs. Parked cars shall
be screened from all vehicular and pedestrian views.
Shrubs used to screen headlight glare shall be spaced
a minimum of two feet on center as a double row.
[b] The landscape design shall provide shade for parking
areas and evergreen and ornamental trees to screen
nuisances and emphasize appropriate views.
[c] All plants shall be tolerant of harsh roadside
conditions.
[d] If a twenty-five-foot landscape strip cannot be
provided, a row of evergreen trees or a combination of
a low wall and berm with planting may be required.
[e] Minimum plant sizes shall be shade trees two inches
to 2 1/2 inches caliper, evergreen and ornamental
trees four feet to five feet height and shrubs two feet
height.
[f] Irrigation of all open space/planting areas within
nonresidential developments shall be provided.
(d) Windbreak/heavy screening. Windbreak screening shall be
required where necessary to provide windbreak or to stop
windborne debris from leaving a site. This type of screening
may also be required in undersized buffer areas or around
outdoor storage facilities. The following standards shall apply:
[1] Provide a landscape strip consisting of a double staggered
row of evergreen trees of six feet to eight feet height
spaced eight feet on center.
§ 200-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-91
1:753
[2] If a landscape buffer area is less than 10 feet wide or
windborne debris is produced, then a fence may be
required in addition to planting.
[3] All outdoor storage facilities shall be screened with a
landscape strip. If the strip is less than 10 feet wide, a
fence shall be required.
[4] If a fence is required, it shall be six feet high and of a
design consistent with the architecture of the principal
building. Planting shall be included in any fencing plan.
[5] Irrigation of all open space/planting areas in
nonresidential and high density residential developments
shall be provided.
(7) Parking areas. The objectives of the landscape architectural
treatment of all parking areas shall be to provide for safe and
convenient movement of vehicles, to limit pedestrian/vehicular
conflicts, to limit paved areas, to provide for screening from public
rights-of-way and buildings, to soften the overall visual impact of
parking lots and to provide shade and reduce heat island effects.
(a) Parking areas shall comply with the requirements of
§ 200-222E(1) of Part 4, Zoning, of this chapter.
(b) Large parking lots shall be subdivided into modules as per
§ 200-29M(3) of Part 1 of this chapter. Separation of modules
should be achieved by a landscape buffer area and strip of 10
feet width. Integrating pedestrian circulation into these strips
should be considered.
(c) Trees within the parking areas shall be provided at a minimum
rate of two trees per 10 parking spaces. Preservation or
relocation of existing trees greater than five inches in caliper is
encouraged to meet this requirement. Landscape buffer or
parking area perimeter plantings do not satisfy this
requirement.
(d) Any parking area in a front yard or within clear view from the
public right-of-way shall be screened from view by a landscape
buffer area.
(e) Parking areas shall be screened from interior drives using
evergreen, deciduous and flowering trees and shrubs to create
a continuous landscape strip of 10 feet minimum width.
Consider integration of pedestrian walkways within these
strips.
(f) Parking structures shall receive landscape treatment which
softens the bulk and scale of the structures and screens the
ground-level cars from public right-of-way and buildings. Deck
§ 200-91 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-91
1:754
level planting shall be treated similarly to a parking lot on
grade.
(g) Plant sizes shall be a minimum 2 1/2 inches to three inches
caliper for shade trees, five feet to six feet height for evergreen
and ornamental trees and two feet height for shrubs.
(h) Parking lot lighting should be sited within landscape islands.
However, trees shall not hinder safe lighting coverage.
Therefore, varieties must be considered. Shade trees should be
used so as to reduce glare to adjacent properties, buildings and
roadways.
(i) Pedestrian and vehicular conflicts shall be minimized through
design; yet, when necessary, clearly indicated by change of
paving and/or plant material.
(8) Pedestrian spaces. The objectives of landscape architectural
treatment of pedestrian access shall be to promote free and safe
movement of pedestrians and bicycles into, in between and through
§ 200-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-91
1:755
the proposed and existing facilities and to provide pleasant
pedestrian spaces at building entrances and nodes. The following
standards shall apply:
(a) Pedestrian and bicycle access shall be provided from public
roadways, parking lots and adjacent land uses where
appropriate.
(b) The layout of pedestrian walkways shall be consistent with the
overall design. In natural landscapes, walkways shall meander
through plantings and berms. Formal landscapes may require
long straight walkways. The views of the pedestrian shall be
visually interesting.
(c) Plantings along pathways shall provide shade, orientation and
views.
(d) Provide benches and sitting areas along pathways where
appropriate and particularly where they can incorporate or
provide views of a significant landscape feature, recreational
facility or interesting site design of the project.
(e) All walkways shall have an unobstructed width of four feet to
five feet for pedestrians and eight feet for pedestrians and
bicycles and be paved appropriately. These standards do not
apply to sidewalks along Township streets.
(f) Connections to open space areas and facilities on adjacent
properties shall be provided. Pedestrian easements between
lots with a paved walkway may be required.
(g) Pedestrian bridges over streams, ravines or drainage swales
are encouraged and shall be required when necessary to make
connections in pedestrian systems. They are subject to all
regulatory agency permit requirements.
(h) Other pedestrian amenities, such as kiosks, water fountains,
pedestrian scale lighting and gazebos, shall be provided where
appropriate.
(i) Bicycle parking for each building, adequate space for bicycle
movements and visual screening shall be provided.
(j) Building entrances, plazas, exterior malls and nodes shall
receive detailed pedestrian scale landscape architectural
treatments. Plantings shall include shade trees, evergreen and
ornamental trees and shrubs. The planting design shall provide
visual variety and interest, spatial enclosure and separation
from parking areas and protection from sun and wind. Sitting
areas with benches or seat walls shall be provided.
§ 200-91 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-91
1:756
(9) Amenities/resources. The objectives of landscape architectural
treatment of sites inclusive of historic resources and natural
amenities shall be to preserve and enhance such amenities for
present and future West Windsor residents. Historic resources and
natural amenities are areas of unique landscape character. This
may include, but is not limited to, bodies of water, streams,
wetlands, windbreaks, groves of trees, hedgerows, orchards,
unique vistas, farmsteads, villages and historic structures and
landmarks. Land developments in West Windsor Township shall be
designed to preserve and utilize these amenities as features. The
architectural, site plan and landscape architectural design shall
utilize these amenities for design themes, preserving their heritage
and enhancing their significance. The following standards shall
apply:
(a) Utilize the uniqueness of the existing bodies of water, groves of
trees, hedgerows, historic structures and landmarks and
farmsteads within the site plan as features.
(b) Respect the historic value and character of the villages which
exist in West Windsor Township. Development within these
areas shall conserve their individual character.
(c) Provide landscaping as required, integrated with existing
vegetation or historic landscape themes.
(d) When appropriate, the development of historical markers or
displays in coordination/agreement with the West Windsor
Historical Society shall be required.
Q. Landscape maintenance. [Added 5-16-1988 by Ord. No. 88-9]
(1) A landscape management/maintenance specification shall be
provided in conjunction with all approved subdivisions as to street
§ 200-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-91
1:757
trees, common open space and areas to be dedicated to the public
and all approved site plans. In addition, a copy of the reverse
frontage maintenance specifications for the tasks outlined in the
maintenance matrix for this area must be provided to all owners of
fee simple reverse frontage lots at the time of sale.
(2) These documents shall provide specifications for perpetual
maintenance in order to assure a safe and attractive landscape
environment and to promote healthy growth of all plant materials.
They may take the form of a monthly schedule or a categorized
guideline. All maintenance items shall be on a site-specific basis
and shall comply with the following standards.
(a) Maintenance matrix. The maintenance matrix set forth in the
first attachment following Subsection R of this section
describes the tasks which shall be undertaken for each
landscape area.
(b) Maintenance tasks. Applicants shall prepare a customized set
of maintenance specifications consistent with the following
minimum standards, which shall apply to every approved
subdivision with respect to trees, common open space and
areas proposed to be dedicated to the public and to every
approved site plan.
[1] Periodic inspection.
[a] All lands, developed or undeveloped, shall receive
periodic inspection to evaluate the performance of
landscape areas and the need for maintenance. Such
an inspection shall be conducted by the applicant or
its successor in interest at a minimum interval of once
every month. During the growing season, recreation,
streetscape, parking and buffer areas shall be
inspected every two weeks. Stormwater areas shall be
inspected after every storm or storm episode.
[b] During this site inspection, the need to perform the
tasks outlined in the maintenance matrix for the
specific area being inspected shall be evaluated.
Developments for which a detailed maintenance
specification were developed shall be inspected based
upon the details of the provided specifications.
Remaining areas shall be inspected in relation to the
maintenance specifications contained in this
subsection.
[2] Debris and weed control.
[a] This task shall include the removal of all undesirable
litter, debris and weeds. The objective of this task is to
provide a neat, orderly, well-maintained appearance.
§ 200-91 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-91
1:758
At the time of each monthly site inspection, a site
shall be investigated for the presence of any debris
or weeds. Any objects or plants which create a health
or safety hazard or unnatural visual nuisance shall be
removed immediately.
[b] For developed areas exposed to public view (e.g.,
streetscape, parking, buffer, open space and
stormwater areas), investigation and weed and debris
control shall be undertaken on a biweekly basis during
each mowing season. A general fall cleanup shall be
provided to remove debris accumulated in that
season.
[3] Irrigation.
[a] All developed landscaped areas shall be evaluated at
the time of inspection for the general condition and
success of irrigation methods. Any inadequacies in the
performance of an irrigation system shall be rectified
as soon as possible.
[b] Automatic sprinkler systems should be cleaned out
and turned off in the fall before the first frost and
tested and turned on in the spring.
[4] Mulching.
[a] This task shall include the maintenance of all planting
beds around trees, shrubs and ground covers or those
ground areas covered with decorative stone or other
materials.
[b] All planting beds with existing or specified organic
mulch shall be maintained with a minimum of two
inches depth of shredded bark mulch or an equivalent.
To maintain this level, new mulch shall be applied
each spring. Turf or lawn adjacent to beds shall be
edged to prevent encroachment of turf and present a
neat, distinct border and appearance.
[c] Areas with decorative stone or other materials shall be
maintained with a neat appearance and at such a level
that no weeds, bare ground or soil are exposed.
[5] Seasonal plantings.
[a] Seasonal plantings include all annuals, perennial
flower beds or seasonal features as specified on the
landscape plans. Provisions for seasonal planting shall
be made such that continual installation and/or
maintenance is assured.
§ 200-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-91
1:759
[b] All annual flower beds shall be rototilled to a depth of
six inches with the proper proportions of soil, peat
moss and fertilizer added as necessary before planting
every year. Annual flower beds shall be planted in
May; flowers shall be removed after frost in the fall.
[c] During the growing season, all beds shall receive
periodic inspection, irrigation and weeding in order to
maintain a neat appearance.
[d] All spring bulbs shall be periodically mulched and the
soil amended annually. New bulbs shall be installed
after the first frost in the fall as necessary. During the
growing season, all beds shall receive periodic
inspection, irrigation and weeding to maintain a neat
appearance.
[6] Mowing.
[a] The mowing standards shall apply to all lands planted
as lawn, turf or wildflowers or those with naturalized
grasses and weeds. The objective of all mowing shall
be to create a neat, well-maintained appearance.
Blades on all equipment shall be sharp, in order to
prevent excessive damage to the grasses.
[b] Grasses and weeds around trees and shrubs will be
trimmed to the same height as mowed areas by the
use of appropriate hand tools, in order to prevent
undesirable damage to the trees or shrubs. Clippings
shall be removed from all paved surfaces. Alternating
mowing patterns shall be utilized to prevent
compactions.
[c] The following standards shall apply:
[i] Turf. Turf areas shall include grasses planted in
active recreation areas (including those within
stormwater management areas). The turf in these
areas shall not exceed a height of six inches. In
order to maintain this standard, approximately 22
to 30 mowings per year will be required. It is
preferable to maintain these areas at a height of
two inches to three inches, with mowing at a
frequency such that no more than 1/3 of a grass
blade is removed per cutting. The grass shall be
cut when the height reaches three inches to five
inches.
[ii] Lawn. Lawn areas shall include grasses planted in
passive recreation areas, stormwater areas,
buffers and streetscapes and all other open lawn
§ 200-91 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-91
1:760
areas. The grass plantings in these areas shall not
exceed a height of 12 inches. In order to maintain
this standard, approximately 12 to 15 mowings
per year will be required.
[iii] Wildflowers. Wildflowers shall include those
planted with annual and perennial herbaceous
plants. Those wildflower areas which are
designed to be maintained as such shall be
mowed once a year. This shall occur at the time
recommended on the original landscaped plan or
in the late fall while the wildflowers are dormant.
[iv] Undeveloped areas. The grasses, weeds and other
natural material within these areas (not including
the Greenbelt) shall not exceed 12 inches in
height. All Greenbelt lands shall not be mowed
except for removal of noxious weeds at the
direction of the Township Health Officer.
[7] Pruning.
[a] Pruning shall include the removal of dead or diseased
wood, wood infested with insects, weak or structural
defects in the wood, excessive suckers and shoots and
any irregular or damaged growth.
[b] All plants shall be checked during the periodic
inspection to determine if pruning is necessary. Care
shall be taken to prune flowering trees and shrubs
properly during the dormant season or after
flowering. Evergreen shrubs shall be pruned after
flowering.
[c] Shrub material shall not be sheared as individual
plants. The plants that are intended for screening or
buffering shall be pruned in natural massed forms so
as to enhance the plants' natural growth.
[d] Root pruning of all trees adjacent to curbs or
sidewalks shall be undertaken as necessary to prevent
heaving of the sidewalk/curb by excessive roots. The
need for such pruning shall be determined during the
periodic inspection and with knowledge of the most
recent pruning. Care shall be taken not to prune a root
system in excess of 1/3 diameter of the tree per year.
[8] Fertilizer and amendments.
[a] Fertilizer and soil amendments should be added as
necessary and/or on a seasonal basis.
§ 200-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-91
1:761
[b] Fertilizer is optimally applied to lawn and turf areas
three times per season. Timing, frequency and rate of
application shall be adjusted according to weather and
horticultural and soil test conditions for each specific
site.
[c] Fertilizer shall be applied by accepted methods only.
Safety shall always be of prime consideration. Care
shall be taken not to apply fertilizer when the ground
is wet or under extreme stress or during windy
conditions.
[d] Soil amendments such as lime, gypsum or peat moss
may have to be added to the soil of lawns, turf or
planting areas periodically. The need for such soil
amendments shall be analyzed during the periodic
inspections and in conjunction with a soil test.
[9] Insect and disease control. The control of insects and
disease associated with all planting areas shall be a
maintenance priority. All plantings shall be periodically
inspected for insect or disease infestation. Methods
utilized to control insects and disease may range from
spraying and pruning to plant removal. Whatever method
is utilized, safety and control shall always be of prime
concern. Certified and trained personnel shall always
perform this task.
[10] Renovation. Renovation includes the reseeding or
replanting of landscape areas damaged, destroyed or
failing due to insects, disease, weather or physical
damage. Specific areas will require detailed specifications
for renovation. The following standards shall apply:
[a] Lawn, turf or wildflowers. All areas where soil has
been exposed shall be renovated during the next
planting season. Proper horticultural and soil erosion
prevention methods shall be utilized. If soil erosion
has occurred, the area shall be repaired. A seed
mixture compatible to existing plantings and
conditions shall always be utilized.
[b] Plantings. All plantings which are damaged or
destroyed shall be replaced during the next planting
season. A failing, damaged or destroyed landscape
screen with buffer shall be renovated or replaced
within a reasonable amount of time, but not to exceed
the subsequent growing season.
[11] Site amenities. Site amenities include, but are not limited
to, tot lots, play structures, benches, tables, bridges,
paths, fences, walls, banks, bicycle racks and signs. All of
§ 200-91 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-91
1:762
these amenities shall be periodically inspected.
Maintenance procedures will vary from one site to another.
At a minimum, inspection shall occur twice a year in early
March and early August. Any damaged, worn or unsafe
conditions shall be rectified immediately.
[12] Landscape lighting. All lighting essential to pedestrian and
vehicular circulation shall be periodically inspected.
Damaged or malfunctioning lights shall be replaced or
repaired immediately.
[13] Paved surfaces.
[a] All paved surfaces shall be periodically inspected and
maintained. Items of normal maintenance not listed
below but found to be necessary shall be performed as
soon as possible to keep these surfaces safe and in
satisfactory condition.
[b] All roadways, parking areas, loading areas and
pedestrian walkways shall be maintained free of snow,
trash and debris at all times.
[c] All stains shall be washed off paved surfaces.
[d] During building occupation, sidewalks shall not be
obstructed with maintenance equipment, trash or
grass clippings.
[e] Damaged pavements shall be repaired and properly
resurfaced or replenished as necessary to assure a
neat appearance and safe usage.
R. Installation and inspection of landscaping. The following installation
and performance and inspection principles and procedures should be
applied to all landscape installations. [Added 5-16-1988 by Ord. No.
88-9]
(1) Prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy, the proposed
landscape as shown on the approved landscape plan must be
installed, inspected and approved by the Township Landscape
Architect. The Township Engineer and Landscape Architect shall
take into account seasonal considerations in this regard as follows.
[Amended 12-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-59]
(a) The planting of trees, shrubs, vines or ground cover as
required by or associated with a subdivision or site plan
approval by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall be installed during the following fall and spring planting
seasons:
§ 200-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-91
1:763
Planting Season Dates Item
Fall 8/15 to 12/15 Evergreen plants
10/15 to 12/15 Deciduous plants
Spring 3/1 to 5/15 All plants
(b) 232Furthermore, the following tree varieties shall not be
planted during the fall planting season due to the hazards
associated with planting these trees in this season:
Acer Rubrum Populus varieties
Betula varieties Prunus varieties
Carpinus varieties Pyrus varieties
Crategus varieties Quercus varieties
Koelreuteria Salix weeping
Liquidamber styraciflua All varieties
Lirodendron tulipifera Tilia tomentosa
Platatnus acerfolia Zelkova varieties
(c) Any plantings installed in conflict with this requirement must
receive the written approval of the Township Engineer or
Landscape Architect, prior to planting. Failure to comply with
these requirements will require the removal of the plantings in
question. This requirement does not apply to seeding or
sodding or plantings specifically for soil stabilization purposes.
The plantings associated with any lot given a certificate of
occupancy outside these periods shall be provided during the
previous or next appropriate season.
(2) All plantings shall be made in a manner consistent with the
instructions and graphics set forth in the following planting details.
(a) For all reverse frontage and other buffer areas, the following
installations and inspection procedures shall be followed. First,
the area should be rough graded for the approval of the
Township Landscape Architect and Engineer. Based upon
comments made during these two inspections, the sidewalk
shall be formed for inspection and approval. Subsequent to
sidewalk installation, the area should be fine graded and the
planting staked for the approval of the Township Landscape
Architect.
(b) If minor changes to the approved plan are made prior to or
during construction, revised or record drawings must be
submitted to the Township and Landscape Architect for
approval. Such revisions shall be indicated by a formal letter of
232. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 200-91 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-91
1:764
request to the Township with a copy to the Township
Landscape Architect and the Township Engineer. Substantial
changes shall require the approval of the board of jurisdiction.
If unapproved or inadequate landscape is implemented, then
appropriate replacement may be required.
(c) Subsequent to landscape installation and until release of
performance bonds, the Township shall have the right to
inspect all landscape areas for conformance to the approved
plans, proper installation and maintenance and performance of
landscape material.
§ 200-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-91
1:765
§ 200-91 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-91
1:766
§ 200-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-91
1:767
§ 200-91 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-91
1:768
S. Bicycle-safe storm grates. Storm sewer grates installed on roadways,
including driveways and parking lot aisles and dedicated bikeways,
shall be bicycle safe. Standard Township construction detail for such
grates shall be utilized. [Added 12-27-1988 by Ord. No. 88-51]
T. Other improvements. In the event that the Township has not adopted
standards for a specific type of improvement, then generally accepted
engineering standards as set forth in engineering and construction
manuals as may be approved and modified by the Township Engineer
for a specific situation shall be used.
U. Traffic signs. [Added 9-19-1988 by Ord. No. 88-26]
(1) A proposed traffic control plan showing traffic signs to be installed
by the developer at its sole expense shall be submitted with each
application for subdivision or site plan approval. The plan shall
indicate the nature and proposed location of traffic and street signs
§ 200-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-91
1:769
§ 200-92. Inspection and fees. [Amended 7-25-1983 by Ord. No.
83-19; 3-26-1984 by Ord. No. 84-8; 10-29-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-26]
needed to assure the safe and controlled flow of traffic on the tract,
including ingress and egress to the site. The information to be
set forth on each sign, including street names, permissible speed
limits, stop and yield signs at intersections, designations of oneway
and dead end streets and prohibited parking locations shall be
specified.
(2) Final sign locations shall be determined by the Township Police
Department after review, when necessary, with the new New Jersey
Department of Transportation of proposed traffic generation and
vehicular movement data and relevant speed and accident
sampling data.
(3) All signs shall be approved by the Township Engineer prior to their
purchase by the developer to assure uniformity and conformance
with the standards contained in the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices.
(4) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any structure
located on the tract until the Township Engineer has certified the
satisfactory installation by the developer of all signage in
accordance with the traffic control plan, as it may be modified by
the Township Police Department or the New Jersey Department of
Transportation.
(5) The installation of electronic traffic control signaling devices is not
prescribed by this section, since a pro rata portion of the
developer's cost for such devices shall be assessed and collected
from the developer pursuant to § 200-88.
A. Prior to starting any construction of the required improvements, the
developer must submit final detailed construction plans to the Township
Engineer for the Township Engineer's review and approval, and shall
pay to the Township Treasurer, by cash or certified check, the
inspection fee as stated in Chapter 82, Fees, for both private and public
improvements.
B. Prior to the proposed start of the various phases of the work, and after
the submission of final constructions plans and posting of inspections
fee, the developer shall request and the Township Engineer shall
arrange a project pre-construction conference between the developer,
contractors, and Township Engineer, and in the case of public sewer
improvements, the Director of Public Works. The Township Engineer
shall be notified by the developer in writing at least five days in advance
of the start of construction following the successful completion of the
pre-construction conference.
§ 200-91 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-92
1:770
C. All of the required public improvements for a development, during and
upon completion of their construction, shall be subject to inspection
and approval by the Township Engineer, who shall be notified by the
developer in writing at least five days prior to the initial start of
construction. On-site private improvements relating to stormwater
management, drainage, landscaping and circulation as shown on an
approved final development plan shall also be subject to inspection and
approval by the Township Engineer.
D. No underground installations shall be covered until inspected and
approved by the Township Engineer. If such installation is covered prior
to inspection, it shall be uncovered or another means of inspection
acceptable to the Township Engineer, such as closed circuit television
inspection, shall be used, and all costs for same are to be borne by the
developer.
E. At a minimum, the Township Engineer will make the following
inspections:
(1) Roadway subgrade prior to placing subbase material and/or
bituminous stabilized base course material.
(2) The bituminous stabilized base course material during installation
and compaction and prior to applying bituminous material tack
coat for the bituminous concrete surface course.
(3) Bituminous concrete surface course materials while it is being laid.
(4) Finished bituminous concrete surface course pavement.
(5) Concrete curb and sidewalks, when the forms are laid and the
subgrade is leveled and compacted prior to placing concrete, also
during the placing and finishing of the concrete.
(6) Such inspections as the Township Engineer shall deem necessary of
the pipe drains, inlets, municipal utilities lines and appurtenances,
etc., while pipes, etc., are being laid and prior to backfilling
trenches, inlets and manholes while being constructed.
(7) Stormwater management improvements provided to address
development stormwater quantity control, stormwater quality
control and groundwater recharge, both during their construction
as well as post-construction and prior to release of performance
guarantee.
(8) Landscape planting materials on site, but before installation, and
finished landscape plantings.
(9) Approval or reasons for withholding approval for either public or
private improvements shall be given promptly, and in any event
within 45 days after inspection. If work proceeds without such
approval or not in compliance therewith, the Township Engineer, in
addition to any other remedies available to the Township, may issue
§ 200-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-92
1:771
§ 200-93. Acceptance of streets and improvements [Amended
6-25-1990 by Ord. No. 90-18]
an order requiring immediate cessation of the affected work and
prohibiting resumption thereof until approval is obtained or
noncompliance corrected.
F. Inspection not to be deemed acceptance. Inspection of work by the
Township Engineer shall not be considered to be final acceptance or
rejection of an improvement, but shall only be considered to be a
determination of whether or not the specific improvement work
observed was performed in accordance with Township specifications, or
other prevailing standards, at the time of inspection. Any subsequent
damage to such improvement, or defect that makes itself apparent, or
other unforeseen circumstances due to weather, other construction
work, settlement, etc. between the time of observed installation and the
time of request of release of performance guarantee shall be the full
responsibility of the developer. No work shall be considered accepted
until release of all guarantees required under Chapter 200, Land Use,
Article XVII, Improvement Guaranties.
A. Prior to the release of a performance bond covering any public or
private improvements within a subdivision, there shall be filed with the
Township Engineer a deed of dedication containing a metes and bounds
description of all easements, two paper prints plus one reproducible
Polyester Film tracing (matte finish) (base thickness, 0.003 inches) and
as-built plans and profiles drawn to a scale of one inch equals five feet
vertically, which plans and profiles shall be based on a final survey and
shall be in the United States Coast and Geodetic Control Survey datum.
Such drawing shall show how streets and other improvements were
actually constructed or installed. The following data must be shown
with measurements from the property lines:
(1) Plans and profiles of the streets showing elevations as constructed
and reference bench marks.
(2) Plans and profiles of sanitary and storm sewers showing elevations
of inverts of manholes and catch basins and elevations of inlet
gratings and manhole rims; also locations of sanitary sewer laterals
dimensioned from main and reference dimensions to T or V
connections from manholes. [Amended 4-20-1990 by Ord. No.
90-12]
B. Upon the submission of the following documents and the approval
thereof by the Township Engineer and the Township Attorney, the
Township shall accept those streets, rights-of-way and other public
improvements in a subdivision by resolution: [Amended 10-16-1995
by Ord. No. 95-42]
(1) Satisfaction of all items set forth in Subsection A of this section.
§ 200-92 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-93
1:772
§ 200-94. Maintenance of streets prior to acceptance. [Added
7-25-1983 by Ord. No. 83-17]
(2) Deeds of dedication with metes and bounds descriptions for all
easements, detention basins, greenbelts or other public
improvements other than streets and rights-of-way intended to be
owned by the Township.
(3) Final plat filed with the Mercer County Clerk's Office showing all
streets, rights-of-way, easements, detention basins, greenbelts or
other public or quasi-public improvements.
(4) All applicable streets, rights-of-way and/or other public
improvements have been inspected and have received final
approval by the municipal engineer. [Added 10-16-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-42]
(5) Posting of the required maintenance guaranties with the Township
and approved by the Township prior to acceptance by the Township
Council of the applicable streets, rights-of-way and/or other public
improvements, in an amount provided by law. [Added 10-16-1995
by Ord. No. 95-42]
A. Until such time as the streets are accepted by the governing body in
accordance with § 200-93, the developer shall be obligated to perform
all maintenance, including but not limited to snowplowing, on said
streets.
B. In the event that the developer fails to maintain the streets and thereby
creates a hazard, the Township may perform such maintenance as is
necessary to remove the hazard. The costs incurred by the Township
shall be billed to and paid by the developer. Emergency maintenance
work performed by the Township as a result of the developer's failure to
properly maintain shall not constitute an acceptance of the streets.
C. With regard to snow and ice removal, the developer shall cause the
removal of snow and ice within 24 hours after the snow has ceased.
[Added 2-28-1994 by Ord. No. 94-05]
D. Any developer violating provision of this section shall be subject to all
the available penalties established in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article II, Penalty.
§ 200-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-94
1:773

ARTICLE XX
Design Standards for Collector Roads
[Added 8-16-1993 by Ord. No. 93-23]
§ 200-95. Legislative findings and purposes.
A number of major and minor collector roads set forth in the Circulation
Element to the West Windsor Township Master Plan run through existing
residential developments or residential developments which are expected
to be built in the Township. Many of these roads are already complete.
Because of the cartway widths and radii, tangents and other design features
of these roads, vehicular traffic may and often does travel at higher than
the posted speed and at speeds which represent a danger to pedestrians
as well as to other motorists. This is particularly so because many children
and other pedestrians live, work and play in close proximity to the roads
and must often cross them, since they bisect residential neighborhoods.
Given this, it is necessary for reasons of public safety to reduce vehicular
speed by building friction into the roadway system through limiting these
roads to two lanes, limiting cartway widths, providing for medians and
bicycle lanes and designating paved areas which are not in use, all of
which will reduce cartway widths and establishing marked crosswalks and
constructing pedestrian-activated signals. It is also necessary for public
safety reasons to provide better means of pedestrian crossings of these
roadways and turning lanes to handle turning movements. Two-lane
roadways with landscaped medians, with bicycle lanes and with enhanced
pedestrian crossings will also protect the integrity of established
neighborhoods, prevent the division of existing and new neighborhoods by
requiring collector roads to be designed so as not to act as physical barriers
and maintain and preserve property values.
§ 200-96. Development applications and other developments to
which the design standards are applicable.233
The design standards set forth in § 200-97 shall apply to all major and
minor collector roads so designated in the Circulation Plan Element to
the Master Plan of West Windsor Township included in all applications for
development, including those for which final approval has been granted but
building permits have not been issued as of the effective date of this Part
3 to the maximum extent permitted by law, except that the standards set
forth in § 200-98 shall apply if the collector road is an existing road. No
building permits shall be issued after the effective date of this Part 3 for
any development, the approved development application for which contains
such a roadway, until the developer submits a roadway design conforming
to such standards and a construction schedule, both of which are acceptable
to the Township Council, and executes a developer's agreement providing
for the same approved by the Township Council, as the case may be.
The standards set forth in §§ 200-97 and 200-98 shall also apply when
233. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 200-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-96
1:775
a property owner or developer has agreed to be bound thereby or as
otherwise permitted by law. Public entities building or improving collector
roads shall follow the design standards set forth in §§ 200-97 and 200-98
respectively to the extent that funding permits.
§ 200-97. Design standards.
Major and minor collector roads as designated in the Circulation Plan
Element to the Master Plan of West Windsor Township shall be designed in
accordance with the following standards:
A. Number of travel lanes. Two travel lanes shall be provided, one in each
direction, and cartway not used for travel, turning or bicycle lanes shall
be suitably marked so as to indicate that it is not in use.
B. Cartway widths. The cartway width shall be 50 feet, except that the
width shall be varied therefrom to the extent necessary to assure safety
and adequate space for turning movements and to assure a design in
accordance with Intersection Details A, B and C included in Subsection
G of this section.
C. Medians and turning lanes. Permanent raised curbed medians shall be
provided for the full length of the collector road which is part of the
application for development, except that gaps of sufficient width for
turning movements for emergency vehicles shall be provided in
proximity to fire hydrants, but no less than every 800 feet. However, no
such gap shall be provided for fire hydrants within 250 feet of the
intersection. They shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs and ground
cover in a manner consistent with sound landscape architecture
principles, shall not interfere with applicable sight distances and shall
be acceptable to the board of jurisdiction. The narrow tip of the island
surrounding the crosswalk shall be concrete. Turning lanes and other
median elements shall be designed in the manner set forth in
Intersection Details A, B and C included in Subsection G of this section,
except that the medians shall extend from intersection to intersection.
D. Curbing. All cartways and medians shall be curbed in the manner set
forth in § 200-58 of Part 2 of this chapter, except that they shall be
mountable in the continuation of the medians between those portions
shown in Intersection Details A, B, and C included in Subsection G.
E. Pedestrian crosswalks. Suitably marked pedestrian crossings shall be
provided at each intersection and shall be located so as to provide a
safe landing area on the median. Where intersections are to be
signalized at the time the development is built out or in the future, such
signals shall include a pedestrian-activated crossing control. Signage
controls shall be installed for intersections which do not have signals.
F. Bicycle lanes. Six-foot-wide bicycle lanes with appropriate signage and
markings shall be provided on both sides of the roadway. They shall be
separated from the cartway if the board of jurisdiction determines that
§ 200-96 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-97
1:776
§ 200-98. Retrofitting improvements to existing collector roads.
When the collector road to which the design standards apply is in existence,
the standards set forth in § 200-97 shall apply, except that:
separating them from the cartway is preferable for safety and site
design reasons. The intersection treatment for bicycle lanes which are
not separated from the cartway shall be as set forth in the Intersection
Details A, B and C included in Subsection G.
G. Intersection details. Intersection Details A, B and C are included at the
end of this chapter.
A. Raised and curbed medians shall be located on each side of vehicular
intersections for 200 feet to 250 feet, depending upon intersection
spacing and drainage considerations, in the manner set forth in
Intersection Details A, B and C, included in § 200-97G, and at
pedestrian and bicycle path intersections, but need not extend from one
intersection to the next. In lieu of a continuous median between
intersections and until their further installation under the auspices of a
public entity in conformance with § 200-97, the pavement between the
raised medians shall be striped in order to continue the median design
theme.
B. The median and turning lane designs set forth in Intersection Details A,
B and C included in § 200-97G shall be followed, except that they may
be modified to the extent necessary in light of right-of-way and
pavement widths and other existing conditions.
C. The median islands on both sides of the intersection shall include at
least three holes punched through the existing pavement to the soil
beneath to accommodate shade trees and shall include suitable
shrubbery and ground cover in accordance with sound landscape
architectural principals.
D. Bicycle lanes shall be provided on existing cartway if the cartway is of a
sufficient width therefor. Bicycle lanes separated from the cartway need
not be provided. The bicycle lane widths may be reduced to five feet and
one bicycle lane may be eliminated to the extent that it is necessary to
do so in order to accommodate the bicycle lane within the existing
cartway. Bicycle lanes shall be marked by striping or other means as the
board of jurisdiction determines most effectively enhances bicyclist
safety.
§ 200-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-98
1:777

ARTICLE XXI
Stormwater Control
[Amended 12-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-41; 10-27-1986 by Ord. No.
86-27; 4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12; 4-10-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-06]
§ 200-99. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural BMPs. Structural BMPs should be
integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies and
proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both
environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed to
stormwater. Source control plans should be developed based upon
physical site conditions and the origin, nature and the anticipated
quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater
management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established
performance standards for water quality, quantity and groundwater
recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development," as defined in § 200-100.2.
C. Applicability.
(1) This article shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This article shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by West Windsor Township.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this article are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act
or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. This article
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law except
§ 200-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-99
1:779
§ 200-100. General administration.
§ 200-100.1. General standards.
that, where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
A. No application for development shall be approved unless the Township
Engineer has certified to the approving authority, in writing, that:
(1) The applicant has provided the Township Engineer with sufficient
information to determine whether or not the proposed development
will conform with Township runoff standards, runoff control details
and stormwater detention facility design criteria.
(2) In the judgment of the Township Engineer, the proposed
development will substantially conform with these standards and
the design criteria set forth herein.
B. The stormwater management plans submitted shall demonstrate
careful consideration of the general and specific concerns, values and
standards of the Municipal Master Plan and applicable county and state
storm drainage control programs, any County Mosquito Commission
control standards and shall be based on environmentally sound site
planning, engineering and architectural techniques.
C. Development shall use the best available technology to minimize off-site
stormwater runoff, increase on-site infiltration, simulate natural
drainage systems and minimize off-site discharge of pollutants to
ground and surface water and encourage natural filtration functions.
D. Sufficient inlets, basins and drainage appurtenances shall be provided
to channel all surface runoff to the detention facility, except the design
storm shall be a twenty-five-year frequency.
E. All sites shall be graded to secure proper drainage away from buildings
and to prevent the collection of stormwater in pools.
F. The requirements of this section shall not be satisfied by the
construction of dry wells.
G. Additionally, all work shall be in accordance with the established design
standards of the Township as promulgated by the Township Engineer.
A. Design and performance standards for stormwater management
measures.
(1) Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity and stormwater runoff quality
standards in § 200-101. To the maximum extent practicable, these
§ 200-99 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-100.1
1:780
§ 200-100.2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this article its most reasonable application. The definitions
below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2:
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A state development and redevelopment plan
center as designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban,
regional, town, village or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies into the design. If these strategies alone
are not sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater
management measures necessary to meet these standards shall be
incorporated into the design.
(2) The standards in this article apply only to new major development
and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on
water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and
maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new
major development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or water quality management plan adopted in
accordance with Department rules.
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
B.
§ 200-100.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-100.2
1:781
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, development
means: any activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed
by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural
Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not
exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:IC-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater, sediments
or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body or to a
particular point along a receiving water body.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction with" the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Non-game Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. "Disturbance," for the purpose of this
rule, is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement
of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting or removing of vegetation.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural and
§ 200-100.2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-100.2
1:782
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state or
to a domestic treatment works. Pollutant includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities or
conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers resulting from precipitation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin) or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
§ 200-100.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-100.2
1:783
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
§ 200-100.3. Locations.
§ 200-100.4. Optional locations.
Where it can be demonstrated at the time of Planning Board review that
such on-site basin location within the zoning district permitting that use is
impractical due to engineering feasibility factors, then the Planning Board
may permit such basins to be located offtract and/or out of the zoning
district, provided that the following requirements are met:
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
A. Retention and detention basins as may be required for surface runoff
and drainage control shall be located on site and within the zoning
district permitting that use, subject to the requirements outlined
herein. Such basins shall be considered accessory uses and also subject
to the conditions of Article XXIX, § 200-211 of Part 4, Zoning, of this
chapter.
B. Such stormwater control improvements may be located within the
setback line of the area to be improved, excluding landscape transition
buffers or landscape strips as may be required in Part 4, Zoning, of this
chapter.
A. All of the conditions noted in this article are met, in addition to
§ 200-226 of this chapter.
§ 200-100.2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-100.4
1:784
§ 200-100.5. Site design characteristics.
Basins other than those providing long-term water retention, such as at
a recreational or irrigation lake or basin facility serving three or more
properties, shall be designed to be dewatered, with the side slopes and floor
of such basins to be sodded. Where dewatering is not practical, then areas
adjacent to such basins shall contain protective landscaping (e.g., thorny,
decorative shrubs), arranged so as to restrict access to its edge. Where
basins in general are to be located near parking lots or areas adjacent to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, dense plantings of shrubs to act as barriers
and adequate low-level lighting for safety precautions shall be required.
§ 200-101. Stormwater management requirements for major
developments.
B. Location of the basin does not hinder or discourage the appropriate
development and use of the property on which it is located or the use of
adjacent land and buildings.
C. Permanent access or easement to the basin for maintenance purposes
shall be provided.
D. Utilization of other nearby off-tract basin facilities is not feasible or
practicable as determined by the Township Engineer.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 200-105.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
13:1B-15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or
Clemmys muhlenbergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of § 200-101F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
§ 200-100.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-101
1:785
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity and stormwater runoff quality requirements
of § 200-101F and G may be obtained for the enlargement of an existing
public roadway or railroad or the construction or enlargement of a
public pedestrian access, provided that the following conditions are
met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis that,
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Sections § 200-101F and G to
the maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of § 200-101F and G, existing structures currently in use, such as
homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
§ 200-101F and G that were not achievable on site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in § 200-101F
and G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth at § 200-101E into the design. The
applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures incorporated
into the design of the project. If the applicant contends that it is not
feasible for engineering, environmental or safety reasons to
incorporate any nonstructural stormwater management measures
identified in Subsection E(2) below into the design of a particular
project, the applicant shall identify the strategy considered and
provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss.
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces.
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation.
§ 200-101 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-101
1:786
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed.
(e) Minimize land disturbance, including clearing and grading.
(f) Minimize soil compaction.
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides.
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas.
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy Subsection E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under § 200-101E(2)(i)[2] above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash and other floating, suspended or settleable solids. For
exemptions to this standard, see Section § 200-101E(3)(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
§ 200-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-101
1:787
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches or
is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest
dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench gates and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches or be no greater than
two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in § 200-101G(1) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space four and five-eighths inches long
and one and one-half inches wide (this option does not
apply for outfall netting facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches;
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in § 200-101G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
§ 200-101 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-101
1:788
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in § 200-101F and G
shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate County Clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 200-102 or found on the Department's
website at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 200-101.2, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to postconstruction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area or to
projects subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
§ 200-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-101
1:789
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading.
"High pollutant loading areas” are areas in industrial
and commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan; and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial pollutants activities
which could be a source of in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels; and lubricants, solvents and detergents that
are related to process, manufacturing or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 200-101.2, complete one of
the following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
§ 200-101 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-101
1:790
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten- and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten- and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the postconstruction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to
postconstruction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection F(1)(c)[1], [2] and
[3] above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at § 200-100.2 shall be submitted
to the appropriate Soil Conservation District for review and
approval in accordance with the requirements of this section and
any applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
postconstruction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater
runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the developed site,
expressed as an annual average. Stormwater management
measures shall only be required for water quality control if an
additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being proposed on a
development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to
§ 200-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-101
1:791
any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric
effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or
in a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from
this requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches
of rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of rain from the water quality design
storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of
runoff may take into account the implementation of nonstructural
and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 200-102 or found on the Department's
website at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other
sources of technical guidance are listed in § 200-102. TSS
reduction shall be calculated based on the removal rates for the
BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative removal rates and methods of
calculating removal rates may be used if the design engineer
provides documentation demonstrating the capability of these
alternative rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any
approved alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate
shall be provided to the Department at the following address:
Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of
§ 200-101 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-101
1:792
Environmental Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize
the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R=A+B - (AXB)/100
Where
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs, and
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention Systems 90
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90
Extended detention basin 40-60
Infiltration structure 80
Manufactured treatment device See Section 6.C
Sand filter 80
Vegetative filter strip 60-80
Wet pond 50-90
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in § 200-101F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 200-102.
§ 200-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-101
1:793
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession is provided.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or center
line of the waterway where the bank is undefined. All
encroachments proposed under this subsection shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the Standards For
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
§ 200-101 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-101
1:794
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard For Off-Site Stability in the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS
postconstruction removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to § 200-101G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value
and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in Subsection G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall
a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
special water resource protection area to less than 150 feet as
measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
§ 200-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-101
1:795
§ 200-101.1. System strategy and design.
(e) Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. The system shall be adequate to carry off or store the stormwater and
natural drainage water which originates not only within the lot or tract
boundaries but also that which originates beyond the lot or tract
boundaries which normally flows through the tract. Stormwater runoff,
natural drainage water or water discharged from any source shall not
be so diverted as to overload the existing drainage systems or create
flooding or the need for additional drainage structures on other private
properties or public lands without proper and approved provisions
being made for taking care of these conditions. Over the sidewalk,
under the sidewalk and/or through the curb drains for the purpose of
disposing of the sump pump is prohibited. These facilities must outlet
into an adequate watercourse or drainage system as approved by the
Township Engineer. Roof leaders must be connected to an approved
drainage system as determined by the Township Engineer. In the
absence of a practical outlet for either the sump pump or roof leader,
other disposal systems as approved by the Township Engineer may be
used.
B. Techniques for computing stormwater runoff shall be as approved by
the Township Engineer. The Rational Method of surface runoff
computation may be used under certain circumstances subject to the
approval of the Township Engineer. The Soil Conservation Service
Method (Urban Hydrology For Small Watersheds, Technical Release
No. 55) or other methods approved by the Township Engineer shall be
used for drainage basins larger than 25 acres in area.
C. All internal storm sewers shall be designed for a twenty-five-year storm
frequency with a minimum velocity of three feet per second when
flowing full. All open channels, bridges and culverts shall be designed
for a one-hundred-year storm frequency or as approved by the
Township Engineer.
D. The materials used in the construction of storm sewers and other
drainage structures shall be in accordance with the Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction of the New Jersey
Department of Transportation, latest edition, including any
supplements, addendum and modifications thereto. Modification or
change of these specifications may be effected only with the knowledge
and written consent of the Township Engineer.
E. Wherever possible, all lots shall be designed to provide positive
drainage to the roadway facility fronting the same without flowing onto
or across adjacent property.
§ 200-101 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-101.1
1:796
§ 200-101.2. Calculations of stormwater and groundwater recharge.
F. Land subject to periodic or occasional flooding (floodplain areas) shall
not be considered for any purpose which may endanger life or property
or aggravate the flood hazard. Such land shall be considered for open
spaces or other similar uses.
G. The lowest floor elevation, including any basement, of all proposed
structures shall be one foot or greater above the one-hundred-year
flood elevation along nondelineated streams or at or above the flood
hazard design elevation along delineated streams.
H. Approval for drainage structures shall be obtained from the appropriate
municipal, county, state and federal agencies and offices. Each
applicant shall make application to the Department of Environmental
Protection, the Mercer County Engineering Department and the
Township Engineer. Letters of approval from the appropriate
governmental authorities shall be furnished to the Township Engineer,
with copies to the administrative officer, prior to the granting of final
approval or, if approval is granted conditionally, letters of approval shall
be provided prior to the Township Engineer's signing of the final map or
final plans.
I. Where required by the Township, if a lot or tract is traversed by a
watercourse, surface or underground drainageway or drainage system,
channel or stream, there shall be provided and dedicated a drainage
right-of-way easement to the Township or other owners of private
underground drainage systems conforming substantially with the lines
of such watercourse or drainage system and such further width or
construction of both as will be adequate to accommodate expected
stormwater runoff in the future, based upon reasonable growth
potential in the Township, and in any event, meeting any minimum
widths and locations shown on any adopted Official Map or Master
Plan. Such easement dedication shall be expressed on the plat as
follows: "Drainage easement granted to _______________ for the purposes
provided for and expressed in the Code of the Township of West
Windsor."
J. The depth of standing water at the pavement gutter line shall not
exceed nine inches for a one-hundred-year storm event. In sump
conditions, overland relief shall be provided in the form of a drainage
swale designed to carry the one-hundred-year design flow. As an
alternate, the storm sewer system shall be designed to carry the onehundred-
year design storm from the sump location to the detention
basin and shall include adequate inlet capacity to pass the onehundred-
year design storm.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
§ 200-101.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-101.2
1:797
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at § 200-101.2A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at § 200-101.2A(1)(b). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing
condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design
engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the
site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover have
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the
time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the
presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the
land use type is pasture, lawn or park), with good cover (if the land
use type is woods) or with good hydrologic condition and
conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
§ 200-101.2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-101.2
1:798
§ 200-101.3. Runoff standards.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following: The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method
for Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/, or at New Jersey Geological Survey, 29
Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0427;
(609)984-6587.
A. No land area in the Township shall be developed so that:
(1) The maximum rate of stormwater runoff after development
exceeds:
(a) Fifty percent of the predevelopment peak flow for the two-year,
twenty-four-hour Type III storm.
(b) Seventy-five percent of the predevelopment peak flow for the
ten-year, twenty-four-hour Type III storm.
(c) Eighty percent of the predevelopment peak flow for the onehundred-
year, twenty-four-hour Type III storm.
(2) The drainage of adjacent areas is adversely affected.
(3) Soil erosion during and after development is increased over what
naturally occurs there.
(4) Soil absorption and groundwater recharge capacity of the area is
decreased below what occurs under existing conditions.
(5) The natural drainage pattern of the area is significantly altered.
(6) Wetland areas located within the subject property and in
immediately adjacent properties are deprived of their water supply
provided by surface runoff.
B. Provisions should be made for retention of runoff from small storms
long enough for settlement of particles. Specifically, the stored runoff
from 1 1/4 inches of rainfall occurring in two hours must allow only 90%
to be evacuated from the detention facility during 36 hours or during 18
hours in the case of dry basins in residential areas. This requirement for
retention may be waived for residential areas where runoff is passed in
sheet flow over 30 feet of lawn or leaf-mulch area; and the full extent of
retention will not be required where this would require outlets less than
three inches in diameter.
C. For site plan submissions consisting of 10 acres or more and
subdivision submissions consisting of 10 lots or more, the applicant
shall provide an analysis of the effect of any additional water which will
§ 200-101.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-101.3
1:799
§ 200-101.4. Runoff control details.
In order to duplicate as nearly as possible natural drainage conditions,
regulation and control of stormwater runoff and erosion for any land area to
be developed shall be through on-site water detentions which include, but
are not limited to, the following:
§ 200-101.5. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
drain from the site as a result of the proposed site plan and/or
subdivision, such analysis to specifically document the anticipated
impact that the duration of reduced rate of water flow will have upon
existing drainage structures located between the site and the
downstream municipal boundary lines.
A. Detention areas which may be excavated basins, stabilized earth berms
or dikes or any other form of grading which serves to temporarily
impound and store waters.
B. Rooftop storage through temporary impoundment and storage of
stormwater on flat or slightly pitched building rooftops by use of drain
outlets which restrict the stormwater runoff from the roof surface.
C. Preservation of natural vegetation.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas; wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 200-103B.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed and installed to be strong, durable and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
§ 200-101.3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-101.5
1:800
§ 200-101.6. Design of stormwater detention facilities.
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
5:21-7.4, and 5:21-7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 200-103.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 200-101 of this article.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 200-101 of this article, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
A. Stormwater detention or retention facilities shall be required for all
tracts, except as subsequently noted, and shall be designed to provide
adequate storage for a one-hundred-year storm event. Runoff shall be
computed for each site using curve numbers found in Urban Hydrology
for Small Watersheds, Technical Release No. 55, Engineering Division,
Soil Conservation Service, United States Department of Agriculture,
latest edition, or as further restricted by the Township Engineer on a
site-specific basis. Flood routing computations shall be provided for
basin storage capacity using the following parameters:
(1) Water quality requirements of the Delaware and Raritan Canal
Commission.
(2) Storage requirements of Mercer County.
(3) Flood routing analysis for the two-year storm, the ten-year storm
and the one-hundred-year storm.
(4) Postdevelopment peak outflows from the detention basin shall not
exceed the following:
(a) Fifty percent of the predevelopment peak flow for the two-year,
twenty-four-hour Type III storm at the point of discharge from
the detention basin.
(b) Seventy-five percent of the predevelopment peak flow for the
ten-year, twenty-four-hour Type III storms at the point of
discharge from the detention basin.
§ 200-101.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-101.6
1:801
(c) Eighty percent of the predevelopment peak flow for the onehundred-
year, twenty-four-hour Type III storms at the point of
discharge from the detention basin.
(5) Detention basin berms constructed of fill shall be provided with an
emergency spillway set at or above the maximum water surface
elevation for a one-hundred-year storm and shall be designed for
the maximum flow into the basin.
(6) The emergency spillway shall be designed for a maximum crest
elevation of six inches plus one-foot minimum freeboard. The
exposed surface of the spillway shall be appropriately designed for
integrity at the maximum crest elevation.
(7) The Township Engineer reserves the right to modify the values of
runoff and curve number coefficients assumed for the design.
(8) No detention basin storage allowance will be permitted in parking
areas or parking area islands.
(9) Detention basins shall be constructed with side slopes less than or
equal to one vertical to three horizontal.
B. For commercial developments, a gas/oil separator shall be provided
prior to discharge of stormwater into the detention basin.
C. The perimeter of the basin shall be screened with landscaping as
required by § 200-91P of this Part 3 and as required by the board of
jurisdiction or the Township Landscape Architect.
D. Any stormwater basin that impounds water through the use of an
artificial dike, levee or other barrier and raises the water level five feet
or more above the usual mean low water height when measured from
the downstream toe-of-dam to the emergency spillway crest is classified
as a dam and subject to N.J.A.C. 7:20 of the New Jersey Dam Safety
Standards. All such dams must be designed, constructed, operated,
inspected and maintained in compliance with the rules of N.J.A.C. 7:20.
Detention and retention basin designs that are classified as dams are
discouraged and will only be considered when all other non-dam means
for detention have been exhausted.
E. Stormwater detention facilities may not be required on tracts which
generate a postdevelopment total runoff of less than three cubic feet
per second for a one-hundred-year storm. The runoff shall be
determined using the Rational Method. The runoff coefficient shall be
as determined from the Technical Manual for Stream Encroachment,
published by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
or as modified by the Township Engineer. Where detention facilities are
not required, and with the concurrence of the Township Engineer,
design for water quality may be required depending on site-specific
conditions.
§ 200-101.6 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-101.6
1:802
F. Outlets from detention facilities shall be designed to function without
manual, electric or mechanical controls.
G. Detention facilities in flood hazard areas shall be constructed in
accordance with State Storm Water Management Regulations, N.J.A.C.
7:8-1.1 et set.
H. If the detention facilities utilizing surface impoundment, such as
detention basins or rooftop storage, are used, sufficient volume as
previously described shall be provided. The outlets of such facilities
shall discharge in such a way as not to adversely affect any other
property. If rooftop storage is proposed, the weight of the impounded
water on the roof shall be accounted for in the structural design of the
building, and the roof shall be designed to provide maximum protection
against leakage. If berms or dikes are used to create the impounding
area, they shall be adequately stabilized and the slopes protected with
vegetative cover, paving or riprap to protect against failure or
breaching.
I. If a combination of different stormwater detention techniques is used,
the combined volume of the systems shall be large enough to fully
contain the total volume of required storage.
J. Stormwater detention facilities shall be constantly maintained by the
owner to assure continual functioning of the systems at design capacity
and to prevent the health hazards associated with debris buildup and
stagnant water long enough to constitute a mosquito breeding, disease
or any other type of health problem, unless approved as a multifunction
facility to include water such as a pond. If the land or stormwater
detention facility or facilities are proposed to be dedicated to the
Township and said dedication is accepted by the Township, the
procedures for the construction, dedication and acceptance and
maintenance of such facilities set forth herein, including but not limited
to performance and maintenance bonds, inspections, etc., shall govern.
K. Detention and sediment and erosion control facilities shall be designed
in conformance with the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control in New Jersey of the New Jersey State Soil Conservation
Committee as approved by the Township Engineer or the Mercer
County Soil Conservation District under agreement, except where the
Township Engineer has determined that conditions peculiar to a certain
site warrant exception.
L. Sediment and erosion control measures shall be installed prior to any
other site development, shall apply to all aspects of the proposed
development and shall be in operation during all stages of development.
Increased runoff and sediment resulting from modified soil and surface
conditions caused by the proposed development shall be minimized
and, where possible, retained on site.
§ 200-101.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-101.6
1:803
§ 200-102. Sources of technical guidance.
§ 200-103. Safety standards for stormwater management.
M. Outlet waters from the site or the detention facility shall be discharged
at such locations and velocities as not to cause additional erosion or to
create additional channels below the development.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsection A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306; and
(3) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625, (609)
292-5540.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
§ 200-101.6 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-103
1:804
(1) A "trash rack" is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable and corrosion resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs/ft sq.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs /ft sq.
(3) For purposes of this Subsection B(3), "escape provisions" means
the permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs or other
features that provide easily accessible means of egress from
stormwater management basins. Stormwater management basins
shall include escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
§ 200-103C, a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four feet to six feet
in width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet
below the permanent water surface, and the second step shall
§ 200-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-103
1:805
§ 200-104. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
be located one to one and one-half feet above the permanent
water surface. See § 200-103D for an illustration of safety
ledges in a stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing
agency (municipality, county or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this article, the applicant shall submit all of the required
§ 200-103 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-104
1:806
components of the Checklist for the Site Development Stormwater
Plan at § 200-104C below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this article.
(3) The applicant shall submit sufficient copies as set forth under the
appropriate site plan review stage of this article of the materials
listed in the checklist for site development stormwater plans in
accordance with § 200-104C of this article.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in
this article.
C. Checklist requirements.
(1) The following information shall be required: Topographic base
map. The reviewing engineer may require upstream tributary
drainage system information as necessary. It is recommended that
the topographic base map of the site be submitted which extends a
minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits of the proposed
development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet or greater,
showing two-foot contour intervals. The map as appropriate may
indicate the following: existing surface water drainage, shorelines,
steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or intermittent streams
that drain into or upstream of the Category One waters, wetlands
and floodplains along with their appropriate buffer strips,
marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or vegetative surfaces,
existing man-made structures, roads, bearing and distances of
property lines and significant natural and man-made features not
otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
§ 200-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-104
1:807
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of subsections C(3)
through (6) are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of
controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions for
the design storms specified in § 200-101 of this article.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 200-105.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this article may, in
consultation with the Municipal Engineer, waive submission of any
§ 200-104 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-104
1:808
§ 200-105. Maintenance and repair.
of the requirements in § 200-104C(1) through (6) of this article
when it can be demonstrated that the information requested is
impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant
to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 200-99C of this article
shall comply with the requirements of § 200-105B and C.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris or trash removal; and the name,
address and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project unless such owner or tenant owns or leases
the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 200-105B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on § 200-105B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice
removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
§ 200-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-105
1:809
§ 200-105.1. Maintenance agreements.
As a condition to the granting of any site development approval, the
applicant may be required to enter into an agreement with the Township,
in form satisfactory to the Township Attorney, requiring the installation and
maintenance by the applicant and the applicant's successors in interest of
such improvements on or to the site or imposing such limitations upon the
development thereof as are deemed necessary by the Planning Board for
implementing the standards and criteria set forth in this Part 3; providing
that the municipality may cause such improvements to be installed or
maintained and developments in violation of such limitations to be
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 200-105B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 200-105B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 200-105B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon request
by any public entity with administrative, health, environmental or
safety authority over the site, the maintenance plan and the
documentation required by § 200-105B(6) and (7) above.
(9) The requirements of § 200-105B(3) and (4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal
Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 200-105 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-105.1
1:810
corrected at the expense of the applicant or the applicant's successors in
interest if they shall fail to do so; and granting to the municipality such
rights and easements as shall be reasonably required for access by the
municipality to such improvements and developments for such purposes.
The agreement shall also provide for inspection annually and after each
major flood by the Township Engineer and by another qualified engineer
acceptable to the Township Engineer, at the expense of the applicant and
the applicant's successors in interest, and for the undertaking by the
applicant and successors of such corrective measures as are shown by such
inspection to be required for the proper functioning of the facilities.
§ 200-106. Inspection and stop-work order.
Such improvements and developments on the site, during and upon
completion of their construction, shall be subject to inspection and approval
by the Township Engineer, who shall be notified by the applicant at least
24 hours prior to the start of construction. No underground installation
shall be covered until inspected and approved. Approval or reasons for
withholding approval shall be given promptly, and in any event within
14 days after inspection. If work proceeds without such approval or is
not in compliance therewith, the Township Engineer, in addition to any
other remedies available to the municipality, may issue an order requiring
immediate cessation of the affected work and prohibiting resumption
thereof until approval is obtained or noncompliance is corrected.
§ 200-107. As-built certification.
Prior to the acceptance by the Township of any stormwater facilities, the
developer's engineer shall certify, in writing, that said facilities were
constructed in accordance with the approved plan.
§ 200-108. Joint detention facilities.
§ 200-109. Time for completion of stormwater detention facilities.
A. The provision of separate detention facilities for a number of single
sites is generally more expensive and more difficult to maintain than
provision of joint facilities, each serving a number of sites. In such
cases, a properly planned staged plan and program of detention
facilities may be approved by special ordinance; and in such a case,
compliance with detention requirements for areas first developed may
be postponed at early stages while preliminary work is being
undertaken, sites acquired and construction funds accumulated.
B. In such a case, an initial money contribution will be levied upon each
developer, proportionate to the runoff excess of this proposed
development. Such funds will be held in escrow for use in carrying out
the joint plan. Construction and maintenance responsibility for the joint
facilities will be determined and specified as part of the plan.
§ 200-105.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-109
1:811
§ 200-110. Violations and penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this article shall be
subject to the penalties as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
II, § 1-3, General penalty, of the Township Code.
§ 200-111. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding of holding of any such portion of this article to be
unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause or reason shall not affect
any other portion of this article.
§ 200-111.1. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon the approval by the county
review agency or 60 days from the receipt of the ordinance by the county
review agency if the county review agency should fail to act.
A. Stormwater control improvements shall be completely installed and
stabilized, except for final landscaping, prior to issuance of any building
permit for the development.
B. Final landscaping shall be completed in accordance with the schedule
established for the completion of all other improvements.
§ 200-109 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-111.1
1:812
ARTICLE XXII
General Development Plan Approval Procedures
[Amended 12-22-1980 by Ord. No. 80-41; 4-20-1990 by Ord. No.
90-12; 10-15-1990 by Ord. No. 90-26]
§ 200-112. General intent. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07;
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-43]
The intention of this article is to provide a flexible procedure for the
review, consideration and hearings involving residential and nonresidential
planned developments. This procedure recognizes that the process may
involve conditional use approval, site plan approval, subdivision approval
and additional affirmative findings by the Planning Board in regard to
planned developments. It is intended that this article would apply to
planned developments that are permitted in the Route 1 corridor zoning
districts (e.g., ROM-1, ROM-2, ROM-5, B-2, B-3, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-4A, R-5,
R-5A, PRN, and E). This article does not apply to any planned developments
that may be permitted in the RR/C, R-1A and R-2 Districts.
§ 200-113. Applicability.
Any developer of a parcel of land greater than 20 acres in size for which
the developer is seeking approval of a planned development may submit
a general development plan to the Planning Board prior to the granting
of preliminary subdivision approval pursuant to the provisions of Part 2,
Subdivision, of this chapter, or preliminary site plan approval pursuant to
the provisions of Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this chapter.
§ 200-114. Plat required.
The general development plan shall be submitted on a series of sheets in
plat form at a scale of about one inch equals 200 feet or such other scale
permitting the entire site to be shown on one sheet not larger than 42
inches by 60 inches. Enlargements of portions of the plan may be submitted
on separate sheets of the same size.
§ 200-115. Contents of general development plan.
A general development plan shall include the following:
A. A general land use plan indicating the tract area and general locations
of the land use uses to be included in the planned development. The
total number of dwelling units and amount of nonresidential floor area
to be provided and proposed land area to be devoted to residential and
nonresidential use shall be set forth. In addition, the proposed types of
nonresidential uses to be included in the planned development shall be
set forth, and the land area to be occupied by each proposed use shall
be estimated. The gross density and intensity of use of the entire
planned development shall be set forth, and a residential gross as well
as net density and a nonresidential floor area ratio shall be provided.
§ 200-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-115
1:813
B. A circulation plan showing the general location and types of
transportation facilities, including facilities for pedestrian access,
within the planned development and any proposed improvement to the
existing transportation system outside the planned development. The
plan shall indicate:
(1) The projected peak hour traffic volumes on arterial and collector
roads at the estimated time of completion of the initial proposed
section of the planned development and at the time of completion
of ultimate development of the project, including both internal and
adjacent external volumes.
(2) The peak hour volume capacity relationship or level of service at
ultimate development on major collector and arterial roads
servicing the planned development.
(3) The projected peak hour turning movements at ultimate
development for all major intersections, both internally and
adjacent to the project.
(4) A general description of any off-tract road or intersection
improvements necessitated by the planned development and a
general schedule for their implementation.
(5) The traffic circulation plan shall describe appropriate mass transit
opportunities within and to the planned development, including
any traffic management techniques anticipated to be utilized in
achieving peak hour traffic reductions.
C. An open space plan showing the proposed land area and general
location of parks and any other land area to be set aside for
conservation and recreational purposes and a general description of
improvements proposed to be made thereon, including a plan for the
operation and maintenance of parks and recreational lands.
D. A utility plan indicating the need for and showing the proposed location
of sewage and water lines and drainage facilities necessitated by the
physical characteristics of the site, proposed methods for handling solid
waste disposal and a plan for the operation and maintenance of
proposed utilities.
E. A stormwater management plan setting forth the proposed method of
controlling and managing stormwater on the site.
F. An environmental inventory as specified in Part 1, Site Plan Review, of
this chapter for a preliminary EIS, including a general description of the
vegetation, soils, topography, geology, surface hydrology, climate and
cultural resources of the site, existing manmade structures or features
and the probable impact of the development on the environmental
attributes of the site.
§ 200-115 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-115
1:814
G. A community facility plan indicating the scope and type of supporting
community facilities which may include, but not be limited to,
educational or cultural facilities, historic sites, libraries, hospitals,
firehouses and police stations.
H. If applicable, a housing plan outlining the number of housing units to be
provided and the extent to which any housing obligation assigned to the
municipality pursuant to P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.)
will be fulfilled by the development.
I. A local service plan indicating those public services which the applicant
proposes to provide and which may include, but not limited to, water,
sewer, cable and solid waste disposal.
J. A fiscal report describing the anticipated demand on municipal services
to be generated by the planned development and any other financial
impacts to be faced by the Township or school district as a result of the
completion of the planned development. The fiscal report shall also
include a detailed protection of property tax revenues which will accrue
to the county, the Township and school district according to the timing
schedule provided under Subsection K of this section and following the
completion of the planned development in its entirety.
K. A proposed timing schedule in the case of a planned development
whose construction is contemplated over a period of years, including
any terms or conditions which are intended to protect the interests of
the public and of the residents who occupy any section of the planned
development prior to the completion of the development in its entirety.
In addition, the timing schedule shall indicate:
(1) That adequate protection is provided to ensure the proper
disposition of each stage through the use of maintenance and the
performance guaranties, covenants and other formal agreements.
(2) Information that indicates the stage is substantially self-functioning
and self-sustaining with regard to access, utility services, parking,
common open space, all amenities and other similar features.
Further, each stage shall be capable of occupancy, operation and
maintenance upon completion of construction and development of
that stage or, in the case of subsequent stages, such subsequent
stages shall likewise be in harmony with those under construction
or in place.
(3) That each stage is properly related to every other segment of the
planned development and to the community as a whole and to all
necessary community services which are available or which may be
needed to serve the planned development in the future.
(4) A description of the off-tract and off-site improvements that would
be constructed by a particular stage and proposed responsibility
for construction of such improvements, including pro rata share
computations as appropriate.
§ 200-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-115
1:815
§ 200-116. Effect and duration of approval.
§ 200-117. Modification of proposed timing schedule.
In the event that the developer seeks to modify the proposed timing
schedule, such modification shall require the approval of the Planning
Board. The Planning Board shall, in deciding whether or not to grant
approval of the modification, take into consideration prevailing economic
and market conditions, anticipated and actual needs for residential units
and nonresidential space within the Township and the region and the
availability and capacity of public facilities to accommodate the proposed
development.
L. A municipal development agreement, which shall mean a written
agreement between a municipality and a developer relating to the
planned development.
A. The planned development shall be developed in accordance with the
general development plan approved by the Planning Board,
notwithstanding any provision of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.), or of any ordinance or regulation adopted pursuant thereto after
the effective date of the approval.
B. The term of the effect of the general development plan approval shall be
determined by the Planning Board using the guidelines set forth in
Subsection C of this section, except the term of the effect of the
approval shall not exceed 12 years from the date upon which the
developer receives Planning Board approval of the general
development plan for a planned development.
C. In making its determination regarding the duration of the effect of
approval of the general development plan, the Planning Board shall
consider the number of dwelling units or amount of nonresidential floor
area to be constructed, prevailing economic conditions, the timing
schedule to be followed in completing the development and the
likelihood of its fulfillment, the developer's capability of completing the
proposed development, traffic management techniques and the level of
infrastructure improvements contemplated and the contents of the
general development plan and any conditions which the Planning Board
attaches to the approval thereof.
D. The densities and floor areas established by the general development
plan shall be maximums, but in each case shall be subject to further
review at the preliminary and/or preliminary/final approval to assure
conformity with the provisions of Part 1, Site Plan Review, and Part 2,
Subdivision, of this chapter, and all other applicable Township
ordinances governing such approvals.
§ 200-115 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-118
1:816
§ 200-118. Variation in location of land uses or increase in density
of floor area ratio.
The developer shall be required to gain the prior approval of the Planning
Board if after approval of the general development plan the developer
wishes to make any variation in the location of land uses within the planned
development or to increase the gross density of residential development
or the floor area ratio of nonresidential development in any section of the
planned development.
§ 200-119. Amendment or revision of general development plan;
allowable reductions within original approval.
§ 200-120. Notice of completion of section of development; notice
by municipality of nonfulfillment; hearing; termination of approval;
causes.
A. Except as provided hereunder, once a general development plan has
been approved by the Planning Board, it may be amended or revised
only upon application by the developer approved by the Planning Board.
B. A developer, without violating the terms of the approval pursuant to this
chapter, may, in undertaking any section of the planned development,
reduce the number of low- and moderate-income units or amounts of
nonresidential floor space by no more than 15%; provided, however,
that a developer may not reduce the number of residential units to be
provided without prior municipal approval. [Amended 4-19-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-07]
A. Upon the completion of each section of the development as set forth in
the approved general development plan, the developer shall notify the
Township Clerk, by certified mail, as evidence that the developer has
fulfilled the developer's obligations under the approved plan. For the
purposes of this section, "completion" of any section of the development
shall mean that the developer has acquired a certificate of occupancy
for every residential unit or every nonresidential structure, as set forth
in the approved general development plan and pursuant to Section 15
of P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-133). If the Township does not
receive such notification at the completion of any section of the
development, the Township shall notify the developer, by certified mail,
in order to determine whether or not the terms of the approved plan are
being complied with.
B. If a developer does not complete any section of the development within
the time required in the Planning Board's approval of the general
development plan, or if at any time the Township has cause to believe
that the developer is not fulfilling said developer's obligations pursuant
to the approved plan, the Township may notify the developer, by
certified mail, and the developer shall have 10 days within which to give
evidence that the developer is fulfilling his or her obligations pursuant
to the approved plan. The Township, upon advice and recommendation
§ 200-118 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-120
1:817
§ 200-121. Termination of approval upon completion of
development.
In the event that a development which is the subject of an approved general
development plan is completed before the end of the term of the approval,
the approval shall terminate with the completion of the development. For
the purposes of this section, a development shall be considered complete on
the date upon which a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the final
residential or nonresidential structure in the last section of the development
in accordance with the timing schedule set forth in the approved general
development plan and the developer has fulfilled all of his or her obligations
pursuant to the approval.
of the Planning Board, thereafter shall conduct a hearing to determine
whether or not the developer is in violation of the approved plan. If
after such a hearing the Township finds good cause to terminate the
approval, it shall provide written notice of the same to the developer
and the approval shall be terminated 30 days thereafter.
C. In the event that a developer who has general development plan
approval does not apply for preliminary approval for the planned
development which is the subject of that general development plan
approval within five years of the date upon which the general
development plan has been approved by the Planning Board, the
Township shall have cause to terminate the approval. However, the
Planning Board in establishing the timing schedule and the municipality
in negotiating the development agreement pursuant to § 200-115,
Subsections K and L, respectively, may allow for preliminary approval
for section(s) of the planned development to be applied for subsequent
to five years of the date upon which the general development plan has
been approved by the Planning Board; in which case, the municipality
shall not have cause to terminate the general development plan
approval as long as the timing schedule and the development
agreement allowing section by section preliminary approvals
subsequent to the five-year period are being met.
§ 200-120 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-121
1:818
ARTICLE XXIII
Housing Trust Fund
[Added 10-12-1993 by Ord. No. 93-30; amended 12-20-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-33; 11-29-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-35; 9-15-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-21; 1-20-2009 by Ord. No. 2008-52; 3-18-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-11]
§ 200-122. Purpose.
This article establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and
expenditure of development fees that are consistent with COAH's
regulations developed in response to P.L. 2008, c. 46, Sections 8 and 32-38
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and the Statewide Non-Residential Development
Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 8.7). Fees collected pursuant to this
article shall be used for the purpose of providing very-low, low- and
moderate-income housing in accordance with a Court-approved spending
plan.
§ 200-123. Court approval required.
§ 200-124. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this article, shall have the following
meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to, an
inclusionary development, a municipally-sponsored construction project or
a 100% affordable housing development.
COAH or THE COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
established under the Fair Housing Act, or any successor agency charged
with the administration of the Act.
COURT — The Superior Court of New Jersey, Law Division, Mercer County.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the improvement
of property as authorized by Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel
A. This article shall not be effective unless and until approved by the
Superior Court in connection with the Township of West Windsor's
declaratory judgment action concerning its third round affordable
housing obligations.
B. The Township of West Windsor shall not spend development fees
collected pursuant to this article unless and until the Superior Court
has approved a spending plan for such fees.
§ 200-122 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-124
1:819
Borough, 121 N.J. 550 (1990) and the Fair Housing Act of 1985, N.J.S.A.
52:27d-301, et seq., and regulated by applicable COAH Rules.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property divided
by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality in
which the property is situated, as determined in accordance with Sections
1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a through c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Strategies that minimize the impact
of development on the environment, and enhance the health, safety and
well-being of residents by producing durable, low-maintenance, resourceefficient
housing while making optimum use of existing infrastructure and
community services.
§ 200-125. Residential development fees.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within all districts, residential developers, except for developers of
the types of development specifically exempted below, shall pay a
fee of 1.5% of the equalized assessed value for residential
development, provided no increased density is permitted.
(2) When an increase in residential density is permitted pursuant to a
"d" variance granted under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(5), developers
shall be required to pay a "bonus" development fee of 6% of the
equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be
realized, except that this provision shall not be applicable to a
development that will include affordable housing. If the zoning on a
site has changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of
such a variance application, the base density for the purposes of
calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest density
permitted by right during the two-year period preceding the filing
of the variance application. Example: If an approval allows four
units to be constructed on a site that was zoned for two units, the
fees could equal 1.5% of the equalized assessed value on the first
two units; and 6% of the equalized assessed value for the two
additional units, provided zoning on the site has not changed
during the two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance
application.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential
developments.
(1) Affordable housing developments and/or developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units, if permitted by ordinance or by agreement with
the Township of West Windsor, shall be exempt from the payment of
development fees.
(2) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of this article shall be exempt from
§ 200-124 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-125
1:820
§ 200-126. Nonresidential development fees.
the payment of development fees, unless the developer seeks a
substantial change in the original approval. Where site plan
approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building permit shall be
synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for this
purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date that the
building permit is issued.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure undergoes a change to a more intense use or, except as
provided in Subsection B(4), is demolished and replaced. The
development fee shall be calculated on the increase in the
equalized assessed value of the improved structure.
(4) Owners of residential structures that are demolished and replaced
as a result of a fire, flood or natural disaster and additions as well
as decks shall be exempt from paying a development fee.
(5) Not-for-profit developers shall be exempt.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of developments specifically exempted,
shall pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized assessed value of the
land and improvements, for all new non-residential construction on
an unimproved lot or lots.
(2) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of
developments specifically exempted below, shall also pay a fee
equal to 2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value resulting
from any additions to existing structures to be used for
nonresidential purposes.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5%
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the preexisting land and improvements and the
equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e., land
and improvements, at the time the final certificate of occupancy is
issued. If the calculation required under this section results in a
negative number, the nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
(1) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market
rate development shall be subject to a 2.5% development fee,
unless otherwise exempted below.
§ 200-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-126
1:821
§ 200-127. Collection procedures.
(2) The fee of 2.5% development fee shall not apply to an increase in
equalized assessed value resulting from alterations, change in use
within the existing footprint, reconstruction, renovations and
repairs.
(3) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to the Statewide Non-Residential
Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 8.7), as
specified in Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-Residential
Development Certification/Exemption." Any exemption claimed by
a developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
(4) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to the Statewide Non-
Residential Development Fee Act shall be subject to the fee at such
time as the basis for the exemption no longer applies, and shall
make the payment of the nonresidential development fee, in that
event, within three years after that event or after the issuance of
the final certificate of occupancy for the nonresidential
development, whichever is later.
(5) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the
fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential
development fees under these circumstances may be enforceable
by West Windsor Township as a lien against the real property of the
owner.
A. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval
for a development, the applicable approving authority or entity shall
notify or direct its staff to notify the Construction Official responsible
for the issuance of a building permit.
B. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/Exemption" to be completed as
per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The Construction Official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
C. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first
§ 200-126 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-127
1:822
building permit for a development which is subject to a development
fee.
D. Within 90 days of receipt of such notification, the municipal Tax
Assessor, based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the
equalized assessed value of the development.
E. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy shall notify the local Tax Assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on a property which is
subject to a development fee.
F. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the municipal Tax Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
G. Should the Township of West Windsor fail to determine or notify the
developer of the amount of the development fee within 10 business days
of the request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the
amount due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute
process set forth in Subsection b. of Section 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
H. Fifty percent of the development fee shall be collected at the time of
issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion shall be
collected at the time of issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The
developer shall be responsible for paying the difference between the
fee calculated at building permit and that determined at the issuance of
the certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued
to the developer until all remaining developer fees have been paid in
full.
I. Appeal of development fees.
(1) A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest-bearing escrow account by West Windsor
Township. Appeals from a determination of the Board may be made
to the Tax Court in accordance with the provisions of the State Tax
Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1, et seq., within 90 days
after the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
(2) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow account
by West Windsor Township. Appeals from a determination of the
§ 200-127 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-127
1:823
§ 200-128. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
Director may be made to the Tax Court in accordance with the
provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A.
54:48-1, et seq., within 90 days after the date of such
determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be
credited to the prevailing party.
A. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing Housing Trust
Fund to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer for the purpose of
depositing development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls.
B. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
(1) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
(2) Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached dwelling
unit development accessible;
(3) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(4) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(5) Recaptured funds;
(6) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(7) Any other funds collected in connection with the Township of West
Windsor's affordable housing program.
C. In the event of a failure by the Township of West Windsor to comply with
trust fund monitoring and reporting requirements or to submit accurate
monitoring reports; or a failure to comply with the conditions of the
judgment of compliance or a revocation of the judgment of compliance;
or a failure to implement the approved spending plan and to expend
funds within the applicable required time period as set forth in In re Tp.
of Monroe, 442 N.J. Super. 565 (Law Div. 2015) (aff'd 442 N.J. Super.
563); or the expenditure of funds on activities not approved by the
Court; or for other good cause demonstrating the unapproved use(s) of
funds, the Court may authorize the State of New Jersey, Department of
Community Affairs, Division of Local Government Services ("LGS"), to
direct the manner in which the funds in the Affordable Housing Trust
Fund shall be expended, provided that all such funds shall, to the extent
practicable, be utilized for affordable housing programs within the
Township of West Windsor, or, if not practicable, then within the County.
(1) Any party may bring a motion before the Superior Court presenting
evidence of such condition(s), and the Court may, after considering
§ 200-127 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-128
1:824
§ 200-129. Use of Funds.
the evidence and providing the municipality a reasonable
opportunity to respond and/or to remedy the noncompliant
condition(s), and upon a finding of continuing and deliberate
noncompliance, determine to authorize LGS to direct the
expenditure of funds in the Trust Fund. The Court may also impose
such other remedies as may be reasonable and appropriate to the
circumstances.
D. Interest accrued in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund shall only be
used to fund eligible affordable housing activities approved by the
Court.
A. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by the Superior Court. Funds deposited in the Affordable Housing Trust
Fund may be used for any activity approved by the Court to address
West Windsor Township's fair share obligation and may be set up as a
grant or revolving loan program. Such activities include, but are not
limited to preservation or purchase of housing for the purpose of
maintaining or implementing affordability controls; housing
rehabilitation; new construction of affordable housing units and related
costs; accessory apartments; a market to affordable program; regional
housing partnership programs; conversion of existing nonresidential
buildings to create new affordable units; green building strategies
designed to be cost saving and in accordance with accepted national or
state standards; purchase of land for affordable housing; improvement
of land to be used for affordable housing; extensions or improvements
of roads and infrastructure to affordable housing sites; financial
assistance designed to increase affordability; administration necessary
for implementation of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan; and/or
any other activity permitted by the Court and specified in the approved
spending plan.
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse West Windsor Township for
past housing activities.
C. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned on
such fees shall be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and
moderate-income households in affordable units included in the
municipal Fair Share Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance
portion of development fees collected shall be used to provide
affordability assistance to those households earning 30% or less of the
median income for Housing Region 4, in which West Windsor is located.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs. The specific programs to be used for
§ 200-128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-129
1:825
§ 200-130. Monitoring.
West Windsor Township shall provide annual reporting of Affordable
Housing Trust Fund activity to the New Jersey Department of Community
Affairs, COAH and Local Government Services or other entity designated
by the State of New Jersey, using forms developed for this purpose by the
New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, COAH or Local Government
Services.
§ 200-131. Ongoing collection of fees.
affordability assistance shall be identified and described within the
spending plan.
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income. The specific programs to be used for very-low-income
affordability assistance shall be identified and described within the
spending plan.
(3) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable housing units on site
and funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be
exempt from the affordability assistance requirement.
D. West Windsor Township may contract with a private or public entity to
administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
including its programs for affordability assistance.
E. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees may
be expended on administration, including but not limited to salaries and
benefits for municipal employees or consultants' fees necessary to
develop or implement a new construction program, prepare a Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or administer an affirmative
marketing program or a rehabilitation program.
(1) In the case of a rehabilitation program, the administrative costs of
the rehabilitation program shall be included as part of the 20% of
collected development fees that may be expended on
administration.
(2) Administrative funds may be used for income qualification of
households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units, and
compliance with monitoring requirements.
(3) Legal or other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing
sites or objecting to the Council's regulations and/or actions are not
eligible uses of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
A. The ability of West Windsor Township to impose, collect and expend
development fees shall be permitted through the expiration of the
§ 200-129 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-131
1:826
repose period covered by its judgment of compliance and shall continue
thereafter so long as West Windsor Township has filed an adopted
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan with the Court or with a
designated state administrative agency, has petitioned for a judgment
of compliance from the Court or for substantive certification or its
equivalent from a state administrative agency authorized to approve
and administer municipal affordable housing compliance and has
received approval of its development fee ordinance from the entity that
will be reviewing and approving the Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan.
B. If the Township of West Windsor is not pursuing authorization to impose
and collect development fees after the expiration of its judgment of
compliance and repose, it may be subject to forfeiture of any or all
funds remaining within its Affordable Housing Trust Fund. Any funds so
forfeited shall be deposited into the "New Jersey Affordable Housing
Trust Fund" established pursuant to Section 20 of P.L. 1985, c. 222
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320).
C. After the expiration of the judgment of compliance and repose, if the
Township does not pursue or obtain continued authorization, West
Windsor Township shall not impose a residential development fee on a
development that receives preliminary or final site plan approval,
retroactively impose a development fee on such a development, or
expend any of its collected development fees.
§ 200-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-131
1:827

ARTICLE XXIV
Solid Waste Recycling Requirements
[Added 2-24-1992 by Ord. No. 92-06]
§ 200-132. Applicability.
§ 200-133. Standards for single-family and two-family dwellings.
A. The intention of this article is to provide standards and design
guidelines governing the preparation of recycling plans for certain
developments requiring a subdivision and/or site plan approval. A
recycling plan shall be submitted with every preliminary development
application for a major subdivision application containing two or more
single-family or two-family housing, multifamily or townhouse dwellings
of 25 or more units, and all nonresidential development proposals for
the utilization of 1,000 square feet or more of land.
B. Those commercial/industrial/institutional establishments that are
exempt from source separation requirements pursuant to N.J.S.A.
13:1E-99.16 of the Recycling Act shall submit written verification of
such exemption in lieu of the recycling plan required herein.
A. A recycling plan in the form of a narrative description and diagram or
maps shall be submitted with every preliminary development proposal
for the construction of two or more units of single-family or two-family
housing.
B. The recycling plan shall furnish a list of all applicable recyclable
materials, including at a minimum, the following:
(1) Acceptable glass containers.
(2) Acceptable metal containers.
(3) Acceptable plastic containers.
(4) Acceptable mixed paper.
(5) Tires.
(6) White goods.
(7) Leaves.
(8) Batteries, auto/household.
(9) Motor oil.
(10) Organic material, including grass, leaves and other yard waste as
may be determined by the Mercer County Improvement Authority.
C. Each single-family and two-family dwelling unit or its associated garage
shall be designed to provide a location containing at least 24 cubic feet
of space per unit for storage of designated recyclable material. Such
§ 200-132 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-133
1:829
§ 200-134. Standards for multifamily and townhouse dwellings.
A plan in the form of a narrative description and diagrams and maps shall
be submitted with a preliminary development application for a multifamily
or townhouse development of 25 or more units. The standards herein may
be modified by the Planning Board upon documentation from an applicant
indicating actual solid waste surveys from similar projects that would
support such modification and ensure the most appropriate space allocation
that encourages recycling.
storage space shall be limited to six feet in height. The location shall be
clearly marked as such on floor plans of the dwelling unit or garage.
A. List of recyclable materials. The recycling plan shall furnish a list of all
applicable recyclable materials, including, at a minimum, the following:
(1) Acceptable glass containers.
(2) Acceptable metal containers.
(3) Acceptable plastic containers.
(4) Acceptable mixed paper.
(5) Tires.
(6) White goods.
(7) Leaves.
(8) Batteries, auto/household.
(9) Motor oil.
(10) Organic material, including grass, leaves and other yard waste as
may be determined by the Mercer County Improvement Authority.
B. Dwelling unit storage. Each multifamily and townhouse dwelling unit
shall be designed to provide a location containing at least 18 cubic feet
of space per unit for storage of designated recyclable materials. Such
storage space shall be limited to six feet in height. The location shall be
clearly marked as such on floor plans of the dwelling unit. The required
storage area may be designated within a garage structure accessory to
the dwelling unit, if available.
C. Outdoor storage areas.
(1) For every 25 dwelling units or portions thereof, an outdoor storage
area containing a concrete pad of sufficient dimension to handle
the following projected minimum recyclable material generation
rates shall be provided:
§ 200-133 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-134
1:830
§ 200-135. Standards for nonresidential development.
Minimum Generation Rates Pounds Per Person Per Month
Newspaper 10.0
Glass 7.0
Aluminum 0.4
Tin cans 6.0
Plastic containers 0.8
(2) An explanation of the method used to determine the proposed size
of a storage area shall be provided. An explanation shall also be
provided concerning how the determination was made for the size
of storage containers.
(3) The outdoor storage area shall be conveniently located for
residential disposition of recyclables, preferably near but clearly
separated from a refuse dumpster. The outdoor area shall be
enclosed on three sides by a solid fence of six feet height, and
landscaping shall be provided around the fence in accordance with
landscape standards contained in § 200-91P of this Part 3.
(4) Outside deposit areas shall not be permitted in any required yard
or setback area nor shall they interfere with the adequate
operation of off-street parking facilities.
A. Nonresidential development recycling plan. All preliminary
nonresidential development proposals for the utilization of 1,000
square feet or more of land shall submit with a preliminary site or
subdivision plan a recycling plan to the Township and to the Mercer
County Improvement Authority that includes the following information:
(1) A description of the type of business expected to occupy the
building. In a case where during site plan or subdivision review the
business type is unknown, a recycling plan shall be based on an
assumed tenancy mix. Should there be substantial deviation by
more than 25% from the assumed tenancy mix prior to issuance of
a certificate of occupancy, a revised recycling plan shall be
submitted to the Township's Director of Engineering and
Community Development prior to issuance of the final certificate of
occupancy.
(2) Nonresidential establishments shall furnish a list of all applicable
recyclable materials, including, at a minimum, the following:
(a) Paper, including:
[1] Acceptable mixed paper.
[2] Corrugated cardboard.
§ 200-134 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-135
1:831
[3] Office paper.
(b) Acceptable glass containers.
(c) Acceptable metal containers.
(d) Tires.
(e) Used motor oil.
(f) White goods.
(g) Batteries.
(h) Food wastes.
(i) Organic material, including grass, leaves and other yard waste
as may be determined by the Mercer County Improvement
Authority.
(j) Plastic containers.
(3) An approximate amount of each recyclable material, listed by type,
expected to be generated (in cubic yards or tons, monthly or
annually).
(4) Material separation and handling practices, which shall include the
following:
(a) A list of areas where material is expected to be generated.
(b) A method of storing material at the point of its generation.
(c) A method of moving material from the generation area to the
storage area.
(d) The location of the designated storage area.
(e) The size of the storage area, with an explanation of the method
used to determine the size of the storage area.
(f) The size and type of the container used to store each material,
both at the point of generation and storage prior to hauler
pickup. An explanation shall be provided concerning how
determination was made for the sizing of storage containers.
(g) The method of visually screening the recycling area.
(h) The method of material removal, including frequency of pickup
and type of vehicle(s) expected to be used for pickup.
(i) Safeguards to minimize confusion between recycling areas and
refuse collection areas shall be outlined.
§ 200-135 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-135
1:832
§ 200-136. Compliance with other municipal codes.
Storage areas, both indoors and outdoors, shall meet all fire, building,
health codes and other applicable requirements of the Township of West
Windsor.
§ 200-137. Recycling collection and education plan.
B. Agreement with solid waste hauler. Any agreement with a solid waste
hauler or with a separate entity for recycling of source-separated
designated materials shall also be submitted for review.
C. On-site storage and collection. On-site storage space requirements for
designated recyclable materials shall be sufficient to accommodate the
volume of recyclable materials expected to be generated by the
proposed development. On-site collection areas shall not be permitted
in any required yard or setback area, nor shall they interfere with the
adequate operation of off-street parking facilities.
D. Landscaping and screening. Landscaping and screening of the
recycling storage area shall be provided in accordance with landscape
standards contained in § 200-91P of this Part 3.
A. For both residential and nonresidential developments required to
submit a solid waste recycling program, a plain language summary of
the proposed recycling requirement storage areas and collection
process shall be prepared. Such summary material shall be included as
part of any sales or rental transactions, and the method for such
information dissemination shall be provided as part of a development
application.
B. If a residential or nonresidential development application contains a
homeowners' association or business owners' association, then the
bylaws for such associations shall address the recycling plan envisioned
for the development project.
§ 200-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-137
1:833

ARTICLE XXV
Administration
§ 200-138. Enforcement and penalties. [Amended 10-30-1989 by
Ord. No. 89-31]
This Part 3 shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer of the Township.
Requirements for enforcement and penalties for noncompliance shall be as
set forth for Part 4, Zoning, of this chapter.
§ 200-138 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-138
1:835

Part 4
[Adopted 11-24-1980 By Ord.Z Noon.i n8g0-40 (Ch. XXII Of The Revised
General Ordinances); Amended 12-22-1980 By Ord. No. 80-41]
ARTICLE XXVI
Titles, Purposes, Establishment of Districts; General Conditions
§ 200-139. Title.
This Part 4 shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of
the Township of West Windsor, New Jersey."
§ 200-140. Purposes.
This Part 4 is adopted pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law of 1975
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), and subsequent amendments and supplements
thereto, in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, morals
and general welfare,
§ 200-141. Application, implementation and enforcement.
The application, implementation and enforcement of this Part 4 shall be
accomplished as prescribed in Article XXXII, Administrative Procedures.
§ 200-142. Establishment of zoning districts. [Last amended
4-1-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-07r]
The Township of West Windsor is hereby divided into the following zoning
districts, differentiated according to use, area and bulk requirements, to be
designated as follows:
District Description
RR/C Residence Rural residential/conservation
R-1/C Residence Low-density residential/conservation
R-1A Residence Low-density residential
R-2 Residence Low-density residential
R-30 Residence Low-density residential
R-30A Residence Low-density residential
R-30B Residence Low-density residential
R-30C Residence Low-density residential
R-30D Residence Low-density residential
R-24 Residence Low-/medium-density residential
R-20 Residence Low-/medium-density residential
R-20A Residence Low-/medium-density residential
R-20B Residence Low-/medium-density residential
R-3 Residence Low/medium-density residential
§ 200-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-142
1:837
District Description
R-3A Residence Affordable housing
R-3.5 Residence Medium-density residential
R-4 Residence Medium-density residential
R-4A Residence Affordable housing
R-4B Residence Affordable housing
R-5 Residence High-density residential
R-5A Residence High-density residential
R-5B Residence Affordable housing
R-5C Residence Affordable housing
R-5D Residence Affordable housing
PRN-1 Residence Planned residential neighborhood
PRRC Planned Residential
Retirement
Community
Retirement community/affordable
housing
PRRC-1 Planned Residential
Retirement
Community
Retirement community/affordable
housing
PMN Residence/Business Planned mixed use neighborhood/
affordable housing
PMN-1 Residence/Business Planned mixed use neighborhood/
affordable housing
R-1/O Residence Residence office
B-1 Business Limited convenience center
B-2 Business Neighborhood center business
B-3 Business Retail node
B-4 Business Planned retail village center
P Business Professional office
P-1 Planned Village
Center
Small-scale village center
P-3 Business Professional office, residence
ROM-1 Industrial Research, office, limited manufacturing
ROM-2 Industrial Research, office, limited manufacturing
ROM-3 Industrial Research, office, limited manufacturing
ROM-4 Industrial Research, office, limited manufacturing
R&D Industrial Research and development
ROR Industrial Research, office, recreation
RO Industrial Research, office
§ 200-142 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-142
1:838
District Description
RO-1 Industrial Research, office
E Educational
EH Residence Elderly housing
RP-1 of the Princeton Junction Redevelopment Plan
RP-2 of the Princeton Junction Redevelopment Plan
RP-3 of the Princeton Junction Redevelopment Plan
RP-4 of the Princeton Junction Redevelopment Plan
RP-5 of the Princeton Junction Redevelopment Plan
RP-6 of the Princeton Junction Redevelopment Plan
RP-7 of the Princeton Junction Redevelopment Plan
RP-8 of the Princeton Junction Redevelopment Plan
RP-9 of the Princeton Junction Redevelopment Plan
RP-10 of the Princeton Junction Redevelopment Plan
RP-11 of the Princeton Junction Redevelopment Plan
RP-11-Overlay of the Princeton Junction Redevelopment Plan
RP-12 Residence/Affordable
Housing
§ 200-143. Zoning Map. [Last amended 4-1-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-07r]
The boundaries of said zoning district is hereby established as shown on the
Zoning Map, Township of West Windsor, dated March 18, 2019, and revised
through April 1, 2019, which, with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby
adopted and made part of this Part 4. An official copy of said Map, indicating
the latest amendments shall be kept up-to-date in the office of the Land
Use Manager for the use and benefit of the public and shall have the most
current revision date shown thereon. The Zoning Map for that shall be the
official reference as to the current zoning classification of the land within
the boundaries of the Township of West Windsor.
§ 200-144. Interpretation of district boundaries.
In determining the boundaries of districts shown on the Map, the following
rules shall apply:
A. Along transportation rights-of-way lines and waterways. Where district
boundaries are indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, street lines or highway right-of-way lines, waterways
or railroad rights-of-way or such lines extended, such center lines shall
be construed to be such boundaries.
B. District lines parallel to streets. Where district boundaries are so
indicated that they are running parallel to the center lines or street
§ 200-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-144
1:839
§ 200-145. Effect of establishment of districts.
Following the effective date of this Part 4:
lines of streets, such district boundaries shall be construed as being
parallel thereto and at such distances therefrom as indicated on the
Zoning Map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be
determined by the use of the scale shown on said Zoning Map.
C. Vacation of streets. Whenever any street or public way is vacated by
official action, the zoning districts adjoining the side of such public way
shall be automatically extended to include the right-of-way thus
vacated, which shall thenceforth be subject to all regulations of the
extended district or districts. In general, where the vacated right-ofway
is bounded on either side by more than one district, the former
center line of such right-of-way shall determine the extension of each
district.
D. District lines divide lot. In the event that a district boundary line divides
one or more lots, other than as provided in Subsection E below, then the
district boundary line shall be utilized in all area, bulk, yard, buffer and
any other dimension requirements in this Part 4.
E. District lines parallel to lot lines of record. In all cases where a district
boundary line is located not farther than 15 feet away from a lot line of
record, such boundary line shall be construed to coincide with such lot
line. [Amended 10-25-1982 by Ord. No. 82-48]
F. Map dimensions. In all other cases where dimensions are not shown on
the Map, the location of boundaries shown on the Map shall be
determined by the Zoning Officer by application of a scale thereto.
G. Determination of doubtful lines. In cases of uncertainty or
disagreement as to the true location of any district boundary line, the
determination thereof shall be by the Board of Adjustment.
A. Any use not permitted by this Part 4 shall be deemed to be prohibited.
B. Where the provisions of this Part 4 impose greater restrictions than
those of any statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of
this Part 4 shall be controlling. Where the provisions of any statute,
other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions than this Part
4, the provisions of such statute, other ordinance or regulation shall be
controlling.
C. Every principal dwelling structure and its accessory structures, except
as otherwise provided for under planned residential neighborhood
development, shall be built upon a lot with frontage upon a street.
D. Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to
a public street, and all structures shall be so located on lots as to
§ 200-144 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-145
1:840
§ 200-146. Right to farm. [Added 12-13-1982 by Ord. No. 82-52]
§ 200-147. Conditional uses. [Amended 2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1]
Uses listed as a conditional use in a particular district may be permitted by
the Planning Board only if it has determined that the development proposal
complies with the conditions and standards set forth in this Part 4 for the
location and operations of such use.
§ 200-148. Uses requiring site plan review.
Site plans for all property uses, except individual single-family residences,
custom designed for the owners' own occupancy, and those exemptions as
permitted by the provisions of Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this chapter,
shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board prior to the issuance
provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and
required off-street parking.
A. The right to farm all land is hereby recognized to exist as a natural right
and is also hereby ordained to exist as a permitted use everywhere in
the Township of West Windsor, regardless of zoning designation and
regardless of specified uses and prohibited uses set forth elsewhere in
this Part 4, subject only to the restrictions and regulations for intensive
fowl or livestock farms and subject to Township health and sanitary
codes and Chapter 170 of this Code, regulating the cutting of trees for
the direct benefit of land developers. The right to farm as it is used in
this section includes the use of large irrigation pumps and equipment,
aerial and ground seeding and spraying, large tractors, numerous farm
laborers and the application of chemical fertilizers, insecticides and
herbicides, all for the purpose of producing from the land agricultural
products such as vegetables, grains, hay, fruits, fibers, wood, trees,
plants, shrubs, flowers and seeds. This right to farm shall also include
the right to use land for grazing by animals, subject to the restrictions
for intensive fowl or livestock farms. The foregoing uses and activities
included in the right to farm, when reasonable and necessary for the
particular farming, livestock or fowl production and when conducted in
accordance with generally accepted agricultural practices, may occur
on holidays, Saturdays, Sundays and weekdays, at night and in the day,
and the noise, odors, dust and fumes that are caused by them are also
specifically permitted as part of the exercise of this right. [Amended
4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07: 2-27-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-02]
B. It is expressly found that whatever nuisance may be caused to others by
such uses and activities so conducted is more than offset by the benefits
from farming to the neighborhood and community and to society in
general by the preservation of open space, the beauty of the
countryside and clean air and by the preservation and continuance of
farming operations in West Windsor Township and in New Jersey as a
source of agricultural products for this and future generations.
§ 200-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-148
1:841
of a building permit. In considering any site plan hereunder, the Planning
Board shall be governed by the objectives and standards contained within
Part 1, Site Plan Review, and other applicable ordinances of West Windsor
Township.
§ 200-149. Riparian zones; steep slopes; building prohibition along
watercourses and floodplains. [Amended 9-30-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-12]
Any use or building to be erected, moved, altered, rebuilt or enlarged
adjacent to watercourses or located within flood-prone areas shall also
conform to the conditions and standards contained in Part 6 of this chapter,
Flood Damage and Prevention.
The following riparian zones and regulations herein are enacted to protect
the streams, lakes, and other surface water bodies of the Township of
West Windsor, and to comply with N.J.A.C. 7:15-5.25(g)3, which requires
municipalities to adopt an ordinance that prevents new disturbance
associated with projects or activities in riparian zones as described herein.
Compliance with the riparian zone requirements herein does not constitute
compliance with the riparian zone of buffer requirements imposed under
any other federal, state or local statute, regulation or ordinance.
The following steep slopes regulations herein are enacted to restrict or
control the intensity of use in areas of steeply sloping terrain in order to
limit soil loss, soil erosion, excessive stormwater runoff, the degradation
of surface water and to maintain the natural topography and drainage
patterns of the land.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACID-PRODUCING SOILS — Soils that contain geologic deposits of iron
sulfide minerals (pyrite and marcasite) which, when exposed to oxygen
from the air or from surface waters, oxidize to produce sulfuric acid.
Acid-producing soils, upon excavation, generally have a pH of 4.0 or
lower. After exposure to oxygen, these soils generally have a pH of
3.0 or lower. Information regarding the location of acid-producing soils
in New Jersey can be obtained from local Soil Conservation District
offices.
APPLICANT — A person, corporation, government body or other legal
entity applying to the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or the
Construction Office, proposing to engage in an activity that is regulated
by the provisions of this section, and that would be located in whole or
in part within a regulated Riparian Zone.
CATEGORY ONE WATERS or C1 WATERS — Shall have the meaning
ascribed to this term by the Surface Water Quality Standards, N.J.A.C.
7:9B, for purposes of implementing the antidegradation policies set
forth in those standards, for protection from measurable changes in
water quality characteristics because of their clarity, color, scenic
§ 200-148 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-149
1:842
setting, and other characteristics of aesthetic value, exceptional
ecological significance, exceptional recreational significance,
exceptional water supply significance, or exceptional fisheries
resources.
DISTURBANCE — The placement of impervious surface, the exposure
or movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
HUC14 — The fourteen-digit hydrologic unit code mapping delineating
a watershed boundary, as defined and established in New Jersey by the
United States Geological Survey.
IMPERVIOUS MATERIAL — Any structure, surface, or improvement
that reduces or prevents absorption of stormwater into land, and
includes porous paving, paver blocks, gravel, crushed stone, decks,
patios, elevation structures and other similar structures, surfaces or
improvements.
LAKE, POND, OR RESERVOIR — Any surface water body shown on
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic
Information System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of
a special water resource protection area (SWRPA) pursuant to the
stormwater management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as
shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys
within the associated HUC14 watershed, that is an impoundment,
whether naturally occurring or created in whole or in part by the
building of structures for the retention of surface water. This excludes
sedimentation control and stormwater retention/detention basins and
ponds designed for detention and treatment of storm wastewater.
LINEAR DEVELOPMENT — Land uses, such as roads, lanes, paths,
railroads, sewerage and stormwater, gas and water pipelines, electric,
telephone, digital, and other transmission or distribution lines, that
have the basic function of connecting two points, the rights-of-way
or widening therefor, and any accessory structures or uses directly
associated therewith. Linear development shall not include residential,
commercial, institutional, office or industrial buildings, irrigation lines,
or newly constructed improvements within a new land development
such as utility lines or pipes or internal circulation roads not serving an
area wide or regional purpose.
NO FEASIBLE ALTERNATIVE — A determination made by the
Township Engineer regarding a linear development or expansion of
an existing linear development that an alternative route, method or
means of connecting the linear development or safely accommodating
the additional use of a linear development is possible without resulting
in greater disturbance or alteration of a surface water body or riparian
zone or resulting in a development or expansion scheme or cost such
that a hazardous, unsafe or ineffective linear development will remain
or be developed. Environmental impacts such as increased air, water or
noise pollution may be considered by the Engineer in the evaluation of
hazardous or unsafe conditions.
§ 200-149 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-149
1:843
REDEVELOPMENT — The construction and/or reconstruction of
structures or improvements on areas which previously contained
structures or other improvements.
RIPARIAN ZONE — The land and vegetation within and directly
adjacent to all surface water bodies, including, but not limited to,
lakes, ponds, reservoirs, perennial and intermittent streams, up to
and including their point of origin, such as seeps and springs, as
shown on the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's
GIS hydrography coverages or, in the case of a special water resource
protection area (SWRPA), pursuant to the stormwater management
rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS
quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys within the associated
HUC14 watershed. There is no riparian zone along the Atlantic Ocean
nor along any man-made lagoon or oceanfront barrier island, spit or
peninsula.
SPECIAL WATER RESOURCE PROTECTION AREA or SWRPA — An
area, 300 feet in width, provided on each side of a surface water body
designated as a C1 water or tributary to a C1 water that is a perennial
stream, intermittent stream, lake, pond, or reservoir, as defined herein
and shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys
within the associated HUC14 drainage, pursuant to the stormwater
management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h). Establishment of the area shall
be in accordance with § 200-101G(8).
STEEP SLOPES — Any percent of slope calculated as rise in feet per
horizontal run in feet, calculated for each two-foot topographic contour
interval, equal or greater than 20% as measured over any minimum run
of 10 feet. Steep slopes are determined based on topographic contour
intervals of two feet or less. Landscape berms constructed for purposes
of landscape buffering, recreation, or creating a sense of space or
sequence shall not be considered steep slopes for the purposes of this
section.
STREAM, INTERMITTENT — A surface water body with definite bed
and banks in which there is not a permanent flow of water and shown
on the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic
Information System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of
a special water resource protection area (SWRPA) pursuant to the
stormwater management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h). C1 waters as
shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys
within the associated HUC14 watershed.
STREAM, PERENNIAL — A surface water body that flows continuously
throughout the year in most years and shown on the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection Geographic Information
System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a special water
resource protection area (SWRPA) pursuant to the stormwater
management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h). C1 waters as shown on the
USGS quadrangle map or in the County Soil Surveys within the
associated HUC14 watershed.
§ 200-149 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-149
1:844
SURFACE WATER BODY(IES) — Any perennial stream, intermittent
stream, lake, pond, or reservoir, as defined herein. In addition, any
regulated water under the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:13-2.2, or state open waters identified in a letter of
interpretation issued under the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act
rules at N.J.A.C. 7:7A-3 by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection Division of Land Use Regulation shall also be considered
surface water bodies.
THREATENED OR ENDANGERED SPECIES — A species identified
pursuant to the Endangered and Nongame Species Conservation Act,
N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1 et seq., the Endangered Species Act of 1973, 16 U.S.C.
§ 1531 et seq. or the Endangered Plant Species List, N.J.A.C. 7:5C-5.1,
and any subsequent amendments thereto.
TROUT MAINTENANCE WATER — A section of water designated as
trout maintenance in the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection's surface water quality standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
TROUT PRODUCTION WATER — A section of water identified as trout
production in the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection's surface water quality standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
WATER, FLUVIAL — A surface water body that is not influenced by the
tide, i.e., a nontidal water.
WATER, TIDAL — A surface water body that is influenced by the
gravitational interaction of the earth, the moon and the sun.
B. Establishment and protection of riparian zones and steep slopes.
(1) Except as provided in Subsections C and D below, riparian zones
adjacent to all surface water bodies, measured from the discernible
bank landward, shall be protected from disturbance and shall be
delineated as follows:
(a) The riparian zone shall be 300 feet wide along both sides of any
Category One water (C1 water), and all upstream tributaries
situated within the same HUC14 watershed.
(b) The riparian zone shall be 300 feet wide along both sides of the
Duck Pond Run from the confluence with the Delaware and
Raritan Canal upstream to Clarksville Road to the southeast
and Meadow Road to the northeast. The three-hundred-footwide
riparian zone shall not apply to the Little Bear Brook
northeast of Meadow Road. The riparian zone for Duck Pond
Run upstream from these limits shall be as established by the
criteria of Subsection B(1)(a), (c) and (d) herein.
(c) The riparian zone shall be 150 feet wide along both sides of the
following waters not designated as C1 waters:
[1] Any trout production water and all upstream waters
(including tributaries);
§ 200-149 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-149
1:845
[2] Any trout maintenance water and all upstream waters
(including tributaries) within one linear mile from the
trout maintenance water, as measured along the length of
the regulated water;
[3] Any segment of a water flowing through an area that
contains documented habitat for a threatened or
endangered species of plant or animal, which is critically
dependent on the surface water body for survival, and all
upstream waters (including tributaries) within one linear
mile as measured along the length of the regulated water;
and
[4] Any segment of a water flowing through an area that
contains acid-producing soils to the extent so regulated by
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection or
Soil Conservation District standards.
(d) For all other surface water bodies, a minimum riparian zone of
50 feet wide shall be maintained along both sides of the water
except as modified to 200 feet from the center line of any
stream by § 200-228 of Article XXXI or as required by any other
provisions of Article XXXI.
(2) If a discernible bank is not present along a surface water body, the
portion of the riparian zone that lies outside the surface water body
is measured landward as follows:
(a) Along a linear fluvial or tidal water, such as a stream, the
riparian zone is measured landward of the feature's center
line;
(b) Along a nonlinear fluvial water, such as a lake or pond, the
riparian zone is measured landward of the normal water
surface limit;
(c) Along a nonlinear tidal water, such as a bay or inlet, the
riparian zone is measured landward of the mean high water
line; and
(d) Along an amorphously shaped feature such as a wetland
complex, through which water flows but which lacks a
discernible channel, the riparian zone is measured landward of
the feature's center line.
(3) The applicant or designated representative shall be responsible for
the initial determination of the presence of a riparian zone on a
site, and for identifying the area of the riparian zone on any plan
submitted to the Township of West Windsor in conjunction with an
application for a construction permit, subdivision, land
development, or other improvement that requires plan submissions
or permits. This initial determination shall be subject to review and
§ 200-149 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-149
1:846
approval by the municipal engineer, or the Mayor's appointed
representative, and, where required by state regulation, the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
(4) Establishment of steep slope limits. The applicant shall
demonstrate, through site plans depicting proposed development
and topography, that new disturbance is not located in areas of
steep slopes. For steep slopes, any disturbance shall be prohibited
except as provided below:
(a) Redevelopment within the limits of existing impervious
materials.
(b) New disturbance necessary to protect public health, safety, or
welfare, such as necessary linear development with no feasible
alternative; to provide an environmental benefit, such as
remediation of a contaminated site; to prevent extraordinary
hardship to the property owner peculiar to the property; or to
prevent extraordinary hardship, provided the hardship was not
created by the property owner, that would not permit a
minimum economically viable use of the property based upon
reasonable investment. For example, redevelopment, within
the footprint of existing impervious materials should be
allowed to support efforts to revitalize development that has
fallen into disrepair.
(c) Temporary disturbance (no more than 12 months) to permit
construction adjacent to a steep slope, provided that sufficient
provisions to control and prevent erosion during the temporary
disturbance period and restoration of the steep slope occurs
immediately upon completion of the construction of those
improvements adjacent to the steep slope even if other nearby
construction is not complete.
C. Variances. To the extent allowed by the stormwater management rules
(N.J.A.C. 7:8) and/or the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules (N.J.A.C.
7:13), new disturbances for projects or activities in the riparian zone
established by this section may be allowed through the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or the Board of Jurisdiction review and approval of a
variance, provided the disturbance is proposed to be located on a
preexisting lot (existing as of the effective date of this section) when
there is insufficient room outside the riparian zone for the proposed use
otherwise permitted by the underlying zoning; there is no other
reasonable or prudent alternative to placement in the riparian zone,
including obtaining variances from setback or other requirements that
would allow conformance with the riparian zone requirements; and
upon proof by virtue of submission of appropriate maps, drawings,
reports and testimony, that the disturbance is:
(1) Necessary to protect public health, safety or welfare;
(2) To provide an environmental benefit;
§ 200-149 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-149
1:847
(3) To prevent extraordinary hardship on the property owner when
such hardship is peculiar to the property; or
(4) To prevent extraordinary hardship, provided the hardship was not
created by the property owner, by not allowing a minimum
economically viable use of the property based upon reasonable
investment.
D. Exceptions. To the extent allowed under the Stormwater Management
rules (N.J.A.C. 7:8) and the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules
(N.J.A.C. 7:13) and subject to review and approval by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection to the extent required by
those rules, the following disturbances for projects or activities in the
riparian zone established by this section are allowed:
(1) Redevelopment within the limits of existing impervious surfaces;
(2) Linear development with no feasible alternative route;
(3) Disturbance that is in accordance with a stream corridor
restoration or stream bank stabilization plan or project approved
by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection;
(4) Disturbance necessary to provide for public pedestrian access or
water-dependent recreation that meets the requirements of the
Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7A, the Flood
Hazard Area Control Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13, or the Coastal Zone
Management rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7E; or
(5) Disturbance with no feasible alternative required for the
remediation of hazardous substances performed with New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection or federal oversight
pursuant to the Spill Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A.
58:10-23.11a et seq., or the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, 42 U.S.C.
§ 9601 et seq.
E. Appeals, conflicts and severability.
(1) Any party aggrieved by the location of the riparian zone boundary
determination under this section may appeal to the Zoning Officer
under the provisions of this section. The party contesting the
location of the riparian zone boundary shall have the burden of
proof in case of any such appeal.
(2) Any party aggrieved by any determination or decision of the Zoning
Officer under this section may appeal to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment of the Township of West Windsor. The party contesting
the determination or decision shall have the burden of proof in case
of any such appeal.
(3) Conflicts: All other ordinances, parts of ordinances, that are
inconsistent or in conflict with this section are hereby superseded
§ 200-149 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-149
1:848
§ 200-150. Land subdivisions.
The requirements of this Part 4 and other ordinances governing the
development of land, notwithstanding uses permitted or as may be
permitted by this Part 4, where applicable, shall also be subject to the
requirements and standards contained in the Part 2, Subdivision, of this
chapter, and Chapter 143, Soil Removal.
§ 200-151. Temporary uses.
Temporary uses of land or temporary activities such as fairs, carnivals and
circuses for a period not to exceed 15 calendar days for each sponsor in
any calendar year shall be permitted in all districts. However, all such
temporary uses or activities shall require a special permit issued by the
Construction Official and shall be subject to the provision of adequate
off-street parking and control of traffic, noise, glare, dust and sanitary
concerns.
to the extent of any inconsistency or conflict, and the provisions of
this section shall apply.
(4) Severability:
(a) Interpretation: This section shall be so construed as to avoid
conflict with any provision of New Jersey or federal law.
(b) Notwithstanding that any provision of this section is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
all remaining provisions of this section shall continue to be of
full force and effect.
F. Enforcement. A prompt investigation shall be made by the Zoning
Officer of any person or entity believed to be in violation hereof. If, upon
inspection, a condition which is in violation of this section is discovered,
a civil action in the Special Civil Part of the Superior Court, or in the
Superior Court, if the primary relief sought is injunctive or if penalties
may exceed the jurisdictional limit of the Special Civil Part, by the filing
and serving of appropriate process. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to preclude the right of the Township of West Windsor,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-25, to initiate legal proceedings hereunder
in Municipal Court. The violation of any section or subsection of this
section shall constitute a separate and distinct offense independent of
the violation of any other section or subsection, or of any order issued
pursuant to this section, and shall be subject to the provisions of
§ 200-254 of Article XXXII.
§ 200-149 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-152
1:849
§ 200-152. Temporary signs. [Amended 9-19-1988 by Ord. No.
88-27; 12-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-37; 12-23-1996 by Ord. No. 96-33;
4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07; 3-16-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-08]
The erection, installation or maintenance of temporary signs other than as
set forth below is hereby prohibited. They shall be subject to sign standards
contained in Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this chapter, except as may be
modified herein. Persons placing signs on property in which they do not
have an interest which permits them to do so shall secure the permission of
the owner.
A. General sign regulations.
(1) State/federal or governmental agency signs are exempt from
Township ordinances.
(2) No signs shall be placed on utility poles.
(3) Signs may be two-sided, with side not to exceed the individual sign
area.
(4) Sign height for temporary signs shall be four feet. Temporary signs
shall be located on a lot so that they are not in the public right-ofway
and shall not interfere with sight distances at street
intersections or ingress and egress points to a lot or cause a public
safety hazard. Signs designed to be seen from vehicles should be
perpendicular to the line of travel, while signs designed to be read
on foot can be parallel with walks. To the extent possible, adjacent
signs on the same or adjoining buildings should be placed within
the same horizontal band and be of reasonably harmonious
materials. No such signs shall be located on any public property.
There shall be no placement of such signs between public roads
and sidewalks or within six feet of a public road where no sidewalk
exists. Where there are improvements existing on a property that
are closer than six feet to a public road where no sidewalk exists,
then signs may be affixed to said improvements.
(5) Off-tract temporary real estate or development signs shall be
prohibited in all zoning districts. However, off-tract directional
signs shall be permitted. Such signs shall not exceed four square
feet and shall be displayed only on weekends and legal holidays.
B. Sign types and standards.
(1) Temporary noncommercial, including political signs.
Noncommercial signs, including but not limited to political signs
which are temporary in nature, shall be permitted in all districts.
Temporary noncommercial signs are those which are not
permanently affixed to the ground, a building or other permanent
structure on the property and not intended to be permanent in
time. Temporary noncommercial signs shall not exceed 16 square
feet (no side of any signs shall be more than six feet in any linear
§ 200-152 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-152
1:850
dimension) in residential zones and 32 square feet in
nonresidential zones. Temporary political signs associated with an
election shall be removed no later than seven days after the
election. Site plan approval shall not be required for the placement
of temporary noncommercial signs.
(2) On-site temporary real estate or development signs. On-site
temporary real estate and development signs shall be regulated by
the following standards:
(a) Any real estate signage on individual properties for sale, rent,
lease or open house shall not exceed four square feet for
residential projects and residentially zoned land and shall not
exceed 16 square feet for nonresidential projects and
nonresidentially zoned land. When such nonresidential signage
is for vacant parcels with development approvals, it shall be in
accordance with such approvals. This signage shall be
removed when the property is withdrawn from the market or
within seven days of the date of closing or change of
possession. Only one sign shall be permitted per lot, and it
shall be located in the front yard.
(b) Any signage which identifies a nonresidential project under
construction and/or opening date for occupancy shall not
exceed 16 square feet. Signage shall be removed at the time of
the final certificate of occupancy. Only one sign per
development shall be permitted. However, construction signs
which contain noncommercial messages, such as signs
identifying individual lots or construction ingress and/or
egress, shall be permitted which do not exceed four square
feet.
(c) Any signage which identifies new housing development under
construction shall not exceed 16 square feet per development
project. Signage shall be removed when the project has
received certificates of occupancy for 90% of all approved lots
or units in the total project or section under construction,
whichever is applicable. Only one sign per development tract
shall be permitted. However, construction signs which contain
noncommercial messages, such as signs identifying individual
lots or construction ingress and/or egress, shall be permitted
which do not exceed four square feet.
(d) Freestanding real estate signage for the sale and lease of
commercial properties is prohibited. Six months after the
effective date of this section,234 all temporary commercial real
estate sale or leasing information signage shall be removed.
Commercial real estate leasing or sale information shall be
234. Editor's Note: This section was last amended 3-16-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-08, effective
4-6-2009.
§ 200-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-152
1:851
§ 200-153. Planning Board/Zoning Board of Adjustment
jurisdiction.
In this Part 4, any reference to the Planning Board shall be considered
to refer to the Zoning Board of Adjustment in those instances where the
Zoning Board of Adjustment has jurisdiction as granted by the Municipal
Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), and vice versa.
§ 200-154. When application for development deemed complete;
waiver of defects. [Added 8-13-1984 by Ord. No. 84-24]
An application for development shall be complete for purposes of
commencing the applicable time period for action by a municipal agency
when so certified by the municipal agency or its authorized committee or
designee. In the event that the agency, committee or designee does not
certify the application to be complete within 45 days of the date of its
submission, the application shall be deemed complete upon the expiration
of the forty-five-day period for purposes of commencing the applicable time
period unless the application lacks information indicated on a checklist
adopted by ordinance and provided to the applicant, and the municipal
agency or its authorized committee or designee has notified the applicant,
in writing, of the deficiencies in the application within 45 days of submission
of the application. The applicant may request that one or more of the
submission requirements be waived, in which event the agency or its
authorized committee shall grant or deny the request within 45 days.
Nothing herein shall be construed as diminishing the applicant's obligation
to prove in the application process that said applicant is entitled to approval
incorporated into the permanent business or property
identification signage permitted by § 200-32.
(3) Temporary contractor signage on individual residential lots. Only
one sign shall be permitted identifying contractors doing work on
the site, and it shall be located in the front yard. Such sign shall be
a maximum of four square feet per entity. This sign shall be
removed when work ceases or is abandoned or when a certificate of
occupancy for the project is issued, whichever occurs sooner.
(4) Commercial fairs, carnivals, circuses or similar cultural event
signs. Any on-site or off-tract sign which identifies commercial
fairs, carnivals, circuses or similar cultural event activities shall not
exceed 16 square feet. Only one sign per lot shall be permitted,
which can be put up only one month prior to an event or activity
and shall be removed within seven days of completion of the
activity. Written approval by the Zoning Officer shall be required
for all commercial fairs, carnivals, circuses or similar cultural event
signs. The person or organizational representative responsible for
the event requiring temporary signs shall indicate to the Zoning
Officer where all signs will be placed and the date all such signs
will be removed.
§ 200-152 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-154
1:852
of the application. The municipal agency may subsequently require
correction of any information found to be in error and submission of
additional information not specified in the ordinance or any revisions in
the accompanying documents as are reasonably necessary to make an
informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for approval
of the application for development have been met. The application shall
not be deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional information or
any revisions in the accompanying documents so required by the municipal
agency.
§ 200-154 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-154
1:853

ARTICLE XXVII
Use and Bulk Regulations for Residence Districts235
§ 200-155. General.
The regulations applicable to the residence districts shall be as designated
in the sections below.
§ 200-156. RR/C Residence District use regulations. [Amended
12-15-1986 by Ord. No. 86-35; 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 91-34;
11-30-1992 by Ord. No. 92-35; 12-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-38;
9-27-1993 by Ord. No. 93-27; 12-20-1993 by Ord. No. 93-38;
5-18-1998 by Ord. No. 98-10; 7-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-19; 5-1-2000
by Ord. No. 2000-08; 3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-05; 1-7-2008 by
Ord. No. 2007-27]
A. Permitted uses. In an RR/C District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered on a lot which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used, except for one or more of
the following uses:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Home occupations subject to the regulations contained in Article
XXXI of this Part 4.
(3) Public and nonprofit parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, recreation
and community buildings, swimming pools and other activities of a
recreational character, such as golf and tennis clubs.
(4) Farm and agricultural activities or use of land, subject to the
regulations contained in Article XXXI of this Part 4. Commercial
composting is not a permitted use.
(5) The sale and processing of agricultural products raised or grown on
the particular farm from which it is sold, subject to the regulations
contained in Article XXXI of this Part 4.
(6) Temporary buildings, temporary construction offices and
temporary storage of materials, provided that such use is located
on the lot where construction is taking place or on a lot adjacent to
or part of the development site and that such temporary use is to be
terminated within 30 days of issuance of a final certificate of
occupancy for the total project or work is abandoned according to
N.J.S.A. 5:23-2.5(c)2.
(7) Accessory uses and accessory buildings incidental to the above
uses and located on the same lot.
235. Editor's Note: Former Section 22-4.0, Summary Regulations Included; Schedule, which
immediately preceded this article, was deleted 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07. Ord. No.
2008-32, adopted 10-27-2008, renumbered §§ 200-166 through 200-172 of this article as
§§ 200-155 through 200-161, respectively.
§ 200-155 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-156
1:855
(8) Community residences for the developmentally disabled,
community shelters for victims of domestic violence. community
residences for the terminally ill, and community residences for
persons with head injuries serving not more than 15 persons and
otherwise meeting the standards and criteria set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-66.2, including being duly licensed pursuant to the statutes
referenced therein. All requirements for single-family residences
set forth in the Land Use Ordinance, Chapter 200 of the West
Windsor Code, shall apply to such community residences. Review
by the board of jurisdiction, except when variances are sought,
shall not be required.
(9) Building structures and uses owned and operated by the Township
of West Windsor.
(10) Veterinary clinics in existence as of January 1, 2000. They shall be
subject to the requirements for the RR/C District, except as
modified below, and to the following special requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 3 1/3 acres.
(b) The veterinary clinic shall be sited at least 150 feet from any
residential use or zoning district.
(c) Buildings housing animals shall be soundproofed to a
maximum transmission of 65 dB measured on the outside of
the exterior wall. Other soundproofing requirements may be
imposed by the board of jurisdiction, such as, but not limited to
the following: nonopening windows and forced-air ventilation,
solid core doors and sound-absorbent ceilings.
(d) Proper and ample ventilation of all animal areas in buildings
shall be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the board of
jurisdiction and shall meet all state licensing requirements.
(e) Animals may be kept overnight for medical reasons only.
(f) Animals shall be housed indoors and may be allowed outside
only for short periods under staff supervision for hygienic or
medical reasons. When they are outside, they shall be kept in a
completely enclosed area.
(g) A maximum percentage of floor area for overnight holding of
animals shall be limited to 30% of the gross floor area of the
veterinary clinic/hospital building.
(h) The veterinary clinic shall have frontage on and primary access
via an arterial roadway as defined in the Township's
Circulation Plan.
(i) The building setback shall be twice that of the zone: 100 feet
for front yard and 60 feet for individual side yards and rear
yard.
§ 200-156 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-156
1:856
(j) A landscape buffer at least 50 feet wide within the onehundred-
fifty-foot standard set forth in Subsection A(10)(b)
above, consisting of deciduous and evergreen plant material,
shall be provided sufficient to screen parking and structures
year round from all abutting side and rear yards. Such buffer
may be waived by the board of jurisdiction where the applicant
demonstrates to the board's satisfaction that natural on-site
vegetation, existing topography or other existing conditions
provide acceptable screening from any surrounding residential
property. In such case, the board of jurisdiction shall require a
conservation easement to preserve this buffer screening.
(k) The veterinary clinic shall include a separate dwelling unit for
the owner of the clinic, spouse and children, and such unit
shall be attached to the clinic. The clinic shall be operated by
the owner of the dwelling unit and may be operated only if the
owner is residing in the unit.
(l) Only one veterinary clinic is permitted on each tract on which
was located a veterinary clinic as of January 1, 2000.
(m) No cremation or disposal of dead animals is allowed on the
premises. Disposal of used and contaminated veterinary
medical supplies shall meet low-level hazardous waste disposal
requirements.
(n) Maximum FAR for all uses: 9%.
(o) Maximum improvement coverage for all uses: 20%. [Amended
9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-21]
(p) Pitched roofs, residential building materials (such as brick,
wood and clapboard) and other architectural elements shall be
employed to make the veterinary structure compatible with the
portion housing the dwelling unit.
B. Conditional uses. In an RR/C District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses:
(1) Open space cluster (OSC) development in accordance with
§ 200-174, provided that public water is available and that public
sewer is available, and further provided that the record supports
and the board of jurisdictions makes the findings for planned
developments set forth in § 200-234B.
(2) Church or other places of worship, parish house or religious school
building, subject to the following special requirements:
(a) The location of access driveways, landscaping and site plan
design are compatible with the neighborhood in which it is to
be located.
§ 200-156 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-156
1:857
(b) No building or part thereof or any parking or loading area shall
be located nearer than 50 feet to any street line or lot line.
(c) A parish house, rectory or parsonage shall conform to the
requirements for a single-family dwelling.
(d) The minimum lot area shall be 3 1/3 acres.
(e) The maximum FAR for any such use shall be 13%.
(f) The maximum improvement coverage (MIC) for any such use
shall be 40%. [Amended 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-21]
(g) A child-care center shall be considered an accessory and may
be combined with this conditional use; however, the combined
FAR and MIC of this conditional use and any child care shall
not exceed the limits set above. In addition, any child-care use
shall meet the requirements provided in Subsection B(9).
(3) Public and private elementary, junior and senior high schools,
subject to the requirements of Subsection B(2)(a) and B(2)(b) of
this section, in addition to minimum lot sizes as established by the
New Jersey State Department of Education for school facilities.
(4) Public libraries and museums, subject to the requirements of
Subsection B(2)(a), (b) and (d) of this section.
(5) Social clubs, fraternal, veterans, social service, union and civic
organizations, subject to the following special requirements:
(a) The project meets criteria set forth under Subsection B(2)(a),
(b) and (d) of this section.
(b) The project is designed to be structurally compatible and in
keeping with the architectural character of the neighborhood
in which it is to be located.
(c) Undue traffic congestion on streets providing access to the
project is not created.
(d) Adequate landscaping or screening from adjacent residential
lots along each side and rear lot line in accordance with the
standards established herein and in Part 1, Site Plan Review, of
this chapter, is provided.
(6) Water storage tank or tower, water reservoir, water or sewer
pumping station and water or sewage treatment plant, subject to
the following special requirements:
(a) The project is designed to be structurally compatible and in
keeping with the architectural character of the neighborhood
in which it is to be located.
§ 200-156 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-156
1:858
(b) The project is in keeping with the Master Plan or Utility Master
Plan of the Township.
(c) The project conforms with yard setbacks for the district in
which it is to be located.
(d) Adequate landscaping in conformance with standards
established in Article XXXI of this Part 4.
(7) Substations, electric and gas facilities and all other public utilities,
subject to the following requirements:
(a) All those requirements of Subsection B(6) above.
(b) No storage of materials and trucks and no repair facilities or
housing of repair crews, except within completely enclosed
buildings.
(8) Transmission lines, transmitting and receiving antennae or aerials,
subject to the following special requirements:
(a) None shall exceed 55 feet in height.
(b) None shall be of such height or position that aircraft warning
lights are required by any governmental agency.
(c) All shall be so located on a lot and aligned as to be as
inconspicuous as possible.
(d) The design for freestanding antennae structures shall be
structurally compatible and in keeping with the character of
the neighborhood in which it may be located.
(9) Child-care centers, day camps, kindergartens and preschools,
subject to the following special requirements:
(a) At least 100 square feet of outdoor play space per child shall be
provided.
(b) Outdoor play space shall be fenced or otherwise enclosed on all
sides and shall not include driveways, parking areas or land
unsuited by other usage or natural features for children's
active play space. Fencing or other enclosures shall be a
minimum height of four feet and shall be subject to all setback
requirements for the district in which it is located. Gate doors,
where provided, shall be equipped with safety locking devices
so as to preclude inadvertent opening of the fenced enclosures.
(c) An outdoor play area shall be on the same lot as the child care
center.
(d) The minimum lot area shall be 3 1/3 acres. The maximum
number of children shall not exceed 40 per lot.
§ 200-156 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-156
1:859
§ 200-157. RR/C District bulk and area regulations. [Amended
5-18-1998 by Ord. No. 98-10; 1-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2007-27]
The following shall be the standards for the RR/C District:
(e) No child-care center, day camp, kindergarten or preschool
shall be located within 1/4 mile radius of any similar use.
(f) The location of access driveways, landscaping and site plan
design are compatible with the neighborhood in which it is to
be located.
(g) Such facilities shall be licensed by the New Jersey Department
of Human Services.
(h) Undue traffic congestion on streets providing access to the
project is not created.
(i) Adequate landscaping or screening from adjacent residential
lots along each side and rear lot line in accordance with
standards established in Article XXX of this Part 4, is provided.
(j) The hours of operation shall be limited to 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
(k) Maneuvering room must be provided on site for parking and
unloading/loading of children so as to preclude the necessity
for stacking or backing out onto a public street. No unsafe
conditions for pickup and dropoff of children shall be
permitted.
(l) There shall be a minimum of 35 square feet of usable activity
indoor floor space for each child. Areas for administrative use,
bathrooms, hallways, storage and kitchen areas shall not be
counted in the calculation of the minimum required indoor play
space.
(10) The taking in of nontransient boarders or roomers by a family
resident on the premises, subject to the following special
requirements:
(a) There shall be no display or advertising on the premises in
connection with such use.
(b) There shall not be more than two boarders or roomers in any
one dwelling.236
A. Minimum lot area: 3 1/3 acres.
B. Minimum lot frontage: 100 feet.
236. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(11), regarding community residences for the
developmentally disabled, as amended 5-18-1998 by Ord. No. 98-10, and which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-05.
§ 200-156 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-157
1:860
§ 200-158. R-1/C District use regulations. [Added 5-18-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-10; amended 11-15-1999 by Ord. No. 99-29; 12-17-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-26]
C. Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
D. Minimum lot depth: 250 feet.
E. Minimum yards:
(1) Front yard: 50 feet.
(2) Rear yard: 30 feet.
(3) Side yard: 30 feet.
F. Maximum FAR: 5%.
G. Maximum improvement coverage: 10%.
H. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories, but not to exceed 35 feet.
A. Permitted uses. In an R-1/C District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used, except for one or more of the following
uses: [Amended 1-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2007-27; 10-27-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-32]
(1) Any use permitted in an RR/C District.
B. Conditional uses. In an R-1/C District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses:
(1) Any use permitted by condition in an RR/C District, as may be
modified herein. [Amended 1-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2007-27]
(2) Nursing home, rest home or home for the aged, subject to the
following special requirements:
(a) The minimum lot area required for each four or remainder over
a multiple of four resident patients or resident guests shall be
the same as the minimum lot area required for each dwelling
unit in the district in which the use is to be created.
(b) Such buildings shall conform to the standards issued by
appropriate agencies of the State of New Jersey and be duly
licensed under appropriate state laws.
(c) A landscape strip shall be provided along each side or rear
property line in accordance with the standards established in
Article XXXI of this Part 4.
§ 200-157 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-159
1:861
§ 200-159. R-1/C District bulk and area regulations. [Amended
5-18-1998 by Ord. No. 98-10; 9-7-1999 by Ord. No. 99-18;
12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26]
The following shall be the standards for the R-1/C District:
§ 200-159.1. R-1A Residence use, bulk and area regulations. [Added
12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26]
The use, bulk, and area regulations for the R-1A District shall be the same
as for the R-1/C District.
§ 200-160. R-2 Residence District use regulations.
A. Minimum lot area: 1 2/3 acres.
B. Minimum lot frontage: 85 feet.
C. Minimum lot width: 175 feet.
D. Minimum lot depth: 175 feet.
E. Minimum yards:
(1) Front yard: 40 feet.
(2) Rear yard: 20 feet.
(3) Side yard: 20 feet.
F. Maximum FAR: 13%.
G. Maximum improvement coverage: 17%.
H. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories, 35 feet.237
A. Permitted uses. In an R-2 District, no building or premises shall be used
and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged, intended
or designed to be used, except for one or more of the following uses:
[Amended 2-25-1991 by Ord. No. 91-05; 1-7-2008 by Ord. No.
2007-27; 10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-32]
(1) Any use permitted in an RR/C District.
B. Conditional uses. In an R-2 District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses: [Amended 8-22-1983 by Ord. No.
83-24; 9-27-1993 by Ord. No. 93-27; 12-20-1993 by Ord. No.
93-38]
(1) Any use permitted by condition in an RR/C District, as may be
modified herein. [Amended 1-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2007-27]
237. Editor's Note: Former Subsection I, regarding specific exceptions to the bulk and area
regulations for certain uses, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-32.
§ 200-159 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-160
1:862
§ 200-161. R-2 District bulk and area regulations.238 [Amended
9-27-1993 by Ord. No. 93-27; 12-20-1993 by Ord. No. 93-38]
The following shall be the standards for the R-2 District:
(2) Nursing home, rest home or home for the aged, subject to the
following special requirements:
(a) The minimum lot area required for each four or remainder over
a multiple of four resident patients or resident guests shall be
the same as the minimum lot area required for each dwelling
unit in the district in which the use is to be created.
(b) Such buildings shall conform to the Manual of Standards for
Nursing Homes issued by the Department of Institutions and
Agencies of the State of New Jersey and be duly licensed under
appropriate state laws.
(c) A landscape strip shall be provided along each side or rear
property line in accordance with the standards established in
Article XXXI of this Part 4.
A. Minimum lot area: one acre.
B. Minimum lot frontage: 85 feet.
C. Minimum lot width: 175 feet.
D. Minimum lot depth: 175 feet.
E. Minimum yards:
(1) Front yard: 40 feet.
(2) Rear yard: 20 feet.
(3) Side yard: 20 feet.
F. Maximum FAR: 13%.
G. Maximum improvement coverage: 17%. [Amended 10-24-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-35]
H. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories, 35 feet.
I. (Reserved)239
238. Editor's Note: Former § 200-172, R-2A Residence District use and bulk regulations, added
10-24-1994 by Ord. No. 94-55, was repealed 1-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2007-27. This ordinance
also provided for the renumbering of former § 200-173 as § 200-172.
239. Editor's Note: Former Subsection I, regarding specific exceptions to bulk and area
regulations for certain uses, added 2-25-1991 by Ord. No. 91-05, was repealed 10-27-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-32.
§ 200-160 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-161
1:863
§ 200-162. R-30 Residence District use regulations. [Added
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-32]
J. For lots with single-family residential structures in existence as of the
effective date of this subsection, the FAR, MIC, and required yards shall
be as follows: [Added 1-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2007-27240]
(1) Maximum FAR: 15%.
(2) Maximum improvement coverage: 20%.
(3) Minimum yards:
(a) Front yard: 50 feet.
(b) Rear yard: 30 feet.
(c) Side yard: 30 feet.
A. Permitted uses. In an R-30 District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered on a lot which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used, except for one or more of
the following uses:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Home occupations, subject to the regulations contained in Article
XXXI of this Part 4.
(3) Parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, recreation and community
buildings, swimming pools and other activities of recreational
character, such as golf and tennis clubs.
(4) Farm and agricultural activities or use of land, subject to the
regulations contained in Article XXXI of this Part 4. Commercial
composting is not a permitted use.
(5) The sale and processing of agricultural products raised or grown on
the particular farm from which it is sold, subject to the regulations
contained in Article XXXI of this Part 4.
(6) Temporary buildings, temporary construction offices and
temporary storage of materials, provided that such use is location
on the lot where construction is taking place or on a lot adjacent to
or part of the development site and that such temporary use is to be
terminated within 30 days of issuance of a final certificate of
occupancy for the total project or work is abandoned according to
N.J.S.A. 5:23-2.5(c)2.
(7) Accessory uses and accessory buildings incidental to the above
uses and located on the same lot.
240. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for an effective date of 1-27-2008.
§ 200-161 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-162
1:864
(8) Community residences for the developmentally disabled,
community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community
residences for the terminally ill and community residences for
persons with head injuries serving not more than 15 persons and
otherwise meeting the standards and criteria set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-66.2, including being duly licensed pursuant to the statutes
referenced therein. All requirements for single-family residences
set forth in the Land Use Ordinance, Chapter 200 of the West
Windsor Code, shall apply to such community residences. Review
by the board of jurisdiction, except when variances are sought,
shall not be required.
(9) Building structures and uses owned and operated by the Township
of West Windsor.
(10) Private, semipublic or public golf and country clubs, provided that
such facilities are located on a lot of at least 100 acres in size which
is deed-restricted to recreational uses in perpetuity.
(11) Accessory uses and accessory buildings incidental to the use
permitted by Subsection A(10) hereof, including the following:
(a) Dining, bar, lounge and banquet facilities with related kitchen
and storage areas.
(b) Pro shops, fitness centers, locker rooms, golf cart and bag
storage areas.
(c) Meeting rooms and management offices.
(d) Tennis and paddle tennis courts.
(e) Swimming pool and cabana with locker rooms.
(f) Maintenance building.
(g) Parking, subject to the regulations contained in Article VI of
this chapter.
B. Conditional uses. In an R-30 District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses:
(1) Church or other place of worship, parish house or religious school
building, subject to the following special requirements:
(a) The location of access driveways, landscaping and site plan
design are compatible with the neighborhood in which the use
is to be located.
(b) No building or part thereof or any parking or loading area shall
be located nearer than 50 feet to any street line or lot line.
(c) A parish house, rectory or parsonage shall conform to the
requirements for a single-family dwelling.
§ 200-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-162
1:865
(d) The minimum lot area shall be 3 1/3 acres.
(e) The maximum FAR for any such use shall be 13%.
(f) The maximum impervious coverage (MIC) for any such use
shall be 40%.
(g) A child-care center shall be considered an accessory use and
may be combined with this conditional use; however, the
combined FAR and MIC of this conditional use and any child
care shall not exceed the limits set above. In addition, any
child-care use shall meet the requirements provided in
Subsection B(8).
(2) Public and private elementary, junior and senior high schools,
subject to the requirement of Subsection B(1)(a) and (b) of this
section, in addition to the minimum lot sizes as established by the
New Jersey State Department of Education for school facilities.
(3) Public libraries and museums, subject to the requirements of
Subsection B(1)(a), (b) and (d) of this section.
(4) Social clubs, fraternal, veterans, social service, union and civic
organizations, subject to the following special requirements:
(a) The project meets the criteria set forth under Subsection
B(1)(a), (b) and (d) of this section.
(b) The project is designed to be in keeping with the architectural
character of the neighborhood in which it is to be located.
(c) Adequate landscaping or screening from adjacent residential
lots along each side and rear lot line in accordance with the
standards established herein and in Part 1, Site Plan Review, of
this chapter, is provided.
(5) Water storage tank or tower, water reservoir, water or sewer
pumping station and water or sewage treatment plant, subject to
the following special requirements:
(a) The project is designed to be in keeping with the architectural
character of the neighborhood in which it is to be located.
(b) The project is in keeping with the Master Plan of the Township.
(c) The project conforms with yard setbacks for the district in
which it is to be located.
(d) Adequate landscaping in conformance with standards
established in Article XXXI of this Part 4.
(6) Substations, electric and gas facilities and all other public utilities,
subject to the following requirements:
§ 200-162 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-162
1:866
(a) All those requirements of Subsection B(5) above.
(b) No storage of materials and trucks and no repair facilities or
housing of repair crews, except within completely enclosed
buildings.
(7) Transmission lines and transmitting and receiving antennas or
aerials, subject to the following special requirements:
(a) None shall exceed 55 feet in height.
(b) None shall be of such height or position that aircraft warning
lights are required by any governmental agency.
(c) All shall be so located on a lot and aligned so as to be as
inconspicuous as possible.
(8) Child-care centers, day camps, kindergartens and preschools,
subject to the following special requirements:
(a) At least 100 square feet of outdoor play space per child shall be
provided.
(b) Outdoor play space shall be fenced or otherwise enclosed on all
sides and shall not include driveways, parking areas or land
unsuited by other usage or natural features for children's
active play space. Fencing or other enclosures shall be a
minimum height of four feet and shall be subject to all setback
requirements for the district in which it is located. Gate doors,
where provided, shall be equipped with safety locking devices
so as to preclude inadvertent opening of the fenced enclosures.
(c) An outdoor play area shall be on the same lot as the child-care
center.
(d) The minimum lot area shall be 3 1/3 acres. The maximum
number of children shall not exceed 40 per lot.
(e) No child-care center, day camp, kindergarten or preschool
shall be located within a radius of 1/4 mile of any similar use.
(f) The location of access driveways, landscaping and site plan
design shall be compatible with the neighborhood in which
they are to be located.
(g) Such facilities shall be licensed by the New Jersey Department
of Human Services.
(h) Adequate landscaping or screening from adjacent residential
lots along each side and rear lot line in accordance with
standards established in Article XXX of this Part 4 is provided.
(i) The hours of operation shall be limited to 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
§ 200-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-162
1:867
§ 200-163. R-30 District bulk and area regulations. [Added
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-32]
The following shall be the standards for the R-30 District:
(j) Maneuvering room must be provided on site for parking and
unloading/loading of children so as to preclude the necessity
for stacking or backing out onto a public street. No unsafe
conditions for pickup and dropoff of children shall be
permitted.
(k) There shall be a minimum of 35 square feet of usable activity
indoor floor space for each child. Areas for administrative use,
bathrooms, hallways, storage and kitchen areas shall not be
counted in the calculation of the minimum required indoor play
space.
(9) The taking in of nontransient boarders or roomers by a family
resident on the premises, subject to the following special
requirements:
(a) There shall be no display or advertising on the premises in
connection with such use.
(b) There shall not be more than two boarders or roomers in any
one dwelling.
(10) Nursing home, rest home or home for the aged, subject to the
following special requirements:
(a) The minimum lot area required for each four or remainder over
a multiple of four resident patients or resident guests shall be
the same as the minimum lot area required for each dwelling
unit in the district.
(b) Such buildings shall conform to the standards issued by
appropriate agencies of the State of New Jersey and be duly
licensed under appropriate state laws.
(c) A landscape strip shall be provided along each side or rear
property line in accordance with the standards established in
Article XXXI of this Part 4.
A. Minimum lot area: 30,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
C. Minimum yards:
(1) Front yard: 40 feet.
(2) Rear yard: 30 feet.
(3) Side yard: 30 feet.
§ 200-162 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-163
1:868
§ 200-164. R-30A Residence District use regulations. [Added
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-33]
D. Maximum FAR: 13%.
E. Maximum improvement coverage: 18%.
F. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories, but not greater than 35 feet.
G. Bulk and area regulations for the uses permitted by § 200-162A(10) and
(11) shall be as set forth in this § 200-163 with the exception of the
requirement set forth in § 200-162A(10) and of the following specific
standards:
(1) Maximum FAR: 0.0076.
(2) Maximum improvement coverage: 0.06.
(3) Building setbacks from residential lot lines:
(a) For maintenance buildings and storage buildings: 100 feet.
(b) For all other buildings, swimming pools and tennis courts: 200
feet.
A. Permitted uses. In an R-30A District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered on a lot which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used, except for one or more of
the following uses:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Home occupations, subject to the regulations contained in Article
XXXI of this Part 4.
(3) Parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, recreation and community
buildings, including fire houses and first aid squads, swimming
pools and other activities of recreational character, such as golf and
tennis clubs.
(4) Farm and agricultural activities or use of land, subject to the
regulations contained in Article XXXI of this Part 4. Commercial
composting is not a permitted use.
(5) The sale and processing of agricultural products raised or grown on
the particular farm from which it is sold, subject to the regulations
contained in Article XXXI of this Part 4.
(6) Temporary buildings, temporary construction offices and
temporary storage of materials, provided that such use is located
on the lot where construction is taking place or on a lot adjacent to
or part of the development site and that such temporary use is to be
terminated within 30 days of issuance of a final certificate of
§ 200-163 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-164
1:869
§ 200-165. R-30A District bulk and area regulations. [Added
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-33]
The following shall be the standards for the R-30A District:
§ 200-166. R-30B Residence District use regulations. [Added
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-34]
occupancy for the total project or work is abandoned according to
N.J.S.A. 5:23-2.5(c)2.
(7) Accessory uses and accessory buildings incidental to the above
uses and located on the same lot.
(8) Community residences for the developmentally disabled,
community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community
residences for the terminally ill and community residences for
persons with head injuries serving not more than 15 persons and
otherwise meeting the standards and criteria set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-66.2, including being duly licensed pursuant to the statutes
referenced therein. All requirements for single-family residences
set forth in the Land Use Ordinance, Chapter 200 of the West
Windsor Code, shall apply to such community residences. Review
by the board of jurisdiction, except when variances are sought,
shall not be required.
(9) Building structures and uses owned and operated by the Township
of West Windsor.
B. Conditional uses. In an R-30A District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses:
(1) Any use permitted by condition in an R-30 District.
A. Minimum lot area: 30,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
C. Minimum yards:
(1) Front yard: 50 feet.
(2) Rear yard: 30 feet.
(3) Side yard: 25 feet.
D. Maximum FAR: 13%.
E. Maximum improvement coverage: 18%.
F. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories, but not greater than 35 feet.
A. Permitted uses. In an R-30B District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered on a lot which is
§ 200-164 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-166
1:870
§ 200-167. R-30B District bulk and area regulations. [Added
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-34]
The following shall be the standards for the R-30B District:
§ 200-168. R-30C Residence District use regulations. [Added
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-35]
§ 200-169. R-30C District bulk and area regulations. [Added
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-35]
The following shall be the standards for the R-30C District:
arranged, intended or designed to be used, except for one or more of
the following uses:
(1) Any use permitted in an R-30A District.
B. Conditional uses. In an R-30B District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses:
(1) Any use permitted by condition in an R-30 District.
A. Minimum lot area: 30,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
C. Minimum yards:
(1) Front yard: 40 feet.
(2) Rear yard: 30 feet.
(3) Side yard: 20 feet.
D. Maximum FAR: 13%.
E. Maximum improvement coverage: 18%.
F. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories, but not greater than 35 feet.
A. Permitted uses. In an R-30C District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered on a lot which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used, except for one or more of
the following uses:
(1) Any use permitted in an R-30A District.
B. Conditional uses. In an R-30C District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses:
(1) Any use permitted by condition in an R-30 District.
A. Minimum lot area: 30,000 square feet.
§ 200-166 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-169
1:871
§ 200-170. R-30D Residence District use regulations. [Added
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-36]
§ 200-171. R-30D District bulk and area regulations. [Added
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-36]
The following shall be the standards for the R-30D District:
§ 200-172. R-24 Residence District use regulations. [Added
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-37]
B. Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
C. Minimum yards:
(1) Front yard: 50 feet.
(2) Rear yard: 30 feet.
(3) Side yard: 20 feet.
D. Maximum FAR: 13%.
E. Maximum improvement coverage: 18%.
F. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories, but not greater than 35 feet.
A. Permitted uses. In an R-30D District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered on a lot which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used, except for one or more of
the following uses:
(1) Any use permitted in an R-30A District.
B. Conditional uses. In an R-30D District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses:
(1) Any use permitted by condition in an R-30 District.
A. Minimum lot area: 30,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
C. Minimum yards:
(1) Front yard: 50 feet.
(2) Rear yard: 30 feet.
(3) Side yard: 20 feet.
D. Maximum FAR: 13%.
E. Maximum improvement coverage: 18%.
F. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories, but not greater than 35 feet.
§ 200-169 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-172
1:872
A. Permitted uses. In an R-24 District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered on a lot which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used, except for one or more of
the following uses:
(1) Any use permitted in an R-30A District.
B. Conditional uses. In an R-24 District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses:
(1) Church or other place of worship, parish house or religious school
building, subject to the following special requirements:
(a) The location of access driveways, landscaping and site plan
design are compatible with the neighborhood in which the use
is to be located.
(b) No building or part thereof or any parking or loading area shall
be located nearer than 50 feet to any street line or lot line.
(c) A parish house, rectory or parsonage shall conform to the
requirements for a single-family dwelling.
(d) The minimum lot area shall be 3 1/3 acres.
(e) The maximum FAR for any such use shall be 13%.
(f) The maximum impervious coverage (MIC) for any such use
shall be 40%.
(g) A child-care center shall be considered an accessory use and
may be combined with this conditional use; however, the
combined FAR and MIC of this conditional use and any child
care shall not exceed the limits set above. In addition, any
child-care use shall meet the requirements provided in
Subsection B(8).
(2) Public and private elementary, junior and senior high schools,
subject to the requirements of Subsection B(1)(a) and (b) of this
section, in addition to minimum lot sizes as established by the New
Jersey State Department of Education for school facilities.
(3) Public libraries and museums, subject to the requirements of
Subsection B(1)(a), (b) and (d) of this section.
(4) Social clubs, fraternal, veterans, social service, union and civic
organizations, subject to the following special requirements:
(a) The project meets the criteria set forth under Subsection
B(1)(a), (b) and (d) of this section.
(b) The project is designed to be in keeping with the architectural
character of the neighborhood in which it is to be located.
§ 200-172 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-172
1:873
(c) Adequate landscaping or screening from adjacent residential
lots along each side and rear lot line in accordance with the
standards established herein and in Part 1, Site Plan Review, of
this chapter, is provided.
(5) Water storage tank or tower, water reservoir, water or sewer
pumping station and water or sewage treatment plant, subject to
the following special requirements:
(a) The project is designed to be in keeping with the architectural
character of the neighborhood in which it is to be located.
(b) The project is in keeping with the Master Plan of the Township.
(c) The project conforms with yard setbacks for the district in
which it is to be located.
(d) Adequate landscaping in conformance with standards
established in Article XXXI of this Part 4.
(6) Substations, electric and gas facilities and all other public utilities,
subject to the following requirements:
(a) All those requirements of Subsection B(5) above.
(b) No storage of materials and trucks and no repair facilities or
housing of repair crews, except within completely enclosed
buildings.
(7) Transmission lines and transmitting and receiving antennas or
aerials, subject to the following special requirements:
(a) None shall exceed 55 feet in height.
(b) None shall be of such height or position that aircraft warning
lights are required by any governmental agency.
(c) All shall be so located on a lot and aligned so as to be as
inconspicuous as possible.
(8) Child-care centers, day camps, kindergartens and preschools,
subject to the following special requirements:
(a) At least 100 square feet of outdoor play space per child shall be
provided.
(b) Outdoor play space shall be fenced or otherwise enclosed on all
sides and shall not include driveways, parking areas or land
unsuited by other usage or natural features for children's
active play space. Fencing or other enclosures shall be a
minimum height of four feet and shall be subject to all setback
requirements for the district in which it is located. Gate doors,
where provided, shall be equipped with safety locking devices
so as to preclude inadvertent opening of the fenced enclosures.
§ 200-172 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-172
1:874
§ 200-173. R-24 District bulk and area regulations. [Added
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-37]
The following shall be the standards for the R-24 District:
(c) An outdoor play area shall be on the same lot as the child-care
center.
(d) The minimum lot area shall be 3 1/3 acres. The maximum
number of children shall not exceed 40 per lot.
(e) No child-care center, day camp, kindergarten or preschool
shall be located within a radius of 1/4 mile of any similar use.
(f) The location of access driveways, landscaping and site plan
design shall be compatible with the neighborhood in which it is
to be located.
(g) Such facilities shall be licensed by the New Jersey Department
of Human Services.
(h) Adequate landscaping or screening from adjacent residential
lots along each side and rear lot line in accordance with
standards established in Article XXX of this Part 4 is provided.
(i) The hours of operation shall be limited to 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
(j) Maneuvering room must be provided on site for parking and
unloading/loading of children so as to preclude the necessity
for stacking or backing out onto a public street. No unsafe
conditions for pickup and dropoff of children shall be
permitted.
(k) There shall be a minimum of 35 square feet of usable activity
indoor floor space for each child. Areas for administrative use,
bathrooms, hallways, storage and kitchen areas shall not be
counted in the calculation of the minimum required indoor play
space.
(9) The taking in of nontransient boarders or roomers by a family
resident on the premises, subject to the following special
requirements:
(a) There shall be no display or advertising on the premises in
connection with such use.
(b) There shall not be more than two boarders or roomers in any
one dwelling.
A. Minimum lot area: 24,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 125 feet.
C. Minimum yards:
§ 200-172 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-173
1:875
§ 200-173.1. R-20 Residence District use regulations. [Added
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-38]
§ 200-173.2. R-20 District bulk and area regulations. [Added
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-38]
The following shall be the standards for the R-20 District:
§ 200-173.3. R-20A Residence District use regulations. [Added
3-16-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-07]
(1) Front yard: 50 feet.
(2) Rear yard: 30 feet.
(3) Side yard: 25 feet.
D. Maximum FAR: 13%.
E. Maximum improvement coverage: 19%.
F. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories, but not greater than 35 feet.
A. Permitted uses. In an R-20 District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered on a lot which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used, except for one or more of
the following uses:
(1) Any use permitted in an R-30A District.
B. Conditional uses. In an R-20 District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses:
(1) Any use permitted by condition in an R-24 District.
A. Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
C. Minimum yards:
(1) Front yard: 40 feet.
(2) Rear yard: 30 feet.
(3) Side yard: 15 feet.
D. Maximum FAR: 13%.
E. Maximum improvement coverage: 20%.
F. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories, but not greater than 35 feet.
A. Permitted uses. In an R-20A District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered on a lot which is
§ 200-173 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-173.3
1:876
§ 200-173.4. R-20A District bulk and area regulations. [Added
3-16-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-07]
The following shall be the standards for the R-20A District:
§ 200-173.5. R-20B Residence District use regulations. [Added
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-40]
§ 200-173.6. R-20B District bulk and area regulations. [Added
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-40]
The following shall be the standards for the R-20 District:
arranged, intended or designed to be used, except for one or more of
the following uses:
(1) Any use permitted in an R-30A District.
B. Conditional uses. In an R-20A District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses:
(1) Any use permitted by condition in an R-24 District.
A. Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
C. Minimum yards:
(1) Front yard: 30 feet.
(2) Rear yard: 30 feet.
(3) Side yard: 15 feet.
D. Maximum FAR: 13%.
E. Maximum improvement coverage: 20%.
F. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories, but not greater than 35 feet.
A. Permitted uses. In an R-20B District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered on a lot which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used, except for one or more of
the following uses:
(1) Any use permitted in an R-30A District.
B. Conditional uses. In an R-20B District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses:
(1) Any use permitted by condition in an R-24 District.
A. Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
§ 200-173.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-173.6
1:877
§ 200-174. Open space cluster (OSC) planned development in RR/C
and R-1/C Districts. [Amended 8-22-1983 by Ord. No. 83-25;
12-5-1986 by Ord. No. 86-35; 9-27-1993 by Ord. No. 93-27;
12-20-1993 by Ord. No. 93-38; 5-18-1998 by Ord. No. 98-10;
3-31-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-10; 3-8-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-03;
12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26; 1-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2007-27]
B. Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
C. Minimum yards:
(1) Front yard: 40 feet.
(2) Rear yard: 30 feet.
(3) Side yard: 20 feet.
D. Maximum FAR: 13%.
E. Maximum improvement coverage: 20%.
F. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories, but not greater than 35 feet.
A. Application. Open space cluster (OSC) planned development
requirements may be applied in accordance with the provisions of this
section to modify bulk and area requirements specified in the RR/C and
R-1/C Residence Districts of this Part 4, and open space cluster planned
developments shall be required where greenbelt as designated in the
conservation element of the Master Plan is present on the property
regardless of tract size.
TABLE A
Open Space Cluster (OSC) Lot and Bulk Requirements
OSC Permitted
Reductions in
Absence of
Greenbelt
OSC
Permitted
Reductions in
Absence of
Greenbelt
OSC Permitted
Reductions in
Presence of
Greenbelt
Zoning District
Basic Permitted
Lot Size
3 1/3 Acres 1 2/3 Acres 3 1/3 Acres
and 1 2/3
Acres
Lot area1 50,000 sq. ft. 3/4 acre 1/2 acre
Lot frontage
(feet)
75 60 45
Lot width (feet) 150 125 100
Lot depth (feet) 150 125 100
Yards (feet)
Front 40 30 25
§ 200-173.6 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-174
1:878
TABLE A
Open Space Cluster (OSC) Lot and Bulk Requirements
OSC Permitted
Reductions in
Absence of
Greenbelt
OSC
Permitted
Reductions in
Absence of
Greenbelt
OSC Permitted
Reductions in
Presence of
Greenbelt
Zoning District
Basic Permitted
Lot Size
3 1/3 Acres 1 2/3 Acres 3 1/3 Acres
and 1 2/3
Acres
Side 20 15 12
Rear 20 15 12
NOTES:
1The lot area reduction in the absence of designated greenbelt to as
low as [of] 3/4 acre or 50,000 square feet is permitted if public water
is available and public sewer is available. The lot area reduction in the
presence of designated greenbelt to as low as 1/2 acre is mandatory to
avoid disturbance to the greenbelt. If such lots as are created under
this provision cannot meet the State of New Jersey standards for wells
and septic systems, then public water and/or public sewer must be
provided.
B. Minimum area. The minimum total area of a tract to be developed as an
OSC shall be 20 acres, except that, when designated greenbelt is
located on the tract, there shall be no minimum tract area. Such area to
be so developed shall be as a single entity or under unified control.
C. General procedures. Notwithstanding other provisions of this section,
development proposals in accordance with this section shall only be
approved by the board of jurisdiction if the record supports and such
board makes the findings for planned developments set forth in
§ 200-234B and the proposal is in compliance with the applicable
requirements Part 1, Site Plan Review, and Part 2, Subdivision, of this
chapter. Further, nothing contained in this section shall relieve the
owner or agent of the owner or the developer of an open space cluster
from receiving subdivision plat approval in accordance with the
provisions of Part 2, Subdivision, of this chapter.
D. Maximum number of OSC lots. The number of individual building lots
created shall be no greater than if the tract were developed as a
conventional subdivision conforming to all Township zoning and
subdivision standards and the lots were not reduced in size.
E. Area reductions permitted and other requirements with respect
thereto. In an OSC, single lots for single-family detached dwelling units
may be reduced in size as stipulated in Table A, Open Space Cluster
(OSC) Lot and Bulk Requirements. The permitted FAR and MIC shall
§ 200-174 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-174
1:879
§ 200-175. R-3 Residence District use regulations.
remain the same as if the lot were not reduced in size. Further, lots may
be reduced, provided that the land which would otherwise be required
for residential lots but which is not required under the permitted lot
area reduction provisions of this subsection shall be devoted to common
open space. The FAR and MIC for clustered subdivisions in the R-20,
R-20A, and R-20B Districts approved prior to December 1, 2008 shall
be based on a lot area of 32,670 square feet, except that the FAR and
MIC shall be based on the actual lot area if the lot is larger than 32,670
square feet. The FAR and MIC for clustered subdivisions in the R-30,
R-30A, R-30B, R-30C and R-30D Districts approved prior to December
1, 2008, shall be based on a lot area of 43,560 square feet, except that
the FAR and MIC shall be based on the actual lot area if the lot is larger
than 43,560 square feet. [Amended 3-16-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-06]
F. Common open space.
(1) Area to be dedicated. The common open space area to be dedicated
shall not be less than the difference in lot sizes that would have
resulted in the application of conventional subdivision standards
and the standards as allowed for an open space cluster.
(2) Location and configuration. The common open space shall be in one
compact and contiguous parcel to the maximum extent practicable.
Parcels of common open space unconnected to other parcels and
linear strips of open space, except those connecting parcels of open
space on- and off-tract and existing or proposed pedestrian and
bicycle paths and those along stream corridors, are discouraged.
The common open space shall maximize the sense of openness of
the development as seen from public rights-of-way and shall be
contiguous to existing or proposed open space on adjacent tracts, if
possible. All greenbelt designated in the conservation element of
the Master Plan shall be included in the common open space.
(3) Ownership and administration. The requirements pertaining to
ownership and administration of common open space shall be the
same as those conditions established for a PRN development, as
outlined in Article XXVII, § 200-190C, of this Part 4.
A. Permitted uses. In an R-3 District, no building or premises shall be used
and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged, intended
or designed to be used except for one or more of the following uses:
(1) Any permitted use in an R-2 District, subject to the bulk and area
regulations of that district, as set forth in § 200-161 of this Part 4.
(2) With sewer and public water: single-family detached dwellings on
smaller lots, townhouses, patio houses or single-family zero lot line
detached dwellings.
§ 200-174 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-175
1:880
B. Conditional uses. In an R-3 District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses:
(1) Any use permitted by condition in an R-2 District.
(2) A planned residential development containing a combination of
residential dwellings as permitted under § 200-175A(2) of this
article, subject to the following conditions and standards and
conforming to the requirements for planned developments
stipulated in Article XXXI of this Part 4.
(a) Minimum development area: 25 acres in contiguous parcels
served by public water and sewer systems. For purposes of this
requirement, streets existing prior to the development of a
planned residential development shall not be deemed to divide
acreage nor be a part of the acreage.
(b) Maximum permissible average gross density: three dwelling
units per acre shall be the basic average gross density
permitted, unless increases under the incentive options in
§ 200-175B(3) herein are permitted by the Planning Board up
to but not to exceed five dwelling units per acre.
(c) Incentive options for increased gross density. Maximum
permissible average gross density of a planned residential
development may be increased under the following options:
[1] Open space: For each 1% of increased common space
above 30% acceptable to the Planning Board, the
maximum permitted basic average gross density may be
increased by 3%, up to a maximum density increase of
15%.
[2] Least cost housing: For each dwelling unit of
nonsubsidized least cost housing provided above the
permitted basic average gross density and maintained as
such thereafter, an additional conventional dwelling unit
may be built, up to a maximum increase in the basic
average gross density of 40%.
[3] Planned development. Where the Planning Board grants
approval for a planned development, the maximum
permitted basic average gross density may be increased as
follows:
Planned Development
Acreage Density Increase
25 - 50 5%
51 - 100 10%
Over 100 15%
§ 200-175 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-175
1:881
[4] Increases under Subsections B(2)(c)[1], [2] and [3] above
may be cumulative. However, the increases permitted shall
not exceed the maximum permissible average gross
density of five dwelling units per acre.
(d) Minimum tract frontage: 150 feet in total as measured along a
public street which provides access to the planned
development.
(e) Residential unit type distribution and net density. There shall
be a variety of housing types and densities within a planned
development and complying with the following:
[1] Residential unit distribution.
[a] At a minimum, two of the permitted housing types
shall be provided.
[b] Of the housing types provided, no one type shall
exceed 80% of the total dwelling units of a planned
development.
[2] Net density of particular types of dwelling units shall be in
accordance with the schedule below. In calculating
permitted net densities as outlined herein, the area of land
covered by such uses shall include internal local streets,
parking areas and all private yards, but not areas
designated as common open space or development
collector streets.
[a] The net density of single-family, detached units shall
not exceed four dwelling units per acre.
[b] The net density of single-family, patio homes and zero
lot line dwellings shall not exceed five dwelling units
per acre.
[c] The net density of townhouses shall not exceed 10
dwelling units per acre.
(f) Maximum improvement coverage: 40% of the area of the
planned development.
(g) Bulk requirements.
[1] Building heights shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
[2] Lot sizes and dimensions, yard sizes and building
arrangement may be freely disposed and arranged,
provided that the planned development conforms to a
development plan approved by the Planning Board
pursuant to the applicable provisions contained in Part 1,
Site Plan Review, Part 2, Subdivision, and Part 3,
§ 200-175 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-175
1:882
§ 200-176. R-3A Residence District use regulations. [Added
2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1]
Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures, of this chapter. In
review of such development plans, the Planning Board
shall also be guided by the following design principles:
[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
[a] No portion of a dwelling shall be closer than 25 feet to
the right-of-way of a local internal road or 50 feet to a
collector road or major thoroughfare, as designated by
the Township's Master Plan.
[b] Along all boundary lines of any R-3 District, except
where they coincide with the right-of-way lines of a
state or county road, public utility right-of-way or
public parks, the same zoning provisions of the
abutting district shall prevail with respect to the side
yards, rear yards, screen planting and such other
transitional feature.
C. Common open space. The common open space conditions pertaining to
a PRN-1 District as contained in § 200-190C of this article shall apply to
a planned development in the R-3 District, except that the minimum
required common open space shall be 30%.
A. Permitted uses. In the R-3A District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used except for one or more of the following
uses:
(1) Any permitted use in an RR/C District, subject to the bulk and area
regulations of that district. [Amended 1-7-2008 by Ord. No.
2007-27]
(2) With sewer and public water: townhouse, patio house or singlefamily
zero lot line detached dwellings within a planned
development, provided that 20% of the total dwelling units that are
the subject of a development application shall be low and
moderate-income dwellings as required by Article XXXI, § 200-237,
of this Part 4.
B. Conditional uses. In an R-3A District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses:
(1) Any use permitted by condition in an R-2 District.
(2) Garden apartment dwellings within a planned development
containing a minimum of 50 acres, except that in the case of
planned developments which include more than one permitted
housing type and a minimum of 20% of the total dwelling units that
are the subject of a development application as low- or moderate-
§ 200-175 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-176
1:883
§ 200-177. R-3 District bulk and area regulations.
The following shall be the standards for the R-3 District:
income housing, the aforesaid minimum 50 acre requirement shall
be reduced to 45 acres. [Amended 10-27-1986 by Ord. No.
86-28]
A. Tract development.
(1) Minimum tract area. For other than single-family detached
dwellings: five acres.
(2) Minimum tract frontage. For other than single-family detached
dwellings: 150 feet.
(3) Open space. For townhouses only, not less than 30% of the tract
area designated for townhouse development shall contain green
open space; individual residential lots or portions thereof shall not
be construed as open space. Common open space shall conform to
requirements for such open space, except as modified herein, as
contained in § 200-190C of this article.
(4) Maximum permissible development density. The average gross
density shall not exceed three dwelling units per acre.
(5) Maximum improvement coverage: 40%.
(6) Design: The standards and principles for design set forth in
§ 200-190A(2)(h)[2] of this article as well as those applicable
provisions contained in Part 1, Site Plan Review, Part 2,
Subdivision, and Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures, of
this chapter, shall be used in the design of residential uses
permitted in this district.
B. Individual lots. Requirements for individual lots shall be as follows:
[Added 4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12]
Single-Family
Detached
Patio/Zero Lot
Line Townhouse
Minimum lot
area (square
feet)
14,000 7,500 2,000
Minimum lot
frontage (feet)
50 50 20
Minimum lot
width (feet)
85 60 20
Minimum lot
depth (feet)
85 60 --
§ 200-176 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-177
1:884
§ 200-178. R-3A District bulk and area regulations. [Added
2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1]
The following shall be the standards for the R-3A District:
Single-Family
Detached
Patio/Zero Lot
Line Townhouse
Minimum yards1
(feet)
Front 20 20 20
Rear 10 10 10
Side 10 0,102 103
Maximum floor
area ratio (FAR)
20% 32% --
Maximum
improvement
coverage (MIC)
25% 35% 45%
NOTES:
1Yards abutting arterial streets shall be increased by 30 feet; those
abutting collector streets shall be increased by 10 feet.
2Ten feet if a patio dwelling unit which may be on one side if also
designed as an attached or zero lot line dwelling; one side 10 feet if
zero lot line dwelling.
3At end units only.
C. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories, but not to exceed 35 feet.
A. Tract development.
(1) Minimum tract area. For other than single-family detached
dwellings: five acres.
(2) Minimum tract frontage. For other than single-family detached
dwellings: 150 feet.
(3) Common open space. For townhouses and garden apartments only,
not less than 25% of the tract area designated for a planned
development shall contain green space. Individual residential lots
or portions thereof shall not be construed as open space. Common
open space shall conform to requirements for such open space,
except as modified herein, as contained in § 200-190C of this
article.
(4) Maximum permissible development density.
§ 200-177 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-178
1:885
(a) The average gross density shall not exceed four dwelling units
per acre.
(b) The net density of particular types of dwelling units shall be in
accordance with the schedule below. In calculating permitted
net densities as outlined herein, the area of land covered by
such uses shall include internal local streets, parking areas and
all private yards, but not areas designated as common open
space or development collector streets.
[1] The net density of single-family, patio homes and zero lot
line dwellings shall not exceed five dwelling units per acre.
[2] The net density of townhouses shall not exceed 10
dwelling units per acre.
[3] The net density of garden apartments shall not exceed 25
dwelling units per acre.
(5) Residential unit type distribution. There shall be a variety of
housing types within a planned development containing 50 or more
acres such that, at a minimum, two of the permitted housing types
shall be provided. Of the housing types provided, no one type shall
exceed 80% of the total market rate dwelling units within the
development. This unit type distribution requirement shall not
apply to units designated for low- and moderate-income housing.
(6) Maximum improvement coverage: 40%.
(7) Design: The standards and principles for design set forth in
§ 200-190A(2)(h)[2] of this article as well as those applicable
provisions contained in Part 1, Site Plan Review, Part 2,
Subdivision, and Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures, of
this chapter, shall be used in the design of residential uses
permitted in this district.
B. Individual lots. Requirements for individual lots shall be as follows:
[Amended 4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12]
Patio/Zero Lot Line Townhouse
Minimum lot area
(square feet)
5,000 2,000
Minimum lot frontage
(feet)
50 18
Minimum lot width
(feet)
50 18
Minimum lot depth
(feet)
50 --
Minimum yards1 (feet)
Front 20 20
§ 200-178 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-178
1:886
§ 200-178.1. R-3.5 Residence District use regulations. [Added
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-41]
§ 200-178.2. R-3.5 District bulk and area regulations. [Added
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-41]
The following shall be the standards for the R-3.5 District:
Patio/Zero Lot Line Townhouse
Rear 10 10
Side 0,102 103
Maximum floor area
ratio
35 35%
Maximum improvement
coverage
38% 35%
NOTES:
1Yards abutting arterial streets shall be increased by 30 feet; those
abutting collector streets shall be increased by 10 feet.
2Ten feet if a patio dwelling unit which may be on one side if also
designed as an attached or zero lot line dwelling; one side 10 feet if
zero lot line dwelling.
3At end units only.
C. Maximum building height: three stories, but not to exceed 35 feet.
A. Permitted uses. In an R-3.5 District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered on a lot which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used, except for one or more of
the following uses:
(1) Dwelling units on three adjoining lots. Two of the units shall share a
common wall and the third may be either attached or detached.
(2) Any use permitted by § 200-156A(2) through (7).
B. Conditional uses. In an R-3.5 District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses:
(1) None.
A. Tract development.
(1) Minimum tract area. For other than single-family detached
dwellings: 35 acres.
(2) Open space: at least 70% of the tract area.
§ 200-178 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-178.2
1:887
§ 200-179. R-4 Residence District use and bulk regulations.
(3) Maximum number of units: 69.
(4) Design. The standards and principles for design contained in Part
1, Site Plan Review, Part 2, Subdivision, and Part 3, Subdivision and
Site Plan Procedures, of this chapter shall be used in the design of
residential uses permitted in this district.
B. Individual lots. Requirements for individual lots shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum lot area: 3,500 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot frontage: 50 feet.
(3) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 75 feet.
(5) Minimum yards:
(a) Front: 18 feet.
(b) Rear: five feet.
(c) Side: five feet. (Note: Zero-foot side yard setback when units
share a common wall.)
(6) Maximum floor area ratio: 60%.
(7) Maximum improvement coverage: 80%.
C. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories, but not to exceed 35 feet.
A. Permitted uses. In an R-4 District, no building or premises shall be used
and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged, intended
or designed to be used except for one or more of the following uses:
(1) Any permitted use in an R-2 District, subject to the bulk and area
regulations of that district, as set forth in § 200-161 of this Part 4.
(2) With sewer and public water: patio house, single-family zero lot line
detached dwellings, townhouse, garden apartment and mid-rise
apartment dwellings.
B. Conditional uses. In an R-4 District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses:
(1) Any use permitted by condition in an R-2 District.
(2) A planned residential development containing a combination of
residential dwellings as permitted under Subsection A(2) of this
section, subject to the following conditions and standards and
conforming to the requirements for planned developments
stipulated in Article XXXI of this Part 4.
§ 200-178.2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-179
1:888
(a) Minimum development area: 25 acres in contiguous parcels
served by public water and sewer systems. For purposes of this
requirement, streets existing prior to the development of a
planned residential development shall not be deemed to divide
acreage nor be part of the acreage.
(b) Maximum permissible average gross density. Five dwelling
units per acre shall be the basic average gross density
permitted, unless increases under the incentive options in
Subsection B(3) below are permitted by the Planning Board, up
to but not to exceed eight dwelling units per acre.
(c) Incentive options for increased gross density. Maximum
permissible average gross density of a planned development
may be increased under the following options:
[1] Open space. For each 1% of increased common open space
above 40% acceptable to the Planning Board, the
maximum permitted basic average gross density may be
increased by 2%, up to a maximum density increase of
10%.
[2] Least cost housing. For each dwelling unit of
nonsubsidized least cost housing provided above the
permitted basic average gross density and maintained as
such thereafter, an additional conventional dwelling unit
may be built, up to a maximum increase in the basic
average gross density of 10%.
[3] Low- or moderate-income housing. For each unit of
housing subsidized by a federal, state or private subsidy
program which provides units for low- or moderate-income
families or individuals, including senior citizens, and
maintained as such thereafter, an additional conventional
dwelling unit may be built, up to a maximum increase in
the basic average gross density of 30%.
[4] Planned development. Where the Planning Board grants
approval for a planned development, the maximum
permitted average gross density may be increased as
follows:
Planned Development
Acreage Density Increase
25 - 50 5%
Over 50 10%
[5] Increases under Subsection B(2)(c)[1], [2], [3] and [4]
above may be cumulative. However, the increases
permitted shall not exceed the maximum permissible
average gross density of eight dwelling units per acre.
§ 200-179 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-179
1:889
(d) Minimum tract frontage: 100 feet in total as measured along a
public street which provides access to the planned
development.
(e) Residential unit type; distribution and net density. There shall
be a variety of housing types and densities within a planned
development and complying with the following:
[1] Residential unit distribution.
[a] At a minimum, two of the permitted housing types
shall be provided.
[b] Of the housing types provided, no one type shall
exceed 80% of the total dwelling units of a planned
development, except that if mid-rise apartments are
provided, they shall not exceed 40% of the total
dwelling units.
[2] The net density of particular types of dwelling units shall
be in accordance with the schedule below. In calculating
permitted net densities as outlined herein, the area of land
covered by such uses shall include internal streets,
parking areas and all private yards, but not areas
designated as common open space or development
collector streets.
[a] The net density of single-family patio homes and zero
lot line dwellings shall not exceed five dwelling units
per acre.
[b] The net density of townhouses shall not exceed 10
dwelling units per acre.
[c] The net density of garden apartments shall not exceed
15 dwelling units per acre.
[d] The net density of mid-rise apartments shall not
exceed 25 dwelling units per acre.
(f) Maximum improvement coverage: 35%, except 40% if at least
10% of the total dwelling units in a planned residential
development are single-family patio homes or zero lot line
dwellings. If less than 10% single-family uses is provided, the
maximum improvement coverage shall be adjusted
proportionately.
(g) Bulk requirements.
[1] Building heights for all building types exclusive of mid-rise
apartments may vary from one to four stories, but in no
case shall they exceed 45 feet.
§ 200-179 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-179
1:890
§ 200-180. R-4A Residence District use regulations. [Added
2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1]
[2] Building heights for mid-rise apartments may vary from
four to six stories, but in no case shall they exceed 70 feet.
[3] Lot sizes and dimensions, yard sizes and building
arrangement may be freely disposed and arranged,
provided that the planned development conforms to a
development plan approved by the Planning Board
pursuant to the applicable provisions contained in Part 1,
Site Plan Review, Part 2, Subdivision, and Part 3,
Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures, of this chapter. In
review of such development plans, the Planning Board
shall also be guided by the design principles contained in
§ 200-190A(2)(h)[2] of this article.
C. Common open space. The common open space conditions pertaining to
a PRN-1 District as contained in § 200-190C of this article shall apply to
a planned development in the R-4 District.
A. Permitted uses. In an R-4A District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used except for one or more of the following
uses: [Amended 9-26-1994 by Ord. No. 94-44]
(1) Any permitted use in an RR/C District, subject to the bulk and area
regulations of that district. [Amended 1-7-2008 by Ord. No.
2007-27]
(2) With sewer and public water: patio house, single-family zero lot line
detached dwelling, two-family and semidetached dwelling,
townhouse, garden apartment dwelling within a planned
residential development, provided that 20% of the total dwelling
units that are the subject of a development application shall be lowand
moderate-income dwellings as required by Article XXXI,
§ 200-237, of this Part 4. As an alternative to providing the required
20% low- and moderate-income housing on-site, an applicant, upon
application to the Planning Board, may elect to transfer such
obligation under the following conditions: [Amended 7-17-1989
by Ord. No. 89-29; 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
(a) A developer's agreement shall be approved by the Township
Committee upon recommendation of the Planning Board and
subject to the approval by a court maintaining jurisdiction of
the Township's Mt. Laurel program that governs, among other
related items, the following aspects of the senior citizen
project: site and building design criteria; development,
operation and management guidelines; staging of the senior
citizen project construction in relation to the market rate
development contained in off-site R-4A Zone, including
§ 200-179 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-180
1:891
§ 200-181. R-4 District bulk and area regulations.
The following shall be the standards for the R-4 District:
financial contingency arrangements governing willful default
by an applicant of said staging program; and provisions for the
continuation of a portion of senior citizen units as affordable
units beyond the prescribed thirty-year time limit required of
such units.
B. Conditional uses. In an R-4A District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses: Any use permitted by condition in an R-2
District.
A. Tract development.
(1) Minimum tract area: five acres.
(2) Minimum tract frontage: 150 feet.
(3) Open space: For other than patio houses or single-family zero lot
line detached dwellings, not less than 40% of the tract area shall
contain green open space; individual lots or portions thereof shall
not be construed as open space. Common open space shall conform
to requirements for such open space as contained in § 200-190C of
this article.
(4) Maximum permissible development density. The average gross
density shall not exceed five dwelling units per acre.
(5) Maximum improvement coverage: 40%.
(6) Design: The standards and principles for design set forth in
§ 200-190A(2)(h)[2] of this article as well as those applicable
provisions contained in Part 1, Site Plan Review, Part 2,
Subdivision, and Part 3, Subdivision Site Plan Procedures, of this
chapter, shall be used in the design of residential uses permitted in
this district.
B. Individual lots. Requirements for individual lots shall be as follows:
Patio/Zero Lot
Line Townhouse
Minimum lot area (square feet) 7,500 2,000
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 50 20
Minimum lot width (feet) 60 20
Minimum lot depth (feet) 60 --
Minimum yards1 (feet)
Front 20 20
Rear 10 10
§ 200-180 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-181
1:892
§ 200-182. R-4A District bulk and area regulations. [Added
2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1]
The following shall be the standards for the R-4A District:
Patio/Zero Lot
Line Townhouse
Side 0,102 103
NOTES:
1Yards abutting arterial streets shall be increased by 30 feet; those
abutting collector streets shall be increased by 10 feet.
2Ten feet if a patio dwelling unit; one side 10 feet if zero lot line
dwelling.
3At end units only.
C. Maximum building height.
(1) Patio, zero lot line, townhouses or garden apartments: 2 1/2
stories, but not to exceed 35 feet.
(2) Mid-rise apartments: six stories, but not to exceed 70 feet.
A. Tract development.
(1) Minimum tract area: five acres.
(2) Minimum tract frontage: 100 feet.
(3) Open space: Except as otherwise provided herein, not less than the
lesser of 25% of the development area, excluding the area of singlefamily
lots, or 20% of the gross development area shall be designed
as and devoted to common open space for use primarily by the
residents of the planned development. Individual lots or portions
thereof shall not be construed as open space. Common open space
shall conform to requirements for such open space as contained in
§ 200-190C of this article.
(4) Maximum permissible development density.
(a) The average gross density shall not exceed six dwelling units
per acre.
(b) Net density of particular types of dwelling units shall be in
accordance with the schedule below. In calculating permitted
net densities as outlined herein, the area of land covered by
such uses shall include internal streets, parking areas and all
private yards, but not areas designated as common open space
or development collector streets.
§ 200-181 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-182
1:893
[1] The net density of single-family patio homes and zero lot
line dwellings shall not exceed five dwelling units per acre.
[2] The net density of two-family and semidetached units shall
not exceed eight dwelling units per acre.
[3] The net density of townhouses shall not exceed 10
dwelling units per acre.
[4] The net density of garden apartments shall not exceed 25
dwelling units per acre.
[5] Residential unit type distribution. There shall be a variety
of housing unit types within a planned development such
that at a minimum, two of the permitted housing types
shall be provided. Of the housing types provided, no one
type shall exceed 80% of the total market rate dwelling
units within the development. This unit type distribution
requirement shall not apply to units designated for lowand
moderate-income housing.
[6] Maximum improvement coverage: 40%.
[7] Design. The standards and principles for design set forth
in § 200-190A(2)(h)[2] of this article as well as those
applicable provisions contained in Part 1, Site Plan Review,
Part 2, Subdivision, and Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan
Procedures, of this chapter, shall be used in the design of
residential uses permitted in this district.
B. Individual lots. Requirements for individual lots shall be as follows:
Patio/Zero
Lot Line Townhouse
Two-Family
Semidetached
Minimum lot area (square
feet)
5,000 2,000 3,200
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 50 18 40
Minimum lot width (feet) 50 18 40
Minimum lot depth (feet) 50 -- --
Minimum yards1 (feet)
Front 20 20 20
Rear 10 10 10
Side 0,102 103 103
§ 200-182 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-182
1:894
§ 200-183. R-4B Residence District use regulations. [Added
2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1]
§ 200-184. R-4B District bulk and area regulations. [Added
2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1]
The following shall be the standards for the R-4B District:
NOTES:
1Yards abutting arterial streets shall be increased by 30 feet; those
abutting collector streets shall be Increased by 10 feet.
2Ten feet if a patio dwelling unit; one side 10 feet if zero lot line
dwelling.
3At end units only.
C. Maximum building height. Three stories, but not to exceed 35 feet.
A. Permitted uses. In an R-4B District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used except for one or more of the following
uses:
(1) Any permitted use in an RR/C District, subject to the bulk and area
regulations of that district. [Amended 1-7-2008 by Ord. No.
2007-27]
(2) With sewer and public water: patio house, single-family zero lot line
detached dwellings, two-family and semidetached dwellings,
townhouses and garden apartment dwellings within a planned
development, provided that 20% of the total dwelling units that are
the subject of a development application shall be low- and
moderate-income dwellings as required by Article XXXI, § 200-237,
of this Part 4.
B. Conditional uses. In an R-4B District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses:
(1) Any use permitted by condition in an R-2 District.
A. Tract development.
(1) Minimum tract area: five acres.
(2) Minimum tract frontage: 100 feet.
(3) Open space: Except as otherwise provided herein, not less than the
lesser of 25% of the development area, excluding the area of singlefamily
lots, or 20% of the gross development area shall be designed
as and devoted to common open space for use primarily by the
§ 200-182 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-184
1:895
§ 200-185. R-5 Residence District use regulations. [Amended
2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1]
residents of the planned development. Common open space shall
conform to requirements for such open space, except as modified
herein, as contained in § 200-190C of this article. [Amended
10-7-1985 by Ord. No. 85-25]
(4) Maximum permissible development density.
(a) The average gross density shall not exceed eight dwelling units
per acre.
(b) The net density of particular types of dwelling units shall be in
accordance with the schedule below. In calculating permitted
net densities as outlined herein, the area of land covered by
given uses shall include internal streets, parking areas and all
private yards, but not areas designated as common open space
or development collector streets.
[1] The net density of single-family patio homes and zero lot
line dwellings shall not exceed five dwelling units per acre.
[2] The net density of two-family and semidetached units shall
not exceed eight dwelling units per acre.
[3] The net density of townhouses shall not exceed 10
dwellings per acre.
[4] The net density of garden apartments shall not exceed 25
dwelling units per acre.
(5) Maximum improvement coverage: 40%.
(6) Design: The standards and principles for design set forth in
§ 200-190A(2)(h)[2] of this article as well as those applicable
provisions contained in Part 1, Site Plan Review, Part 2,
Subdivision, and Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures, of
this chapter, shall be used in the design of residential uses
permitted in this district.
B. Individual lots. The standards for the R-4B District shall be the same as
those for the R-4A District.
C. Maximum building height. The standards for the R-4B District shall be
the same as those for the R-4A District.
A. Permitted uses. In an R-5 District, no building or premises shall be used
and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged, intended
or designed to be used except for one or more of the following uses:
§ 200-184 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-185
1:896
§ 200-186. R-5 District bulk and area regulations. [Amended
2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1]
The following shall be the standards for the R-5 District:
(1) Any permitted use in an RR/C District, subject to the bulk and area
regulations of that district. [Amended 1-7-2008 by Ord. No.
2007-27]
(2) With sewer and public water: garden apartments, townhouses or
maisonette dwelling units within a planned development, provided
that 20% of the total dwelling units that are the subject of a
development application shall be low- and moderate-income
dwellings as required by Article XXXI, § 200-237, of this Part 4.
B. Conditional uses. In an R-5 District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses: Any use permitted by condition in an R-2
District.
A. Tract development.
(1) Minimum tract area: five acres.
(2) Minimum tract frontage: 150 feet.
(3) Open space: Not less than 25% of the tract shall contain green open
space; individual lots or portions thereof shall not be construed as
open space. Common open space shall conform to requirements for
such open space, except as modified herein, as contained in
§ 200-190C of this Part 4.
(4) Maximum permissible development density. The average gross
density shall not exceed 10 dwelling units per acre. Net densities
shall conform to those established for the R-4B district. The net
density for a maisonette unit shall not exceed 25 dwelling units per
acre.
(5) Maximum improvement coverage: 40%.
(6) Design: The standards and principles for design set forth in
§ 200-190A(2)(h)[2] of this article as well as those applicable
provisions contained in Part 1, Site Plan Review, Part 2,
Subdivision, and Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures, of
this chapter, shall be used in the design of residential uses
permitted in this district. [Amended 12-23-1996 by Ord. No.
96-24]
B. Individual lots. Bulk and area regulations for individual lots shall
conform to the regulations for such uses as contained in the R-4A
District, § 200-181B, of this Part 4.
C. Maximum building height. Building heights may vary from one to four
stories, but in no case shall they exceed 45 feet.
§ 200-185 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-187
1:897
§ 200-187. R-5A Residence District use regulations.
A. Permitted uses. In an R-5A District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used except for one or more of the following
uses:
(1) Any permitted use in an R-2 District, subject to the bulk and area
regulations of that district as set forth in § 200-161 of this Part 4.
(2) With sewer and public water, any permitted use in an R-5 District
with the addition of mid-rise apartments.
B. Conditional uses. In an R-5A District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses:
(1) Any use permitted by condition in an R-2 District.
(2) A planned residential development containing a combination of
residential dwellings as permitted under Subsection A(2) above,
conforming to the requirements for planned developments
stipulated in Article XXXI of this Part 4. [Amended 4-19-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-07]
(a) Residential unit type distribution and net density. There shall
be a variety of housing types, densities and costs within a
planned development and complying with the following:
[1] Residential unit distribution.
[a] At a minimum, two of the permitted housing types
shall be provided.
[b] Of the housing types provided, no one type shall
exceed 60% of the total dwelling units of a planned
development, except that if mid-rise apartments are
provided, they shall not exceed 40% of the total
dwelling units.
[2] The net density of particular types of dwelling units shall
be in accordance with the schedule below. In calculating
permitted net densities as outlined herein, the area of land
covered by such uses shall include internal local streets,
parking areas and all private yards, but not areas
designated as common open space or development
collector streets.
[a] The net density of mid-rise apartments shall not
exceed 25 dwelling units per acre.
(b) Bulk requirements. Mid-rise apartments shall not exceed six
stories or 70 feet in height.
§ 200-187 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-187
1:898
§ 200-188. R-5A District bulk and area regulations.
The following shall be the standards for the R-5A District:
§ 200-189. R-5B Residence District use regulations. [Added
10-24-1994 by Ord. No. 94-53]
(c) Common open space. The common open space conditions
pertaining to a PRN-1 District as contained in § 200-190C of
this article shall apply to a planned development in the R-5A
District.
A. Tract development.
(1) Minimum tract area: five acres.
(2) Minimum tract frontage: 150 feet.
(3) Open space: Not less than 40% of the tract area shall contain green
open space; individual lots or portions thereof shall not be
construed as open space. Common open space shall conform to
requirements for such open space, except as modified herein, as
contained in § 200-190C of this article.
(4) Maximum permissible development density. The average gross
density shall not exceed 10 dwelling units per acre.
(5) Maximum improvement coverage: 40%.
(6) Design: The standards and principles for design set forth in
§ 200-189A(2)(h)[2] of this article as well as those applicable
provisions contained in Part 1, Site Plan Review, Part 2,
Subdivision, and Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures, of
this chapter, shall be used in the design of residential uses
permitted in this district.
B. Individual lots. Bulk and area regulations for individual townhouse lots,
subject to the regulations for such uses as contained in the R-4 District,
§ 200-181B, of this Part 4.
C. Maximum building height.
(1) Building heights for all dwelling types exclusive of mid-rise
apartments may vary from one to four stories, but in no case shall
they exceed 45 feet.
(2) Building heights for mid-rise apartments may vary from four to six
stories, but in no case shall they exceed 70 feet.
A. Permitted uses. In an R-5B District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used except for one or more of the following
§ 200-187 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-189
1:899
§ 200-189.1. R-5C District use regulations. [Added 3-18-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-04]
uses: Any permitted use in an R-5 District, subject to the bulk, area and
other regulations of that district.
B. Conditional uses. In an R-5B District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses: Any use permitted by condition in an R-5
District.
C. Bulk and area regulations - R-5B District. The bulk and area regulations
of the R-5 District shall apply in the R-5B District, except that the
maximum permitted development density shall be as follows: The
average gross density shall not exceed 10 dwelling units per acre,
except that such gross density may be increased to 15 dwelling units
per acre if 40% of the additional units are low- and moderate-income
dwellings, and further provided that at least 30% of the total number of
units on-site are low- and moderate-income units. Net densities shall
conform to those established for the R-4B District. The net density for a
maisonette unit shall not exceed 25 dwelling units per acre.
A. General.
(1) All regulations in Chapter 200 shall apply except for the following,
which shall not apply: §§ 200-29C, 200-29M(2), 200-29M(5),
200-29M(8), 200-29O(2), 200-29P, 200-36.1, 200-91P(7)(f),
200-226E(2), and 200-227.
(2) The standards set forth in § 200-189.2 shall apply in lieu of the
following sections for the entire site §§ 200-27D(2), 200-29N(3),
200-30A-B, 200-32, 200-91P(6)(c)2[d], and 200-134C.
(3) The standards set forth in § 200-189.2 shall apply in lieu of the
following sections for podium structures only §§ 200-91P and
200-134B.
(4) The District shall be developed in a comprehensive manner
pursuant to one development plan.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Permitted uses. In the R-5C District, no building or premises shall
be used and no building shall be erected or altered which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used except for one or more
of the following uses:
(a) With sewer and public water: mid-rise apartments which may
be permitted on podiums where the podium counts as one
story and which mid-rise apartments may include buildings in
condominium ownership, and garden apartments, which may
include buildings held in condominium ownership, are
permitted, provided that the equivalent of 25% of the total
§ 200-189 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-189.1
1:900
§ 200-189.2. R-5C District bulk, area, and other regulations. [Added
3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-04]
The following shall be the standards for the R-5C District:
dwelling units that are the subject of a development
application shall be low- and moderate-income housing
meeting all of the applicable standards and requirements for
affordable units, including those set forth in the Uniform
Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC), N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et
seq. and in § 200-237. At least 50% of the affordable units
shall be affordable to low-income households, and at least 13%
of all rental affordable units shall be affordable to very-lowincome
households earning 30% or less of the regional median
household income by household size, which very-low-income
units shall be included as part of the low income requirement.
The remaining affordable units shall be made affordable to
moderate-income households. The affordable units shall be
located on-site and shall be reasonably dispersed throughout
the development phased in accordance with the affordable
housing construction schedule set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:97-6.4(d).
The state-wide nonresidential development fee shall apply to
the nonresidential portion of the development to the extent
that it includes other than residential uses, except that it shall
not apply to the management and leasing office and clubhouse.
(2) Accessory uses. In the R-5C District, the following uses may be
permitted as accessory uses:
(a) Parking, including structures and surface lots.
(b) Community and recreational amenities, including clubhouse,
rental office, management office, and convenience market,
except that no gasoline dispensing provisions are permitted,
cultural facilities, day-care facilities, social services,
supporting neighborhood retail uses, fitness room, spa, pool,
and play lot.
(c) Dumpsters, trash compactors, and other trash, recycling, or
utility structures.
(d) Street furnishings, planters, streetlights and exterior, gardentype
shade structures.
(e) Fences and walls.
(f) Decks, patios, and terraces.
(g) Shelters for car sharing and shuttles.
(h) Loading docks.
A. Tract development.
§ 200-189.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-189.2
1:901
(1) Minimum tract area: 60 acres.
(2) Minimum tract frontage: 150 feet.
(3) Minimum yards.
(a) Where building facade is parallel to a tract line: 15 feet from
the tract line.
(b) Where corner of the building is tangent to a tract line: five feet
from the tract line.
(4) Minimum buffer from lot line to parking, drive aisle, or turnaround
area: zero feet when adjacent lots are in common or affiliated
principal ownership. Drive aisles may be located on Block 8, Lot 54
or 10.02 when the property is in common or affiliated principal
ownership.
(5) Modification to the proposed greenbelt easement on Block 8, Lots
54 and 10.02 shall be permitted to provide for circulation and fire
safety.
(6) Maximum permissible development density:
(a) The average gross density shall not exceed 10 dwelling units
per acre.
(b) The net density of mid-rise and garden apartments shall not
exceed 40 dwelling units per acre.
(7) Maximum improvement coverage to be determined on a tract-wide
basis - 40% of the tract. Additional improvement coverage up to a
total improvement coverage of 55% on Block 8, Lots 54 and 10.02
may be permitted to allow for streets, paths, and emergency access
serving the development. Any increase in improvement coverage
on such lots shall be only for streets, paths, and emergency access
serving the development. The applicant shall provide calculations
demonstrating compliance with both the 40% and 55%
improvement coverage requirements.
(8) Maximum building height for mid-rise apartments and community
building: 85 feet.
(9) Maximum building height for garden apartments: 50 feet.
(10) Design criteria.
(a) Distances between structures. In development groups (more
than one building or structure on the tract), the following
distances shall be maintained between structures:
[1] Any building face to street curb or internal road right of
way: seven feet minimum from any front building face or
two feet from any side building face or corner.
§ 200-189.2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-189.2
1:902
[2] Any building face or corner to parking area: five feet
minimum, or zero feet where a driveway is fronting a
garage.
[3] End wall to window wall: 25 feet minimum.
[4] Window wall to window wall (separate buildings): 25 feet
minimum.
[5] Window wall to window wall (in same building): 20 feet
minimum, exclusive of architectural accents, including,
but not limited to, nooks, notches, or bays.
(b) Building site design principles.
[1] Overall principles.
[a] Parking stalls for residents and visitors shall be
located near dwelling unit entrances.
[b] Screening of private outdoor living areas shall be
addressed and may be accomplished with plant
materials, masonry structures or wood fencing.
Architectural elements such as masonry walls and
fences shall be compatible in both style and materials
with the dwelling unit of which it is part.
[c] The design of all accessory uses, including but not
limited to street furnishings, planters, streetlights,
exterior garden-type shade structures, fences, walls,
decks, patios, terraces, and shelters for car sharing
and shuttles, shall complement the architectural style,
type, and design of the buildings and the overall
project design.
[2] Garden apartments.
[a] Each garden apartment structure shall be limited to a
maximum of 45 units and a length of 335 feet. Such
structures shall be grouped in clusters of consistent
architectural design. Architectural treatment, roof
changes or vertical or horizontal offsets of a minimum
of two feet to create visual breaks on the exterior of
buildings should be provided.
[b] Open balconies or outdoor private living spaces for
individual dwelling units should be provided.
Balconies integrated into the architectural facade
shall be considered as architectural offsets if more
than two feet in depth.
[3] Mid-rise apartments (which may include split-level style
and on podiums).
§ 200-189.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-189.2
1:903
[a] Mid-rise apartments shall be located on a site directly
adjacent to the major portions of common space or
open space in the development.
[b] Open balconies, decks, patios, or garages at the
ground floor units should be provided. Balconies
integrated into the architectural facade shall be
considered as architectural offsets if more than two
feet in depth.
[c] Architectural treatment, roof or parapet changes, or
jogs of a minimum of two feet to create visual breaks
on the exterior of the buildings should be provided.
[d] Architectural treatments, porticos and material
changes at points of principal entry should be
provided.
[4] Buildings may be permitted on podiums.
B. Vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian circulation.
(1) Access. The street system shall be integrated with the existing
network of streets so that there are at least two points of
unobstructed access to and from the tract. Access drives or
driveways shall be provided in accordance with the criteria
provided in this section.
(2) General vehicular circulation design principles.
(a) The street system should utilize, where appropriate, cul-desacs,
roundabouts, loop streets, and other suitable forms of
street layout. Varying street widths according to their intended
traffic carrying and parking purposes are encouraged.
(b) An emergency access drive shall be provided. This access drive
may be fenced off or gated when not in use.
(c) Connector road to Old Meadow Road. The owner of the tract
shall cause an easement to be provided granting one way
access in from Old Meadow Road through the existing access
within the apartment community on Block 8, Lot 10.02 leading
to the R-5C District and providing access in one direction for a
future connection in one direction into Block 8, Lots 17, 24,
and 30 on the West Windsor Township Tax Map as of the
effective date of this section. The one-way access connector
road shall be jointly maintained by the owners of the
aforementioned properties and the developer of Block 8, Lot 8.
(d) Connector road to Route 1. Should the owner of Block 8, Lot 18
redevelop its property, the developer of Block 8, Lot 8 shall
cause an easement to be provided granting direct two way
access from the access road off of Route 1 to Block 8, Lot 18 on
§ 200-189.2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-189.2
1:904
the West Windsor Township Tax Map as of the effective date of
this section. Should Block 8, Lot 18 be redeveloped, the costs
to upgrade and maintain the access connector roadway and
any modifications to the existing curb, or as may be required
by NJDOT, shall be paid by the owner of Block 8, Lot 18. The
portion of the connector roadway not already completed shall
be constructed by the owner of Block 8, Lot 18. An easement so
providing shall be a condition of development approval in the
R-5C District and shall become effective upon the demolition of
all structures and redevelopment of Block 8, Lot 18 as of the
date of the adoption of this section and redevelopment of such
lot.
(e) Road and driveway connections from main roads shall be
located at grade and not below the crest of vertical curves.
(f) Vehicular connections to adjacent properties may be provided
where appropriate.
(g) Access ways, but not parking spaces, are permitted on
adjacent lots when in common principal ownership. An
easement shall be provided therefor.
(h) Pedestrian circulation.
[1] Comprehensive on-site pedestrian circulation shall be
provided.
[2] Pedestrian connections shall be provided to Block 8, Lots
10.03, 24, 10.02, and 54 on the West Windsor Township
Tax Map as of the effective date of this section.
(i) Bikeways. Bicycle access shall be combined with motor vehicle
access and identified with an appropriate street marking such
as a sharrow or striped shoulder outside of vehicle lanes or
provided as a separate parallel system adjacent to motor
vehicle access. Width and design guidelines for all bikeways
shall be as provided in § 200-36C(3)(c)[2] of the West Windsor
Township Land Use Ordinance.
(j) A comprehensive bicycle and pedestrian plan shall be
provided. Consideration shall be given to linking pedestrian
and bicycle circulation features to adjoining open space;
amenities, as determined, to be appropriate and feasible.
(k) The treatment of any crosswalk shall be designed with
materials that indicate the different traffic characteristics of
intersecting streets.
C. Parking and loading requirements.
(1) Off-street parking. The standards set forth in the RSIS shall govern
all off-street parking, except for the standards that govern the size
§ 200-189.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-189.2
1:905
of parking spaces, circulation in parking structures, and compact
parking, which shall conform to the standards in § 200-29M(6) of
the West Windsor Land Use Ordinance.
(2) Location of parking spaces.
(a) Parking spaces, open or enclosed, shall be on the same lot or
tract of land as the building or use to be served.
(b) A parking space plan addressing parking space allocations
shall be submitted with the site plan application.
(3) Car share and shuttles.
(a) A resident shuttle service or ride-sharing service to the
Princeton Junction Station shall be provided on or before the
date when a minimum of 50% of units are occupied.
(b) Drop-off or pick-up areas for car share vehicles or resident
shuttles are permitted.
(4) Bicycle parking design principles.
(a) Location. Bicycle parking facilities shall be located indoors and
outdoors.
[1] Each garden apartment building shall have a dedicated
interior space or enclosed room for storage of bicycles.
[2] Mid-rise apartment buildings shall have dedicated interior
space or an enclosed room for storage of bicycles. Such
spaces may be located within a parking garage.
(b) Off-street loading requirements.
[1] Mid-rise apartments that are on a podium: One loading
area shall be provided. Loading areas may be provided in
designated parking areas.
[2] Mid-rise apartments, which include split-level style and
garden apartments: One loading area shall be provided for
every 50 apartment units. Driveways fronting garages may
satisfy this requirement.
D. Open space and recreational facilities.
(1) Open space distribution requirements are as follows:
(a) Common active open space, including recreational facilities:
40,000 square feet minimum. Common active open space or
recreational space may include areas on top of structures such
as parking garages. Common active open space calculations
shall not include lands in conservation easements.
§ 200-189.2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-189.2
1:906
(b) Natural open space. A minimum of 38 acres shall remain as a
green belt, defined as greenbelt consisting of natural features,
significant wooded areas, vegetation, channels, floodways or
water bodies.
(c) Recreational facilities.
[1] Play lots. One play lot, minimum 3,500 square feet in size,
primarily for use by older children, is required. Facilities
may include swings, slides, play sculptures, and benches
for parents. A tot lot primarily for use by toddlers is not
required, as long as there is at least one tot lot accessible
to residents on Block 8, Lots 54 and 10.02. Accessibility
shall be provided through a reciprocal easement
agreement.
[2] Swimming pools. One swimming pool, minimum 1,800
square feet in size, is required.
[3] Tennis courts, basketball courts, and play fields. There are
no requirements for tennis courts, basketball courts, or
play fields on-site, as long as there is at least one tennis
court, one half-sized basketball court, and a play field
accessible to residents on Block 8, Lots 54 and 10.02.
Accessibility shall be provided through a reciprocal
easement agreement.
[4] Multipurpose community facility. A recreation center or
multipurpose community facility, including space for
permitted accessory uses, is required. The facility may be
a freestanding building or integrated into a principal
permitted building. The facility may be multistory. The
facility shall be within walking or easy biking distance of
the majority of residents it is intended to serve.
E. Landscape standards.
(1) Street trees. Street trees shall be provided in addition to any buffer
requirements for municipal or county streets, if any streets are
provided in the plan. Street trees shall be in accordance with the
West Windsor Land Use Ordinance and Township Comprehensive
Master Street Tree Plan standards for location, species selection
and spacing. Street trees along fire lanes are not required.
(2) Landscape buffers. Buffers shall be provided along all site edges as
provided for herein:
(a) Along property lines adjacent to parking areas or drive aisles a
planted three-foot-wide buffer of evergreen shrubs shall be
provided. Shrubs shall be a minimum of three feet in height at
time of planting, placed a maximum of three feet on center.
Buffer plantings may be located on the adjacent property when
§ 200-189.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-189.2
1:907
in common or affiliated principal ownership. Loading areas
shall be excluded from buffering requirements.
(b) Along property lines where utility and/or sewer easements
interfere, a five-foot-wide buffer shall be provided. The buffer
shall contain a mix of evergreen shrubs planted at a maximum
of three feet on center, and plants planted in naturalistic
groups of mixed plant varieties to provide visual interest.
(3) Parking areas.
(a) All open parking areas and access ways thereto shall be
properly drained, and all such areas shall be a paved surface.
Geo Grid, or an acceptable alternative, shall be permitted for
emergency vehicle access ways.
(4) Podium landscape standards.
(a) Ground floor units. A hardscape or landscape screen shall be
provided between each ground floor apartment outdoor space
and other community spaces.
(b) Deck material. Podium deck shall differentiate spaces by using
different materials or finish colors.
(c) A variety of small plantings that can prosper in shallow soil
conditions shall be provided as landscape elements in outdoor
community spaces.
F. Sign regulations.
(1) Development in the R-5C District shall conform to the requirements
provided in this subsection.
(2) General. Each site plan application shall include a signage plan
showing the specific design, location, size, height, construction,
and illumination of proposed signs in accordance with the
regulations contained herein.
(3) Permitted signs. The following standards shall apply to all signs in
the R-5C District. No sign type other than those identified below
shall be permitted.
(a) Monument signage.
[1] Two monument signs shall be permitted (one at the
entrances on Old Meadow Road and Route 1).
[2] The maximum monument sign area, excluding the base
structure, shall be 60 square feet per side, of which no
more than 50 square feet may be devoted to the LED sign
permitted by Subsection F(3)(a)[4] hereof.
§ 200-189.2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-189.2
1:908
[3] The maximum monument sign height, including structure
and sign area, for signs along Route 1 shall be 12 feet and
for signs along Old Meadow Road shall be six feet.
[4] An electronically programmable and changeable digital
LED sign shall be permitted on the monument signs to
display information solely related to the development. The
sign shall not be used for third-party advertising of any
kind except for announcements by the Township, except
that political signage shall not be permitted. The LED
changeable digital signage must conform to any applicable
NJDOT regulations.
(b) Wayfinding signage.
[1] One freestanding or wall wayfinding sign shall be
permitted for each building entrance.
[2] Freestanding wayfinding signs shall be permitted, to be
spaced throughout the site for the purpose of wayfinding
as needed.
[3] The maximum wayfinding sign area shall not exceed nine
square feet and the letter height shall not exceed four
inches.
[4] For freestanding signs, the maximum sign height,
including structure and sign area, shall be six feet above
existing grade.
[5] One wall sign shall be permitted for the community center.
The maximum wall sign area shall not exceed 50 square
feet.
(c) Street address signage.
[1] Street address signage shall be provided on each building
or for each individual tenant.
[2] Street address numbers shall have a maximum height of
eight inches.
(d) Blade signs/banners.
[1] A maximum of two blade signs per mid-rise apartment
building shall be permitted. The maximum sign area shall
not exceed 60 square feet and may project up to three feet
from the building.
[2] Banner signs may be permitted as needed throughout the
site.
[3] Blade signs and banners may be attached to buildings or
freestanding posts.
§ 200-189.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-189.2
1:909
G. Loading, refuse and recycling, and service utility areas.
(1) All loading, refuse and recycling collection, service and utility areas
shall be sufficient in size to collectively serve the development. The
required method of screening for dumpsters, trash compactors,
recycling facilities or other outdoor storage areas shall conform to
the standards outlined in § 200-189.2B(5)(c).
(2) Outside deposit areas shall not be permitted in any required yard
or setback area, nor shall they interfere with the operation of offstreet
parking facilities.
(3) Trash compactors, recycling facilities, and loading areas shall be
located on the site so as to provide clear and convenient access for
collection vehicles.
(4) The applicant shall provide a waste management and recycling
plan, subject to Township review and approval. Such management
plan shall be submitted with an application for preliminary
approval.
(5) Transformers, telephone terminal boxes, and cable TV boxes
located on the ground shall be screened in the manner set forth in
§ 200-189.2B(5)(c).
(6) Refuse and recycling requirements.
(a) Outdoor storage areas.
[1] A central area consisting of trash compactors and
recycling facility shall be provided to service the entire
development. This area shall be conveniently located for
residential deposition of waste and recyclables.
(b) Dwelling unit storage.
[1] Individual garden apartment dwelling units shall provide a
location within the unit for storage of designated
recyclable materials in compliance with § 200-134B of the
West Windsor Land Use Ordinance. Garden apartment
units for which a garage is rented may have such storage
space within the attached garage structure.
[2] A separate location for storage of designated recyclable
materials within individual mid-rise apartment building
dwelling units is not required, provided that each floor of
the mid-rise apartment building shall include a central
room for trash and recycling with bins for collection of
recycling and a chute for trash terminating in a collection
area within the structure.
H. Snow storage and removal. Procedures for snow storage and removal
shall be identified.
§ 200-189.2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-189.3
1:910
§ 200-189.3. R-5D District use, bulk and other regulations. [Added
9-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-05]
A. Use and bulk standards. The use, bulk and other regulations governing
the R-5B District shall apply, except that:
(1) Stacked flats/apartments attached to townhouses restricted to
units set aside for low- and moderate-income households are
permitted.
(2) Group homes in detached dwellings or attached to townhouse
buildings with a minimum capacity of three bedrooms intended for
individuals with development disabilities are permitted.
(3) A commercial building or buildings not to exceed 10,000 square
feet in total gross floor area which may be occupied by any
principal use or conditional use as permitted in the P-3 Business
District, subject to the bulk and area regulations of that district, are
permitted.
(4) Twenty-five percent of the total dwellings that are the subject of the
development application shall be low- and moderate-income
housing meeting all of the applicable standards and requirements
for affordable units, including those set forth in the Uniform
Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC), N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.,
and in § 200-237. At least 50% of the affordable units shall be made
affordable to low-income households and at least 13% of all rental
affordable units shall be made affordable to very-low-income
households earning 30% or less of the regional median household
income by household size, which very-low-income units shall be
included as part of the low-income requirement. The remaining
affordable units shall be made available to moderate-income
households. The affordable units shall be located on site and shall
be reasonably dispersed throughout the residential component
phased in accordance with the affordable housing construction
schedule set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:97-6.4(d). Parking spaces shall be
reserved for the affordable units.
(5) In lieu of the net density requirements set forth in
§ 200-184A(4)(b), the following shall apply:
(a) The net density of townhouses and stacked flats attached to the
townhouses shall not exceed 25 dwelling units per acre.
(6) Accessory uses: street furniture, decks, patios, fences, walls, pump
stations and garbage corrals.
B. Modifications of design standards. The design standards set forth in
this Chapter 200 shall apply, except that:
(1) Parking for a commercial building or buildings shall be permitted
within the front yard provided that a minimum forty-foot planted
§ 200-189.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-189.3
1:911
§ 200-190. PRN-1 Residence District (Planned Residential
Neighborhood) use regulations. [Amended 2-25-1985 by Ord. No.
85-1; 10-7-1985 by Ord. No. 85-25]
buffer area be maintained to said parking area from the street
right-of-way. No separate off-street loading space shall be required
for a commercial building or buildings.
(2) The minimum window wall to window wall requirement shall be 30
feet.
(3) A minimum of 30 acres shall be preserved for open space.
(4) Useable recreation facilities as set forth in § 200-36C(3)(c) shall be
2.5% of the gross tract area.
(5) The following requirements as to recreational facilities shall apply:
(a) Play lots: One play lot shall be required with a minimum of
2,000 square feet for toddlers and up to 5,000 square feet for
older children.
(b) Tennis: One court shall be required.
(c) Swimming pools: Shall not be required.
(d) Community building: Shall not be required.
(e) Pickleball and bocce courts: Shall be permitted.
(6) In lieu of the active recreation purpose requirement set forth in
§ 200-190C(1), the following shall apply:
(a) Such designated open space shall include no less than two
acres of land developed for active recreation purposes.
C. Snow storage and removal. Procedures for snow storage and removal
shall be identified.
D. Bicycle and pedestrian accessibility.
(1) A comprehensive bicycle and pedestrian circulation plan shall be
provided. Consideration shall be given to linking pedestrian and
bicycle circulation features to adjoining open space amenities, as
determined to be appropriate and feasible.
(2) Pedestrian crossings in streets and alleys shall include special
ground texture treatment such as brick, stone, cobblestones and
other suitable material. The treatment of any crosswalk shall be
designed with materials that indicate the different traffic
characteristics of intersecting streets.
A. Permitted uses. In a PRN-1 District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged,
§ 200-189.3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-190
1:912
intended or designed to be used except for one or more of the following
uses:
(1) Any permitted use in a RR/C District, subject to the bulk and area
regulations of that district. [Amended 1-7-2008 by Ord. No.
2007-27]
(2) Single-family, zero lot line; single-family, detached; two-family,
detached; single-family, semidetached; townhouse; maisonette;
garden apartment dwellings; or senior citizen low- and moderateincome
housing units within a planned residential neighborhood,
provided that the low and moderate income dwellings shall be
rental, family dwellings and 15% of the total dwelling units that are
the subject of a development application shall be low- and
moderate-income dwellings as required by Article XXXI, § 200-237,
of this Part 4. A planned residential neighborhood, subject to the
following standards conforming to the requirements for planned
developments stipulated in Article XXXI of this Part 4: [Amended
9-26-1994 by Ord. No. 94-44; 9-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-21]
(a) Minimum development area: 100 acres in contiguous parcels
served by sewer and public water systems. For purposes of this
requirement, streets existing prior to the development of a
PRN shall not be deemed to divide acreage nor be a part of the
acreage.
(b) Maximum permissible average gross density: 8 1/2 dwelling
units per acre shall be the basic average gross density
permitted.
(c) Neighborhood convenience services. Neighborhood
commercial uses, such as stores for retail sales and services,
professional offices, restaurants, taverns and gasoline stations
shall, in the discretion of the applicant, be permitted and shall
be designed and intended primarily to serve the residents of
the PRN. In no case shall such areas designated for commercial
use and accessory uses thereto exceed 5% of the total planned
development. Bulk controls with regard to FAR and maximum
improvements coverage for such designated neighborhood
convenience services areas shall conform to those regulations
as set forth for the B-1 District, Article XXVIII, § 200-200, of
this Part 4.
(d) Public services. Public service facilities (e.g., schools,
firehouses, etc.) may be located within the designed common
open space of an approved PRN, in the discretion of the
applicant, provided that such uses shall not exceed 7.5% of the
total development tract area of a PRN. The lands on which such
public service facilities are located shall be considered open
space for purposes of the calculation of the minimum required
open space as set forth herein.
§ 200-190 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-190
1:913
(e) Minimum frontage: 300 feet in total as measured along a
public street which provides access to the PRN.
(f) Residential unit type, distribution and net density. In the PRN-1
District, there shall be a range of housing types and densities
in accordance with the requirements set forth below:
[1] Market rate dwelling units may be composed of a single
housing type. Low- and moderate-income dwelling units
may be composed of the same housing type as market rate
dwelling units or of one or more other permitted housing
types.
[2] Net density of particular types of dwelling units shall be in
accordance with the schedule below. In calculating
permitted net densities as outlined herein, the area of land
covered by such uses shall include internal local streets,
parking areas and all private yards and areas designated
as common open spaces, but not the development collector
streets, nor areas that may be occupied by commercial
uses.
[a] The net density of single-family zero lot line and
single-family detached dwellings shall not exceed six
dwelling units per acre.
[b] The net density of semidetached and two-family units
shall not exceed eight dwelling units per acre.
[c] The net density of a townhouse, condominium or
rental shall not exceed 15 dwellings per acre. Fee
simple townhouses shall not exceed 10 dwellings per
acre.
[d] The net density of garden apartment and maisonette
dwelling units shall not exceed 25 dwelling units per
acre.
[e] The net density of senior citizen mid-rise dwellings
shall not exceed 45 dwelling units per acre.
(g) Maximum improvement coverage. [Amended 9-15-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-21]
[1] Coverage requirements shall be 40% of the total area of
the PRN; 37% for the principal building located on
individual single-family detached lots, and 44% for all
pervious and impervious surfaces located on individual
single-family detached lots; 56% for the principal building
located on a fee simple townhouse lot, and 75% for all
pervious and impervious surfaces located on a fee simple
townhouse lot. Standing water bodies shall not be treated
§ 200-190 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-190
1:914
as having surfaces subject to improvement coverage
requirements. The maximum improvement coverage shall
relate to the usable lot area and exclude wetland areas.
[2] For purposes only of calculating the maximum
improvement coverage of a principal building located on a
lot only, such lot area will be deemed to include a portion
of the wetland area within said lot so that when such
portion is added to the non-wetlands portion lot area of
said lot, the wetland area of the lot does not exceed 10%.
Wetlands subject to this provision need not be subject to
conservation easements. For example, if the usable portion
of a lot is 4,500 square feet, only 500 square feet of
wetlands is included in the lot area for the purposes of this
calculation, even if the total area of wetlands within the lot
is greater than 500 square feet.
(h) Bulk requirements.
[1] Building heights may vary from one to four stories, but in
no case shall they exceed 45 feet. Senior citizen mid-rise
apartments may be six stories, but not to exceed 70 feet.
[2] Lot sizes and dimensions, yard sizes and building
arrangement may be freely disposed and arranged, in
accordance with the following standards:
[a] Except as provided for units constructed pursuant to
R-3A standards as set forth hereinafter, no portion of a
dwelling shall be closer than 20 feet to the right-ofway
of a local internal road or 50 feet to a collector
road or major thoroughfare, as designated by the
Township's Master Plan.
[b] Along all boundary lines of any PRN District, except
where they coincide with the right-of-way lines of a
state or county road, public utility right-of-way or
public parks, the same zoning provisions of the
abutting district shall prevail with respect to the side
yards, rear yards, screen planting and such other
transitional feature.
[3] Individual lots: patio/zero lot line/SFD.
[a] Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.
[b] Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
[c] Minimum lot depth: 50 feet.
[d] Minimum yards:
[i] Front yard: 20 feet.
§ 200-190 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-190
1:915
[ii] Rear yard: 10 feet.
[iii] One side (at building setback): zero feet.
[iv] Two sides (given as a percentage of lot width):
20%, but no less than 10 feet.
[e] Maximum distance from detached accessory buildings
to:
[i] Principal building: eight feet.
[ii] Side lot line: five feet.
[iii] Rear lot line: five feet.
[4] Fee simple townhouses:
[a] Maximum lot are: 2,000 square feet.
[b] Minimum lot width: 18 feet at setback line.
[c] Minimum lot depth: Not applicable.
[d] Minimum yards:
[i] Front yard: 20 feet.
[ii] Rear yard: 10 feet.
[iii] Side yard (at end unit only): 10 feet.
[5] Common open space. Common open space shall be subject
to the requirements of Subsection C of this section.
B. Conditional uses. In a PRN-1 District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses: Any use permitted by condition in an RR/
C District, with the exception of § 200-156B(1),(3) and (4). [Amended
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-43]
C. Common open space. [Amended 9-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-21]
(1) General requirements. Except as otherwise provided herein, not
less than the lesser of 25% of the development area, excluding the
area of single-family lots, or 20% of the gross development area
shall be designed as and devoted to common open space for use
primarily by the residents of the planned development or subject to
conservation easements restricting their development. Such
designated open space shall include no less than three acres of land
developed for active recreational purposes. Land in conservation
easements shall not be used in calculating MIC or building
setbacks from lot lines.
(2) Ownership requirements.
§ 200-190 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-190
1:916
(a) Such common open space, stormwater facilities, rights-of-way,
cartways, recreation facilities and lands and similar
infrastructure benefiting the development and/or the residents
in common may be conveyed to homeowners' associations or
trusts or offered for dedication to the Township or other
governmental agency, in the developer's discretion, which
dedication shall be accepted if it is established that the
Township has previously accepted similar areas or facilities.
Lands contained within single-family detached lots which
otherwise would be considered common open space, such as
lands subject to conservation easements or deed restricted
against use as wetlands, shall be included in the calculation of
lands set aside for common open space. If such areas or
facilities are not dedicated and accepted by the Township or
another governmental agency, the landowner shall provide for
and establish an organization for the ownership and
maintenance of any common recreation areas and open space,
and such organizations shall not be dissolved or shall it dispose
of any of the same by sale or otherwise (except to an
organization conceived and established to own and maintain
such areas or facilities) without first offering to dedicate the
same to the Township or any other government agency.
(b) As to any such areas or facilities that the Township is not
required to accept pursuant to the foregoing, the applicant
proposes dedication to the Township, then the Planning Board
shall forward each request with its recommendation prior to
the granting of preliminary plan approval of a development
application containing open space to the Township Council.
(c) If the Township Council does not approve such dedication, the
applicant may submit a cluster or planned development plan
providing only for ownership of such areas or facilities as
outlined herein.
(3) Open space maintenance requirements.
(a) In the event that the organization created for open space
management shall at any time after the establishment of a
planned development fail to maintain any open space or
recreation area in a reasonable order and condition in
accordance with the plan, the Township may serve written
notice upon such organization or upon the owners of the
development setting forth the manner in which the
organization has failed to maintain said areas in reasonable
condition, and said notice shall include a demand that such
deficiencies of maintenance be cured within 35 days thereof
and shall set the date and place of a hearing thereon which
shall be held within 15 days of the notice. At such hearing the
Township may modify the terms of the original notice as to the
§ 200-190 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-190
1:917
§ 200-191. PRN-1 District bulk and area regulations; modification
of other provisions. [Amended 2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1;
9-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-21]
deficiencies and may give an extension of time not to exceed
65 days, within which they shall be cured.
(b) If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in
modifications thereof shall not be cured within said 35 days or
any extension thereof, the Township, in order to preserve the
open space and maintain the same for a period of one year, may
enter upon and maintain such land. Said entry and said
maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to use the
open space and recreation areas, except when the same is
voluntarily dedicated to the public by the owners.
(c) Before the expiration date of said year, the Township shall,
upon its initiative or upon the request of the organization
theretofore responsible for the the maintenance of said areas,
call a public hearing upon 15 days' written notice to such
organization and to the owners of the development to be held
by the Township, at which hearings such organization and
owners of the development shall show cause why such
maintenance by the municipality shall not, at the election of
the Township, continue for a succeeding year. If the Township
shall determine that such organization is ready and able to
maintain said open space and recreation areas in reasonable
condition, the Township shall cease to maintain said open
space and recreation areas at the end of said year. If the
Township shall determine such organization is not ready and
able to maintain said open space and recreation areas in a
reasonable condition, the Township may, in its discretion,
continue to maintain said open space and recreation areas
during the next succeeding year and, subject to a similar
hearing, a determination in each year thereafter. The decision
of the Township in any such case shall continue a final
administrative decision subject to judicial review.
(d) The cost of such maintenance by the municipality shall be
assessed pro rata against the properties within the
development that have a right of enjoyment of the open space
in accordance with the assessed value at the time of imposition
of the lien and shall become a lien and tax on said properties
and be added to and be a part of the taxes to be levied and
assessed thereon and enforced and collected with interest by
the Township and in the same manner as other taxes.
A. The standards for the PRN-1 District for single-family detached and
zero lot line lots shall be the same as those ratio/zero lot line lots in the
R-3A District, except as otherwise specified for a planned residential
§ 200-190 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-191
1:918
neighborhood. Notwithstanding the foregoing, floor area ratio (FAR)
restrictions shall not apply.
B. The following provisions of other sections of this chapter shall be
applied to development in the PRN-1 District as set forth below:
(1) Subdivision.
(a) Sections 200-53H and 200-54G and H. In the PRN-1 District,
the period of vesting for preliminary approvals shall be 10
years from the date of each approval, and the period of vesting
for final approvals shall be five years from the date of each
approval.
(b) Section 200-56. Street right-of-way and cartway. In the PRN-1
District, the standards to be applied shall be those codified in
the New Jersey Site Improvement Standards that address the
same subject area. The other standards of § 200-56 continue to
apply.
(c) Section 200-60. In the PRN-1 District, the standards to be
applied as to the provision of sidewalks shall be those codified
in the New Jersey Site Improvement Standards that address
the same subject area.
(2) Zoning.
(a) Section 200-233. Not applicable to development in the PRN-1,
except that common open space shall not include: parking
areas or accessways thereto or lands privately owned or in fee
simple, except if subject to a conservation easement restricting
development. Land in conservation easements shall not be
used in calculating MIC or building setbacks from lot lines.
(b) Section 200-237. Where inconsistent with the terms hereof, the
provisions of any applicable COAH regulation shall apply and
be substituted for the provisions hereof.
(c) Section 200-237A. In the PRN-1 District, the applicable
percentage of affordable housing shall be as set forth in the
provisions relating thereto. Of the total affordable housing
dwelling units, 50% shall be low-income units and 50% shall be
moderate income units.
(d) Section 200-237C. Distribution and locational criteria.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the PRN-1 District, subject
to reasonable zoning and planning considerations, rental
affordable units need not be dispersed among for sale units
such as single-family detached and townhouse units. Further,
subject to reasonable zoning and planning considerations,
affordable housing units may be of a single product type, such
as garden apartments, and clustered in the area of the tract
§ 200-191 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-191
1:919
§ 200-192. EH Residence District use regulations. [Added
2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1]
devoted to such use; that is, for example, garden apartment
uses.
(3) Site plan.
(a) Section 200-13G and H; 200-14G and H. In the PRN-1 District,
the period of vesting for preliminary approvals shall be 10
years from the date of each approval, and the period of vesting
for final approvals shall be five years from the date of each
approval.
(b) Section 200-27B and C. In the PRN-1 District, the standards to
be applied shall be those codified in the New Jersey Site
Improvement Standards. The PRN-1 District standards shall
apply to the extent not inconsistent with the New Jersey Site
Improvement Standards.
A. Permitted uses. In an EH District, no building or premises shall be used
and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged, intended
or designed to be used except for one or more of the following uses:
(1) Any permitted use in an RR/C District, subject to the bulk and area
regulations of the district. [Amended 1-7-2008 by Ord. No.
2007-27]
(2) With sewer and public water, any permitted use in an R-5 District,
provided that such dwellings are for senior citizen low- and
moderate-income housing developed by a bona fide nonprofit or
limited dividend owner or sponsor, as required by Article XXXI,
§ 200-237, of this Part 4.
B. Conditional uses. In an EH District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses:
(1) Any use permitted by condition in an R-2 District.
(2) Professional offices, not to exceed 25,000 square feet in gross floor
area as part of a mixed use site plan containing senior citizen
affordable housing and public safety fire house facility, subject to
the following requirements: [Amended 7-17-1989 by Ord. No.
89-29]
(a) Bulk and lot area regulations for office use shall be those
contained in the P District, § 200-205, of this Part 4, except that
the building heights shall not exceed two stories.
(b) A developer's agreement shall be approved by the Township
Council upon recommendation by the Planning Board and
subject to the approval by a court maintaining jurisdiction of
the Township's Mt. Laurel program that governs, among other
§ 200-191 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-192
1:920
§ 200-193. EH District bulk and area regulations. [Added 2-25-1985
by Ord. No. 85-1]
§ 200-194. Planned Residential Retirement Community use
regulations. [Added 10-24-1994 by Ord. No. 94-54]
related items, the following aspects of a mixed-use
development program to be undertaken by different parties:
procedures governing the conveyance of two parcels of land
to the Township, which are to be subdivided from a tract
to be developed with professional offices for subsequent use
and development by others as a fire company facility and an
affordable housing senior citizen project on the respective
parcels; provisions regarding no cost for the future fire
company parcel and a cost of $150,000 for the senior citizen
parcel; grant of drainage easements and the establishment
of cost sharing and reimbursement arrangements regarding a
common detention facility to service the uses envisioned for
the overall tract of which the professional offices are a part;
and provision through site plan design of one access point
for the professional office parcel, together with an easement
and interconnection to the senior citizen parcel for emergency
vehicle access.
A. Tract development.
(1) Minimum tract area: five acres.
(2) Minimum tract frontage: 150 feet.
(3) Maximum permissible development density.
(a) The average gross density shall not exceed 20 dwelling units
per acre.
(b) The net density for various unit types shall conform to those
stipulated for the R-5 District.
(c) Maximum improvement coverage: 40%.
(d) Design: The standards and principles for design set forth in
§ 200-190A(2)(h)[2] of this article as well as those applicable
provisions contained in Part 1, Site Plan Review, Part 2,
Subdivision, and Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures,
of this chapter, shall be used in the design of residential uses
permitted in this district.
B. Individual lots: Bulk and area regulations for individual townhouse lots,
subject to the regulations for such uses as contained in the R-4 District,
§ 200-181B, of this Part 4.
C. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
§ 200-192 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-194
1:921
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Residential Retirement
Community (PRRC) District is to provide for a variety of dwelling unit
types and services for the elderly population, which is growing both
locally and in the State of New Jersey. Dwelling units in the PRRC
District are intended for mature adults, 55 years of age or older, and
contain a variety of housing types and services to satisfy a wide range of
life-styles.
B. Permitted uses. In a Planned Residential Retirement Community, no
building or premises shall be used and no building shall be erected or
altered which is arranged, intended or designed to be used except for
one or more of the following uses:
(1) Any permitted use in the RR/C District, subject to the bulk and area
regulations of that district as set forth in § 200-157. [Amended
1-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2007-27]
(2) A planned residential retirement community subject to the
requirements set down herein and conforming to the findings for a
planned development as defined by the N.J.S.A. 40:25D-45,
provided that the following minimum requirements shall be met:
(a) Minimum tract area. A planned residential retirement
community, hereinafter referred to as "PRRC," is defined as a
community having one or more parcels of land with a total
acreage of at least 400 acres forming a land block to be
dedicated for the use of a planned residential retirement
community. For the purposes of determining total parcel
acreage, public streets located between properties under the
control of the planned residential retirement community do not
constitute a break in parcel continuity.
(b) Age restrictions. Through its corporations, association or
owners, said land shall be restricted by bylaws, rules,
regulations and restrictions of record to use by permanent
residents 55 years of age or older, with the following
exceptions:
[1] A member of a couple under the age of 55 years who is
residing with his/her partner who is 55 years of age or
over.
[2] Emancipated children (as defined under New Jersey law)
residing with their parents or parent where one of the
parents with whom the child or children are residing is 55
years of age or over. [Amended 9-15-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-21]
[3] One adult under 55 years of age will be admitted as a
permanent resident if it is established that the presence of
such person is essential to the physical care of one or more
§ 200-194 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-194
1:922
of the adult occupants who shall be 55 years of age or
older.
(c) Minimum open space accessible to the public. A minimum of
30% of the total tract area must be in open space accessible to
the public. The open space to be preserved shall include Block
33, Lot 1, between Village Road and the JCP right-of-way, so as
to serve as an open space buffer between the PRRC and the
remainder of the RR/C Zone. [Amended 10-27-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-43]
(d) Public water and sewer service. All uses will be serviced by
public water and sewer systems.
(e) Affordable housing required. A minimum of 15% of the total
dwelling units shall be low- and moderate-income residential
units as required by Article XXXI, § 200-237, of this Part 4.
Total dwelling units shall be defined as conventional individual
residences/apartments plus bedrooms in assisted living
facilities (such as congregate care, continuing care, nursing
home). The method of accomplishing the required affordable
housing shall be established at the time a development
application is made for a PRRC.
(f) Maximum permissible density. Maximum gross density in a
PRRC is 1.45 dwelling units per acre. For the purpose of
calculating maximum permissible density, individual beds and
units in a congregate care, congregate housing, nursing home,
continuing care facility, extended care facility or outpatient
clinic are not considered units. The PRRC shall have no more
than 500 total beds and 306 dwelling units in congregate care,
continuing care, extended and outpatient care facilities.
[Amended 3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
(g) Permitted residential uses. The following residential uses are
principal permitted uses in a PRRC, provided that they meet
the standards of Subsection C of this section.
[1] Single-family detached.
[2] Two-family semidetached.
[3] Single-family zero lot line.
[4] Zero lot line semidetached.
[5] Townhouse.
[6] Condominium.
[7] Garden apartments.
[8] Congregate care facilities/assisted care facilities.
§ 200-194 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-194
1:923
[9] Continuing care/extended and outpatient care facilities.
(h) Accessory uses and accessory buildings incidental to a PRRC
development.
[1] Recreational, cultural and religious facilities for the sole
use of the residents and their guests.
[2] Garages and storage sheds off residential lots for
recreational vehicles or household goods for resident use
only.
[3] Accessory uses and buildings customarily associated with
residential uses in conformance with § 200-226.
[4] Medical services not to exceed 10,000 square feet in floor
area.
[5] Restaurant use designed as part of the planned
development and not exceeding 5,000 square feet in floor
area.
[6] Elder and day-care centers.
C. Bulk and area regulations for PRRC District.
(1) The following shall be the standards for PRRC developments:
(a) Minimum tract area: 400 acres.
(b) Minimum building and parking setbacks from Old Trenton
Road: 100 feet.
(c) Minimum building and parking setbacks from tract
boundaries: 50 feet and 100 feet from existing residential lot
lines.
(d) Maximum improvement coverage for total PRRC tract area:
25%. [Amended 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-21]
(e) Common open space: 60% of the PRRC must be set aside in
common open space. Common open space calculations may
include all environmental constrained lands and land set aside
for public open space.
(f) Maximum building height. No single-family detached dwelling
unit or nonresidential use shall exceed two stories or 35 feet,
and no multifamily unit or congregate care facility shall exceed
three stories or 45 feet in height.
(2) The following shall be the standards for residential unit types
permitted in PRRC developments:
(a) Single-family detached:
§ 200-194 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-194
1:924
[1] Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot frontage and width: 50 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet.
[4] Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet.
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: 25 feet.
[6] Maximum improvement coverage: 40%. [Amended
9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-21]
(b) Two-family semidetached:
[1] Minimum lot area: 6,500 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot frontage and width: 80 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet.
[4] Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet.
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet.
[6] Maximum improvement coverage: 40%. [Amended
9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-21]
(c) Single-family zero lot line:
[1] Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot frontage and width: 50 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet.
[4] Minimum side yard setback: 0/10 feet.
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: 15 feet.
[6] Maximum improvement coverage: 40%. [Amended
9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-21]
(d) Zero lot line semidetached:
[1] Minimum lot area: 6,500 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot frontage and width: 65 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet.
[4] Minimum side yard setback: 0/10 feet.
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: 15 feet.
[6] Maximum improvement coverage: 40%. [Amended
9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-21]
§ 200-194 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-194
1:925
(e) Townhouse (fee simple):
[1] Minimum lot area: 2,000 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot frontage and width: 20 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet.
[4] Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet (end units).
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: 10 feet.
[6] Maximum improvement coverage: 75%. [Amended
9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-21]
(f) Condominium/garden apartments:
[1] Minimum distance from internal roads: 25 feet.
[2] Minimum distance between buildings:
[a] Window wall to window wall: 75 feet.
[b] Window wall to end wall: 30 feet.
[c] End wall to end wall: 12 feet.
[d] Building face to parking: 12 feet.
[e] Building face to street curb: 20 feet.
(g) Congregate care facility/continuing care/extended care
facility/outpatient facility:
[1] Minimum lot area: five acres or one acre per each 42 beds,
whichever is greater.
[2] Minimum lot frontage: 100 feet.
[3] Minimum lot depth: 500 feet.
[4] Minimum front yard setback from internal roads: 50 feet.
[5] Minimum side yards: 50 feet.
[6] Minimum rear yards: 50 feet.
[7] Maximum improvement coverage: 70%. [Amended
9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-21]
[8] Minimum distance between buildings: same as
condominium/garden apartments, except for front yard
setback.
[9] Maximum floor area ratio: 45%.
§ 200-194 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-194
1:926
(3) The following shall be the standards for all nonresidential uses
permitted in a PRRC development:
(a) Medical services, restaurants and elder and day-care centers
shall follow the area and bulk controls of the B-1 District.
(b) Off-residence garages, storage sheds and parking for
recreational vehicles or household goods.
[1] Area devoted to off-residence storage and recreational
vehicle parking for residence use only shall not exceed five
acres.
[2] Building and parking setback from all residential uses and
tract boundaries: 150 feet.
[3] Landscape buffer perimeter screening: 50 feet.
D. Design requirements for a PRRC.
(1) A comprehensive design plan shall be prepared for the entire PRRC
which creates a series of distinct neighborhoods, each featuring a
communal meeting area or neighborhood focal point developed
with seating areas, landscaping, decorative pavement and lighting
and structural features such as picket fencing, masonry walls, a
gazebo, etc. A minimum of 250 square feet of developed open space
shall be set aside in the form of neighborhood greens or parks per
each residential unit approved in a PRRC.
(2) The development plan for the site, its developed facilities and the
interior of residential units in a PRRC must be specifically designed
to meet the potential physical and social needs and visual auditory,
ambulatory and other impairments that may affect older persons,
particularly as residents age in place.
(a) There should be provided a safe and convenient system of
walks accessible to all occupants. Due consideration should be
given in planning walks and ramps to prevent slipping or
stumbling. Handrails and ample space for rest should be
provided. All walks, paths and risers shall be designed
according to the requirements of the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA).
(b) Artificial lighting shall be provided along all walks and interior
roads and driveways and in all off-street parking areas, with
sufficient illumination for the safety and convenience of older
age residents, depending on anticipated nighttime use.
(c) A PRRC shall provide developed open space and common
recreational or community facilities for the exclusive use of its
residents.
§ 200-194 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-194
1:927
[1] There shall be not less than six square feet of floor space
per dwelling unit provided in community or clubhouse
buildings. Such facilities shall be designed and equipped
to meet the social and recreational needs of the
anticipated residents. This may include hobby and craft
rooms, lounge areas, meeting rooms, card rooms, rooms
providing support facilities for outdoor recreation facilities
or other similar facilities.
[2] Not less than 5% of the developable area of the PRRC and
excluding developable public open space lands shall be
developed for outdoor recreational use. This may include
swimming pools and related facilities, shuffleboard and
horseshoe courts, tennis courts and other appropriate
facilities.
(d) The interior of a residential unit in a PRRC shall be designed to
accommodate the reasonable physical impairments of
residents as they evolve from independence to limited
functioning. Among the features which may be considered in
unit design are skidproof floors, emergency call systems,
elevated switches and electrical outlets that do not require the
user to bend or crouch, grab bars at bathtubs and toilets, doors
wide enough to accommodate wheelchairs, appliances that are
front-mounted with easy to read dials and gauges and
avoidance of barriers such as high doorsteps, uneven walking
surfaces, hard to open doors (use lever handles) and difficult to
operate plumbing fixtures.
(e) An on-site security and maintenance service system may be
provided for a PRRC, including an entrance gatehouse, fences,
walls and supporting service buildings.
(3) The entire planned residential retirement development shall be
designed and constructed to provide utility services, including
stormwater drainage, electric, telephone and, where desired, CATV
cables, all of which shall be installed underground.
E. Off-street parking. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in a
PRRC as follows: one attached garage space plus one space in the
driveway for each single-family detached dwelling unit; and for
multifamily unit dwellings, 1.25 parking spaces for each one-bedroom
unit, 1.75 parking spaces for each two-bedroom unit and two parking
spaces for each three-bedroom unit. Adequate parking facilities for
residents, employees and visitors of a congregate care facility shall be
provided. For congregate care and continuing care/extended care
facilities, there shall be 0.5 off-street parking space per bedroom in
addition to one off-street parking space for each employee on the
largest shift. All parking areas for congregate care, continuing care/
extended care facilities and nonresidential accessory uses shall be
visually defined along their perimeter by a fence, wall, hedge, tree line
§ 200-194 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-194
1:928
§ 200-194.1. Planned Residential Retirement Community-1. [Added
9-8-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-22]
or landscaped berm, or some combination of the above. Screening shall
be at least four feet in height to soften the pedestrian's view of a large
number of parked cars.
F. Application procedure and development standards. The procedural
requirements and standards for planned residential retirement
community developments are those required for all major development
applications as specified in this Part 4, Part 1, Site Plan Review, and
Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures, of this chapter, except
where otherwise provided in this section, and a developer seeking
approval of a planned residential retirement community development
shall submit to the Planning Board a general development plan as
outlined and described in § 200-115 of Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan
Procedures, of this chapter, prior to the submission of any application
for preliminary approval.
G. Other provisions. [Added 3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
(1) For any development application filed for vacant land within the
congregate care component of the PRRC District as of the date of
this ordinance, at least 51 of the units shall be low- and moderateincome
housing meeting all the applicable standards and
requirements for affordable units, including those set forth in the
Uniform Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC), N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1
et seq., and § 200-237. At least 50% of the affordable units shall be
made affordable to low-income households, and at least 13% of all
rental affordable units shall be made affordable to very-low-income
households earning 30% or less of the regional median household
income by household size, which very-low-income units shall be
included as part of the low-income requirement. The remaining
affordable units shall be made available to moderate-income
households. The affordable units shall be located on-site and shall
be reasonably dispersed throughout the development phased in
accordance with the affordable housing construction schedule set
forth in N.J.A.C. 5:97-6.4(d). The state-wide nonresidential
development fee shall apply to the nonresidential portion of the
development to the extent that it includes other than residential
uses.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Residential Retirement
Community-1 (PRRC-1) District is to provide congenial dwelling
opportunities for the elderly population, which is growing both locally
and in the State of New Jersey. Dwelling units in the PRRC-1 District are
intended for mature adults, 55 years of age or older.
B. Permitted uses. In a PRRC-1 District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged,
§ 200-194 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-194.1
1:929
intended or designed to be used except for one or more of the following
uses:
(1) Any permitted use in the RR/C District, subject to the bulk and area
regulations of that district as set forth in § 200-157. [Amended
1-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2007-27]
(2) A planned residential retirement community subject to the
requirements set down herein and conforming to the findings for a
planned development as defined by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45, provided
that the following minimum requirements are met.
(a) Minimum tract area: 150 acres.
(b) Age restrictions. Through its corporations, associations or
owners, said land shall be restricted by bylaws, rules,
regulations and restrictions of record to use by permanent
residents 55 years of age or older, with the following
exceptions:
[1] A member of a couple under the age of 55 years who is
residing with his/her partner who is 55 years of age or
older.
[2] Emancipated children (as defined under New Jersey law)
residing with their parents or parent where one of the
parents with whom the child or children are residing is 55
years of age or older.
[3] One adult under 55 years of age will be admitted as a
permanent resident if it is established that the presence of
such person is essential to the physical care of one or more
of the adult occupants 55 years of age or older.
(c) Public water and sewer service. All uses within the planned
residential retirement community shall be serviced by public
water and sewer systems.
(d) Affordable housing required. A minimum of 15% of the total
dwelling units shall be low- and moderate-income residential
units meeting the requirements of Article XXXI, § 200-237, of
this Part 4. A minimum of 1/5 of the total low- and moderateincome
units shall be provided on site. They may all be
moderate-income units and shall be architecturally and
aesthetically integrated into the development. Any units
transferred off site shall not be age-restricted but shall be
available to income-qualified households of all ages.
(e) Maximum permissible density. Maximum gross density in a
planned residential retirement community is 0.955 dwelling
unit per acre for market units. Low- and moderate-income
§ 200-194.1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-194.1
1:930
units shall not be counted for density purposes under this
subsection.
(f) Permitted residential uses. The following residential uses are
the principal permitted uses in a planned residential
retirement community, provided they meet the standards of
Subsection C of this section.
[1] Single-family.
[2] Two-family.
[3] Single-family zero lot line.
[4] Semidetached zero lot line.
[5] Townhouse.
(g) Accessory uses and accessory buildings incidental to a planned
residential retirement community development are:
[1] Recreational, cultural and religious facilities for the sole
use of the residents and their guests.
[2] Garages and storage sheds off residential lots for
recreational vehicles or household goods for resident use
only.
[3] Accessory uses and buildings customarily associated with
residential uses in conformance with § 200-226.
[4] Medical services not to exceed 10,000 square feet in floor
area.
C. Bulk, area and other regulations for the PRRC-1 District.
(1) The following shall be the standards for planned residential
retirement communities:
(a) Minimum tract area: 150 acres.
(b) Minimum building and parking setbacks from public roads
existing at the time of adoption of this section: 100 feet.
(c) Minimum building and parking setbacks from tract
boundaries: 100 feet.
(d) Maximum improvement coverage for total PRRC-1 tract area:
18%. [Amended 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-21]
(e) Preservation of Greenbelt. There shall be no disturbance to the
Greenbelt as designated on the Conservation Element of the
Master Plan.
§ 200-194.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-194.1
1:931
(f) Common open space. Sixty-seven percent of the planned
residential retirement community shall be set aside in common
open space. All environmentally constrained land, as defined
by § 200-238A(1), all of the Greenbelt as designated on the
Conservation Element of the Master Plan, and all developed
recreational open space shall be included in the areas set aside
as common open space. The open space to be preserved shall
include lands contiguous to Zaitz Park. The applicant is
encouraged to make common open space external to the
planned residential development accessible to the public in a
manner consistent to the Conservation Element of the Master
Plan.
(g) The applicant shall provide a nature center of at least 2,725
square feet or make a contribution to the Township for such a
center in West Windsor. The contribution shall be in the
amount of $1,000 per market unit, payable on a pro rata basis
at the time a certificate of occupancy is issued for each market
unit.
(h) Maximum building height. No dwelling unit or nonresidential
use shall exceed two stories and 35 feet.
(2) The following shall be the standards for residential-unit types
permitted in planned residential development communities:
(a) Single-family:
[1] Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot frontage and width: 50 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet.
[4] Minimum side yard setback: five feet, except that there
must be at least 15 feet between adjoining units.
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: 25 feet.
[6] Maximum improvement coverage: 45%. [Amended
9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-21]
(b) Two-family:
[1] Minimum lot area: 6,500 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot frontage and width: 80 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet.
[4] Minimum side yard setback: five feet, except that there
must be at least 15 feet between adjoining units.
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: 25 feet.
§ 200-194.1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-194.1
1:932
[6] Maximum improvement coverage: 45%. [Amended
9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-21]
(c) Single-family zero lot line:
[1] Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot frontage and width: 50 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet.
[4] Minimum side yard setback: 0/10 feet.
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: 15 feet.
[6] Maximum improvement coverage: 45%. [Amended
9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-21]
(d) Semidetached zero lot line:
[1] Minimum lot area: 6,500 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot frontage and width: 65 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet.
[4] Minimum side yard-setback: 0/10 feet.
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: 15 feet.
[6] Maximum improvement coverage: 45%. [Amended
9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-21]
(e) Townhouse:
[1] Minimum lot area: 2,000 square feet.
[2] Minimum lot frontage and width: 20 feet.
[3] Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet.
[4] Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet (end units).
[5] Minimum rear yard setback: 10 feet.
[6] Maximum improvement coverage: 75%. [Amended
9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-21]
(3) The following shall be the standards for all nonresidential uses
permitted in a planned residential retirement community:
(a) Medical services shall follow the area and bulk controls of the
B-2 District.
(b) Off-residence garages, storage sheds and parking for
recreational vehicles or household goods:
§ 200-194.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-194.1
1:933
[1] Area devoted to off-residence storage and recreational
vehicle parking, which shall be for residents' use only,
shall not exceed three acres.
[2] Building and parking setback from all residential uses and
tract boundaries: 150 feet.
[3] Landscape buffer perimeter screening: 50 feet.
(c) Recreational, cultural and religious facilities shall be subject to
the same height and setback requirements as a single-family
dwelling unit. The applicant shall demonstrate to the Planning
Board the appropriateness of the proposed size of such
facilities and the sufficiency of the proposed parking.
D. Design requirements for a planned residential retirement community:
(1) A comprehensive design plan shall be prepared for the entire
planned residential retirement community which creates a series of
distinct neighborhoods, each featuring a communal meeting area
or neighborhood focal point developed with seating areas,
landscaping, decorative pavement and lighting and structural
features such as picket fencing, masonry walls, a gazebo, etc. A
minimum of 250 square feet of developed open space per each
residential unit approved in a planned residential retirement
community shall be set aside in the form of neighborhood greens or
parks.
(2) The development plan for the site, its developed facilities and the
interior of residential units in a planned residential retirement
community must be specifically designed to meet the potential
physical and social needs and visual, auditory, ambulatory and
other impairments that may affect older persons, particularly as
residents age in place.
(a) There shall be provided a safe, convenient and continuous
system of internal walks connecting residences,
neighborhoods, community facilities, and adjacent properties
accessible to all occupants. Due consideration should be given
in planning walks and ramps to prevent slipping or stumbling.
Handrails and ample space for rest shall be provided. All
walks, paths and risers shall be designed according to the
requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
(b) Artificial lighting shall be provided along all walks and interior
roads and driveways and in all off-street parking areas, with
sufficient illumination for the safety and convenience of older
residents, depending on anticipated nighttime use.
(c) A planned residential retirement community shall provide
developed open space and common recreational or community
facilities for the exclusive use of its inhabitants.
§ 200-194.1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-194.1
1:934
[1] There shall be not less than 10,000 square feet of floor
space provided in community or clubhouse buildings. Such
facilities shall be designed and equipped to meet the social
and recreational needs of the anticipated residents. This
may include hobby and craft rooms, lounge areas, meeting
rooms, card rooms, rooms providing support facilities for
outdoor recreation facilities or other similar facilities.
[2] Not less than 5% of the developable area (excluding
Greenbelt and environmentally constrained areas) of the
planned residential retirement community shall be
developed for outdoor recreational use. This may include
swimming pools and related facilities, shuffleboard and
horseshoe courts, tennis courts and other appropriate
facilities.
(d) The interior of a residential unit in a planned residential
retirement community shall be designed to accommodate the
reasonable physical impairments of residents as they evolve
from independence to limited functioning. Among the features
which may be considered in unit design are skid-proof floors,
emergency call systems, elevated switches and electrical
outlets that do not require the user to bend or crouch, grab
bars at bathtubs and toilets, doors wide enough to
accommodate wheelchairs, appliances that are front-mounted
with easy-to-read dials and gauges and avoidance of barriers
such as high doorsteps, uneven walking surfaces, hard-to-open
doors (use lever handles) and difficult-to-operate plumbing
fixtures.
(3) The entire planned residential retirement community shall be
designed and constructed to provide utility services, including
stormwater drainage, electric, telephone, and, where desired,
CATV cables, all of which shall be installed underground.
(4) Section 200-67 shall apply to the single-family, two-family, singlefamily
zero lot line, and semidetached dwelling units, except that
the distance requirement in § 200-67B shall not apply. In lieu
thereof, the § 200-67 standards shall apply so that substantially
similar dwelling units shall not be located on lots that are next to
each other or on lots across the street from each other or on both
sides of such lots.
E. Off-street parking. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in a
planned residential retirement community as follows: one attached
garage space plus one space in the driveway for each single-family
detached or attached dwelling unit. All parking spaces for
nonresidential accessory uses shall be visually defined along their
perimeters by a fence, wall, hedge, tree line or landscaped berm, or
some combination of the above. Screening shall be at least four feet in
height to soften the pedestrian's view of a large number of parked cars.
§ 200-194.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-194.1
1:935
§ 200-194.2. Planned Mixed Use Neighborhood. [Added 11-23-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-22]
F. Application procedure and development standards. The procedural
requirements and standards for planned residential retirement
community developments are those required for all major development
applications as specified in Part 1, Site Plan Review, and Part 3,
Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures, of this chapter, except where
otherwise provided in this section.
A. Purpose. The Planned Mixed Use Neighborhood (PMN) District is
intended to provide for a village-style center convenient to the evolving
residential neighborhood along Bear Brook Road and proximate to the
train station and surrounding commercial employment centers. It is
intended to be bicycle and pedestrian friendly by permitting a compact
mix of modest-sized stores, personal and professional services,
corporate suites, market-rate residential dwelling units, and plazas.
The PMN District is also intended to provide a compatible setting for
affordable housing close to mass transit services and employment
opportunities.
B. Planned comprehensive development, development application
requirements and required uses. Any development application in the
PMN District shall be submitted as a planned development, in the
nature of a preliminary site plan application, for the entire district.
Such application shall describe any phasing of the proposal, together
with any on-site and off-tract improvements needed to support such
phases. The application for preliminary site plan approval may also
include a request for final approvals with respect to such phase or
phases. The following shall apply:
(1) A Planned Mixed Use Neighborhood development shall be subject
to the requirements of this district and to the mandatory findings
for a planned development as required by the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.
(2) Ten acres shall be dedicated for the use of a municipally sponsored
affordable housing development in accordance with Subsection
I(2).
(3) A roundabout shall be installed at the intersection of Bear Brook
Road and Old Bear Brook Road, and the main access road to the
development shall run from the fourth point of such roundabout.
Such access road shall be primarily retail in character.
(4) A minimum of 20,000 square feet of nonresidential space shall be
required. A convenience food store food outlet is strongly
encouraged but not required to be part of the required
nonresidential floor area. [Amended 8-19-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-24]
§ 200-194.1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-194.2
1:936
(5) A minimum of 70 residential units, market and affordable, other
than the units of a municipally sponsored affordable housing
development, of which a minimum shall be 15 apartments above
retail stores or offices, shall be provided.
C. Principal permitted uses. In the PMN District, no building or premises
shall be used and no building shall be erected or altered which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used except for one or more of the
following uses:
(1) Neighborhood retail uses providing for the sale of goods and
services, not exceeding 40,000 square feet of floor area, including
but not limited to convenience food stores, pharmacies, restaurants
(excluding curb-service establishments and drive-through
facilities), cafes, luncheonettes, and delicatessens, indoor
recreation facilities, including instructional studios and fitness
centers, repair and servicing, indoors only, of any article for sale
which is permitted in this district, attended laundry and retail drycleaning
services (not including bulk processing and, in the case of
dry-cleaning establishments, not providing for the storage of more
than five gallons of flammable or toxic cleaning fluid on the
premises), book, newspaper, periodical and stationery stores and
copy centers, parcel package shipping store or mailing center,
bicycle shops and bicycle rental facilities, museums, art galleries
and other cultural facilities of a similar nature, banks, and personal
services establishments (e.g., barber or beauty salon and spa and
massage services). Game rooms and parlors and drive-throughs are
prohibited.
(2) Corporate suites, which are defined as "hotels" in § 200-4 and
contain 10 or more units of dwelling space or have sleeping
facilities for 25 or more persons and are kept, used, maintained,
advertised as, or held out to be a place where sleeping or dwelling
accommodations are available to transient or long-term guests in
one or more buildings. The minimum size of such suites shall be not
less than 350 square feet of climate-controlled space and shall
include facilities for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and
sanitation. No such suite shall have more than two bedrooms. The
facility may include accessory structures and garages, mail
facilities, a pool, and a business center, which may contain a
computer center, video conferencing facilities, telecommunications
facilities, copy/production facilities, a theater with permanent
seating for not more than 35 people, multimedia presentation
facilities, meeting rooms and conference facilities, a fitness center,
not more than 1,000 square feet of retail space, and other business
support areas, all of which facilities are intended for the exclusive
use of occupants and their guests.
(3) General and administrative offices as well as professional offices
(e.g., physicians, lawyers and architects); small commercial offices
(e.g., realtors and travel agencies); small governmental offices
§ 200-194.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-194.2
1:937
(e.g., Social Security); and offices incidental to uses permitted in
this section.
(4) Townhouse dwellings, two-family dwellings, apartments over retail
or office, and live-work dwelling units not exceeding 100 total
units. The number of market-priced townhouses shall be limited to
51 dwelling units. The market residential units shall be subject to a
twenty-percent low- and moderate-income housing set aside in
accordance with Subsection I.
(5) Affordable housing meeting all standards of the Council on
Affordable Housing and in accordance with Subsection I(1).
D. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Recreational and/or open space facilities, including, but not limited
to, walkways, courtyards, plazas, community centers, and
community gardens.
(2) Off-street parking and loading located to the rear of the principal
use it serves and designed in an aesthetically appealing manner in
terms of layout and materials. Such parking and loading shall not
block the alley, aisle or roadway.
(3) Signs.
(4) Street furniture, planters, approved public art elements, gazebos,
information kiosks, and waste/recycling receptacles.
(5) Sidewalk cafes associated with permitted restaurants.
(6) Fences and walls, which shall complement the architectural style,
type and design of the building and the overall project design. They
shall be constructed in accordance with a fence and wall design
plan approved by the Planning Board.
(7) Decks, patios and terraces, which shall complement the
architectural style, type and design of the building and the overall
project design. They shall be constructed in accordance with a
deck, patio, and terrace design plan approved by the Planning
Board.
(8) Walk-up ATMs.
E. Minimum tract size. The minimum tract area shall be the Planned
Mixed Use Neighborhood District.
F. Location of retail and other uses. Retail uses shall be located primarily
on the main access road described in Subsection B(3). They shall not be
located within 200 feet of the front of any existing single-family
detached residential building on Old Bear Brook Road except where the
entryway and interior of the retail use are not visible from the first floor
of the existing residential building because of the building design, the
§ 200-194.2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-194.2
1:938
creation of a corner plaza, placement of nonretail buildings, or
landscaping. Only townhouse dwellings, two-family dwellings,
corporate suites, and affordable housing may be located on that portion
of Old Bear Brook Road east of the extension of the existing easterly
boundary line of Block 9.02, Lot 3. The applicant will be required to
provide landscaping and/or berming on its property or in the public
right-of-way to ameliorate the impact of the roundabout and retail
uses on Block 9.02, Lot 3. With the written consent of the owner of
Block 9.02, Lot 3, the applicant shall take such steps as to landscaping
and berming on such lot as the Planning Board finds reasonable to
ameliorate the impact on such lot of the roundabout and retail uses.
Retail service areas shall not be visible from residential units.
G. Building orientation and setbacks from existing public roads. All
buildings situated on Bear Brook Road shall have their front facade and
main entry facing the public road. All buildings adjacent to Old Bear
Brook Road shall be set back 35 feet from the right-of-way, and within
such setback a landscape buffer shall be provided.
H. Maximum improvement coverage for district. The maximum
improvement coverage for the Planned Mixed Use Neighborhood
District shall be 60% for the district.
I. Greenbelt preservation. No development other than stormwater
management facilities shall be permitted in the Greenbelt as depicted
in the Conservation Plan Element of the Master Plan. The facilities shall
be designed so as to enhance the Greenbelt.
J. Affordable housing.
(1) Twenty percent of the residential component shall be low- and
moderate-income housing meeting all COAH requirements. It shall
be located on site in apartments.
(2) The developer, at its option, may make payments in lieu of
providing affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-6.4(e) at
$152,227 per unit, or as such amount is modified by COAH from
time to time, equivalent to the fair market value of 10 developable
acres for a municipally sponsored affordable housing development
in a location within the district acceptable to the Township, such
location to be shown on such plan as will be approved by the
Planning Board, and as reduced by the amount that will be
generated by application of the nonresidential fee of 2.5% required
by the Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act, if such fee is
required at the time of approval. Such fair market value shall be
based on the number of market-rate garden apartments that can be
accommodated on such 10 acres at the permitted density of 7.5
units per acre. If it chooses such option, the developer shall enter
into a developer's agreement with the Township as to the payment
and such other matters as the developer and Township deem
appropriate. The developer's agreement shall include terms
§ 200-194.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-194.2
1:939
requiring that the developer convey such ten-acre parcel, providing
that the fee of 2.5%, if applicable, and in-lieu payments in a number
to be identified will be a credit against and constitute payment
in full of the purchase price, and providing that the developer
shall have no further affordable housing obligation other than the
provision of the additional affordable units necessary to satisfy the
set-aside obligation. Upon receipt by the developer of unappealable
preliminary subdivision and site plan approval for the overall
mixed-use project, including subdividing off a separate lot for the
ten-acre parcel, or at an earlier date if agreeable to the Township
and the developer, the developer shall deliver a deed and normal
affidavit of title to the ten-acre parcel to the Township, and the
Township shall deliver a document to the developer acknowledging
that the developer's obligations with respect to the nonresidential
fee and said in-lieu payments have been discharged in full.
K. Public activity area. The Planned Mixed Use Neighborhood
development shall contain a centrally located public space associated
with the retail space. The public space shall have a minimum area of
5,000 square feet, which shall be designed as a public activity focus for
the development. Design elements, which may include patterns in the
pavement, a fountain, gazebo, sculpture, bollards, sitting areas and
landscaping, shall be incorporated into this public space.
L. Area, bulk, and other regulations for fee simple lots.
(1) Residential.
(a) Townhouse dwellings.
[1] Lot area: minimum of 1,800 square feet per dwelling unit;
maximum of 4,500 square feet per dwelling unit.
[2] Lot width: at front yard setback line, minimum of 20 feet
per dwelling unit; maximum of 30 feet per dwelling unit.
[3] Minimum lot depth: 75 feet.
[4] Yard dimensions:
[a] Setback line from Old Bear Brook Road: 35 feet.
[b] Build-to line from Bear Brook Road and internal
streets: 25 feet on Bear Brook Road; 15 feet on
internal streets.
[c] Side yard (each end of row): minimum of eight feet;
maximum of 15 feet.
[d] Rear yard: minimum of 25 feet, except that there need
not be a setback for the garage.
§ 200-194.2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-194.2
1:940
[5] First finished floor level must be a minimum of two feet
above sidewalk grade.
[6] Maximum building height: 38 feet, but no more than 2 1/2
stories.
[7] Maximum impervious surface: 70%.
[8] Maximum building size: six dwelling units in a row, except
that 10 dwelling units in a row shall be permitted on local
streets.
[9] Rear yard garage and alley required. No front yard
driveways or garages are permitted.
(b) Two-family dwellings.
[1] Lot area: minimum of 3,000 square feet per dwelling unit;
maximum of 5,000 square feet per dwelling unit.
[2] Lot width. At front yard setback line: minimum of 30 feet
per dwelling unit; maximum of 50 feet per dwelling unit.
[3] Minimum lot depth: 75 feet.
[4] Yard dimensions:
[a] Setback line from Old Bear Brook Road: 35 feet, but
no more than 2 1/2 stories.
[b] Build-to line from Bear Brook Road and internal
streets: 25 feet on Bear Brook Road; 15 feet on
internal streets.
[c] Side yard (one side): minimum of eight feet; maximum
of 12 feet.
[d] Rear yard: minimum of 25 feet.
[5] First finished floor level must be a minimum of two feet
above sidewalk grade.
[6] Maximum building height: 38 feet, but no more than 2 1/2
stories.
[7] Maximum impervious coverage: 70%.
[8] Rear yard parking and alley required. No front yard
driveways or garages are permitted.
(c) Live/Work units.
[1] Lot area: minimum of 3,000 square feet per dwelling unit
with attached office and retail; maximum of 6,000 square
feet per dwelling with attached office and retail.
§ 200-194.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-194.2
1:941
[2] Lot width. At front yard setback line: minimum of 40 feet
per dwelling unit; maximum of 65 feet per dwelling unit.
[3] Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
[4] Yard dimensions:
[a] Setback line from Old Bear Brook Road: 35 feet.
[b] Build-to line from Bear Brook Road and internal
streets: 25 feet on Bear Brook Road; 15 feet on
internal streets.
[c] Side yard (one side): minimum of eight feet; maximum
of 12 feet.
[d] Rear yard: minimum of 25 feet.
[5] Maximum building height: 38 feet, but no more than 2 1/2
stories.
[6] Maximum impervious coverage: 70%.
[7] Rear yard or side yard parking required; alley access
optional. No front yard driveways or garages are
permitted.
(d) Municipally sponsored affordable housing.
[1] Lot area: 10 acres.
[2] Yard dimensions:
[a] Setback line from Old Bear Brook Road: 35 feet.
[b] Build-to line from Bear Brook Road and internal
streets: 25 feet on Bear Brook Road; 15 feet on
internal streets.
[c] Front yard: minimum of 10 feet; maximum of 20 feet.
[d] Side yard: minimum of 15 feet.
[e] Rear yard: minimum of 25 feet.
[f] Building spacing: a minimum of 30 feet of distance
between an end wall to window wall, and a minimum
of 75 feet of a window wall to window wall structural
arrangement.
[3] Maximum building height: 38 feet, but no more than 2 1/2
stories.
[4] Maximum impervious coverage: 70%.
§ 200-194.2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-194.2
1:942
[5] Maximum building size: eight attached dwelling units or
225 feet of building length.
[6] Maximum gross density: 7.5 units per acre, based on the
entire acreage conveyed to the Township or its designated
affordable housing provider.
(2) Nonresidential.
(a) Corporate suites.
[1] Lot area: minimum of five acres.
[2] Lot width: minimum of 250 feet.
[3] Minimum lot depth: 750 feet.
[4] Yard dimensions:
[a] Front yard: minimum of 15 feet on internal streets; 35
feet on Bear Brook Road and Old Bear Brook Road.
[b] Side yard: minimum of 10 feet.
[c] Rear yard: minimum of 20 feet on internal streets.
[5] Maximum building height: 40 feet or three stories,
whichever is less, on Bear Brook Road and the main retail
access drive; 50 feet or four stories, whichever is less, on
other streets; within 250 feet of Old Bear Brook Road, 38
feet.
[6] Maximum impervious coverage: 70%.
[7] Parking shall be behind building or screened from public
view in side or front yards, except on-street parking
associated with village center.
(b) Commercial uses and mixed-use buildings.
[1] Yard dimensions:
[a] Setback line from Old Bear Brook Road: 35 feet.
[b] Build-to line from Bear Brook Road and internal
streets: 25 feet on Bear Brook Road; 15 feet on
internal streets.
[c] Side yard (each side): minimum of zero feet, if
attached to an adjacent building, or a minimum of five
feet if not attached to an adjacent building; maximum
of 20 feet.
[2] The majority of the building must be at the build-to line,
but at least 15% of the facade shall be set back a minimum
§ 200-194.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-194.2
1:943
of 10 feet therefrom to create one or more alcoves
enclosed on three sides. Outdoor dining and arcades are
permitted within such alcove areas.
[3] There shall be an overhang or arcade along all front
facades.
[4] Building overhangs, including canopies and balconies, can
project up to five feet over the build-to line.
[5] Nonresidential uses are required on the first floor.
Apartments are permitted only on the second, third, or
fourth floor. [Amended 8-19-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-24]
[6] 241At least 75% of the buildings shall be three stories.
[7] The maximum building height shall be three stories or 40
feet, whichever is less, except that up to 15% of the facade
may be at a height of four stories or 50 feet, whichever is
less, provided that such additional height accommodates
either space for mechanicals or for lofts for third floors of
apartments and is not located on Old Bear Brook Road.
[8] All affordable units above the retail shall be rental, and the
market units may be for sale or rental.
[9] Parking shall be located behind the building and screened
from public view from streets. No parking shall be located
between a building and a street. On-street parking on
internal roads shall be permitted. Alleys are
recommended.
(3) All buildings in the Planned Mixed Use Neighborhood District shall
be set back a minimum of 50 feet from any existing residential lot
not separated by a public road if adequate buffering, as determined
by the Planning Board, is provided. If such adequate buffering is
not provided, the setback shall be 75 feet from such property line.
The existing wooded area within such buffer shall be preserved to
the extent feasible.
M. Required off-street and on-street parking.
(1) All streets in the Planned Mixed Use Neighborhood development
shall be designed to accommodate two travel lanes and parking on
both sides of the street.
(2) In lieu of the standards set forth in § 200-27B, the following offstreet
parking standards shall apply:
241. Editor's Note: Former Subsection L(2)(b)[6], regarding maximum store size, was repealed
8-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-24. This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection
L(2)(b)[7] through [10] as Subsection L(2)(b)[6] through [9], respectively.
§ 200-194.2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-194.2
1:944
(a) Off-street parking for corporate suites shall be 1.4 spaces per
suite.
(b) Off-street parking for all retail or office uses shall be a
minimum of one space per each 500 square feet of gross floor
area.
(3) Except for the municipally sponsored affordable housing
development and the hotel and corporate residential suites, offstreet
parking lots shall be prohibited in any front yard setback
area, shall be located at the rear of buildings on the interior of lots
and shall be accessed by means of common driveways, preferably
from side streets or lanes. Cross-access easements for adjacent lots
with interconnected parking lots shall be required. Shared parking
facilities are encouraged where possible. Where off-street parking
areas are visible from existing public or internal streets of the
development, they shall be buffered by landscaping or a low
masonry wall.
N. Pedestrian and bicycle accessibility.
(1) A comprehensive bicycle and pedestrian-/bicycle-friendly
circulation system shall be provided between all uses, along roads,
and through the open space.
(2) The developer shall provide paved pedestrian/bicycle linkages,
including crosswalks, to all off-tract adjacent residential
developments on the project side of Bear Brook Road and Old Bear
Brook Road as well as a sidewalk linkage or path to Alexander
Road.
(3) Pedestrian crossings in streets and alleys shall include special
ground texture treatment such as brick, stone, cobblestones and
other suitable material. The treatment of the crosswalk at the
intersection of Bear Brook Road and Old Bear Brook Road should
be designed with materials which indicate the different traffic
characteristics of these two streets.
O. Signs. A comprehensive sign plan shall be prepared for all use types
proposed within the Planned Mixed Use Neighborhood development.
The signs shall be compatible in design and integral to the architectural
design. A mix of wall and hanging signs is required. The sign standards
set forth in § 200-258D shall apply.
P. Architectural design standards and guidelines.
(1) Buildings shall generally relate in scale and design features to the
surrounding buildings in the development and off-tract. Buildings
shall reflect a continuity of treatment obtained by maintaining the
building scale or by subtly graduating changes; by maintaining
base courses; by continuous use of front porches on residential
buildings; by maintaining cornice lines in buildings of the same
§ 200-194.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-194.2
1:945
height; by extending horizontal lines of fenestration; and by
reflecting architectural styles and details, design themes, building
materials, and colors used in surrounding buildings.
(2) Corner buildings shall be designed to appear as landmark
buildings, since they have at least two front facades visibly exposed
to the street. One possible treatment to achieve this goal would
have buildings designed with additional height or architectural
embellishments, such as corner towers, to emphasize their
location.
(3) Buildings shall avoid long, monotonous, uninterrupted walls or roof
planes. Building wall offsets, including projections such as
balconies, canopies, and signs, recesses, and changes in floor level,
shall be used in order to add architectural interest and variety and
to relieve the visual effect of a simple, long wall. Similarly, roofline
offsets, dormers, or gables shall be provided in order to provide
architectural interest and variety to the massing of a building and
to relieve the effect of a single, long roof.
(4) The architectural treatment of the front facade shall be continued
in its major features around all visibly exposed sides of a building.
All sides of a building shall be architecturally design to be
consistent with regard to style, materials, colors, and details. Blank
wall or service area treatment of side and/or rear elevations visible
from the public viewshed is discouraged.
(5) All visibly exposed sides of a building shall be articulated with a
base course and cornice. For example, the base course may align
with either the kickplate or sill level of the first story. The cornice
may terminate or cap the top of a building wall, may project
horizontally from the vertical building wall plane, and may be
ornamented with moldings, brackets, and other details. The middle
section of a building may be horizontally divided at the floor, lintel
or sill levels with belt or string courses.
(6) Gable roofs with a minimum pitch of 9/12 shall be used to the
greatest extent possible. Where hipped roofs are used, it is
recommended that the minimum pitch be 6/12. Both gable and
hipped roofs shall provide overhanging eaves on all sides that
extend a minimum of one foot beyond the building wall. Flat roofs
are permitted only as part of a green roof or renewable energy
system, provided that all visibly exposed walls have an articulated
cornice that projects horizontally from the vertical building wall
plane. Other roof types shall be appropriate to the building's
architecture. Mansard roofs are prohibited on buildings less than
three stories in height. Architectural embellishments that add
visual interest to roofs, such as dormers, belvederes, masonry
chimneys, cupolas, clock towers, and other similar elements, are
encouraged.
§ 200-194.2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-194.2
1:946
(7) Fenestration shall be architecturally compatible with the style,
materials, colors, and details of the building. Windows shall be
vertically proportioned wherever possible. To the extent possible,
upper-story windows shall be vertically aligned with the location of
windows and doors on the ground level.
(8) All entrances to a building shall be defined and articulated by
architectural elements such as lintels, pediments, pilasters,
columns, porticoes, porches, overhangs, railings, balustrades, and
others, where appropriate. Any such element utilized shall be
architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors, and
details of the building as a whole, as shall the doors.
(9) In mixed-use buildings, the difference between ground-floor
commercial uses and entrances for upper-level commercial or
apartment uses shall be reflected by differences in facade
treatment or a canopy. Storefronts and other ground-floor
entrances shall be accentuated through architectural elements.
Further differentiation can be achieved through distinct but
compatible exterior materials, signs, awnings, and exterior
lighting.
(10) Ground-floor retail, services, and restaurant uses shall have largepane
display windows. Such windows shall be framed by the
surrounding wall and shall not exceed 75% of the total ground-level
facade area.
(11) Natural materials such as wood and masonry are recommended.
High-quality artificial siding and metal roof materials are
permitted. Other roof materials, whether asphalt or other
materials, must mimic slate or tile. Stucco or similar treatment may
be used as an accent. Materials manufactured from local or
regional manufacturers and from recycled or renewable resources
shall be considered. A description of the source for all construction
materials shall be provided for review by the Township.
(12) Heating, ventilating and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems, utility
meters and regulators, exhaust pipes and stacks, satellite dishes
and other telecommunications receiving devices shall be screened
or otherwise specially treated to be, as much as possible,
inconspicuous as viewed from the public right-of-way and adjacent
properties.
(13) Street furniture such as benches, street lamps, bicycle racks,
receptacles for litter, including mandatory recycling receptacles,
bus stops, landscape planters and hanging baskets shall be
provided. A standard street furnishing plan shall be established for
the entire district. Options shall be established in order to permit
variety. Furnishings manufactured from recycled materials shall be
considered. Furnishings manufactured from local or regional
sources shall be considered.
§ 200-194.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-194.2
1:947
§ 200-194.3. PMN-1 District use bulk, and other regulations.
[Added 3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-06]
(14) All ground-level residential units are encouraged to have clearly
defined front yards using landscaping, hedging, fencing or brick,
stone, or masonry walls, none of which, except for approved
planting, shall exceed three feet in height.
A. Purpose. The Planned Mixed Use Neighborhood-1 (PMN-1) District is
intended to encourage a mix of residential development in conjunction
with appropriately scaled and compatible commercial development
consisting of retail sales and services, a hotel, corporate suites, general
and administrative offices, fitness and instructional studios and similar
uses with convenient access to Route 1 and proximate to the train
station and surrounding commercial employment centers such as
Carnegie Center. It is intended to be bicycle and pedestrian friendly and
permit a compact mix of restaurants, commercial, market-rate and
affordable residential dwelling units and plazas, and a limited service
hotel. The PMN-1 District is intended to provide a compatible setting
for affordable housing close to mass transit services and employment
opportunities.
B. Planned comprehensive development, development application
requirements and required uses. Any development application in the
PMN-1 District shall be submitted as a planned development, in the
nature of a preliminary site plan application, for the entire district.
Such application shall describe any phasing of the proposal, together
with any on-site and off-tract improvements needed to support such
phases. The application for preliminary site plan approval may also
include a request for final approvals with respect to such phase or
phases. The following shall apply:
(1) A PMN-1 development shall be subject to the requirements of this
district and to the mandatory findings for a planned development
as required by the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.
(2) A minimum of 15,000 square feet of nonresidential floor area shall
be devoted to neighborhood retail commercial goods and services.
(3) A minimum of 600 residential units, market and affordable, shall be
provided.
(4) A limited service hotel with a minimum of 120 rooms shall be
provided.
(5) A roundabout is preferred for the intersection of Meadow Road and
Carnegie Center Drive.
C. Principal permitted uses. In the PMN-1 District, no building or premises
shall be used and no building shall be erected or altered which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used except for one or more of the
following uses:
§ 200-194.2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-194.3
1:948
(1) Neighborhood retail uses providing for the sale of goods and
services, not exceeding 30,000 square feet of floor area, including
but not limited to convenience food stores, pharmacies, restaurants
(excluding curb-service establishments and drive-through
facilities), cafes, luncheonettes and delicatessens, indoor
recreation facilities, including instructional studios and fitness
centers, attended laundry and retail dry-cleaning services (not
including bulk processing and, in the case of dry-cleaning
establishments, not providing for the storage of more than five
gallons of flammable or toxic cleaning fluid on the premises), book,
newspaper, periodical and stationery stores, copy centers, parcel
package shipping stores or mailing centers, bicycle shops and
bicycle rental facilities, banks, and personal services
establishments (e.g., barber or beauty salon and spa and massage
services).
(2) A hotel.
(3) General and administrative offices and professional offices (e.g.,
physicians, lawyers and architects); small commercial offices (e.g.,
realtors and travel agencies); and offices incidental to uses
permitted in this section.
(4) Garden and mid-rise apartments and townhouse dwellings. The
residential units shall be subject to a 25% low- and moderateincome
housing set aside in accordance with Subsection I.
D. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Recreational, clubhouse, swimming pool, recycling buildings, and
open space facilities, including, but not limited to, walkways,
courtyards, plazas, community centers, and community gardens.
(2) Off-street parking and loading designed in an aesthetically
appealing manner in terms of layout and materials.
(3) Signs.
(4) Street furniture, planters, approved public art elements, gazebos,
information kiosks, and waste/recycling receptacles.
(5) Sidewalk cafes associated with permitted restaurants.
(6) Fences and walls, which shall complement the architectural style,
type and design of the building and the overall project design. They
shall be constructed in accordance with a fence and wall design
plan approved by the board of jurisdiction.
(7) Decks, patios and terraces, which shall complement the
architectural style, type and design of the building and the overall
project design. They shall be constructed in accordance with a
deck, patio, and terrace design plan approved by the board of
jurisdiction.
§ 200-194.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-194.3
1:949
(8) Walk-up ATMs.
(9) Garages for use by tenants.
E. Minimum tract size. The minimum tract area shall be comprised of
Block 9, Lots 12.01 and 12.03, and Block 9.03, Lot 12.02, as shown on
the tax maps of the Township of West Windsor.
F. Location of nonresidential uses. Nonresidential uses shall be located on
Block 9, Lot 12.01 within 700 feet of the Route 1 North Service Road
right-of-way.
G. Maximum improvement coverage. The maximum improvement
coverage shall be 70%.
H. Greenbelt preservation. No development other than walking trails shall
be permitted in the greenbelt as depicted in the Conservation Plan
Element of the Master Plan, except that the greenbelt on Block 9.03,
Lot 12.02 may be modified at the time of development application
review based upon the Delaware and Raritan Canal Commission buffer
line. An easement shall be provided for all greenbelt shown on the
approved plans not already subject to greenbelt easements. Any
walking trail shall be designed so as to enhance the greenbelt.
I. Affordable housing. Twenty-five percent of the residential component
shall be low- and moderate-income housing meeting all of the
applicable standards and requirements for affordable units, including
those set forth Uniform Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC), N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1 et seq., and § 200-237. At least 50% of the affordable units
shall be made affordable to low-income households, and at least 13% of
all rental affordable units shall be made affordable to very-low-income
households earning 30% or less of the regional median household
income by household size, which very-low-income units shall be
included as part of the low-income requirement. The remaining
affordable units shall be made affordable to moderate-income
households. The affordable units shall be located on site and shall be
reasonably dispersed throughout each residential component phased in
accordance with the affordable housing construction schedule set forth
in NJAC 5:97-6.4(d). The state-wide nonresidential development fee
shall apply to the nonresidential portion of the development to the
extent that it includes other than residential uses.
J. Public activity area. The PMN-1 development shall contain a public
space on Block 9, Lot 12.01. The public space shall have a minimum
area of 10,000 square feet, which shall be designed as a public activity
focus for the development. Design elements, which may include
patterns in the pavement, a fountain, gazebo, sculpture, bollards,
sitting areas and landscaping, shall be incorporated into this public
space.
K. Residential unit standards.
§ 200-194.3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-194.3
1:950
(1) The average gross density shall not exceed 12 dwelling units per
acre for the entire tract.
(2) Of the housing types provided, no one type shall exceed 75% of the
total dwelling units to be developed.
(3) Building heights for all dwellings may not exceed four stories and
55 feet.
(4) Yard dimensions:
(a) Front yard: minimum of 15 feet on internal streets and drives
and 25 feet on public streets measured from the property line.
Paved areas for access to garages and parking lots are
permitted in front yards.
(b) For dwellings that front Carnegie Center Drive, the yard
setback shall be a minimum of 15 feet from the property line.
L. Area, bulk, and other regulations for nonresidential uses on fee simple
lots.
(1) Hotel.
(a) Lot area: minimum of one acre.
(b) Lot width: minimum of 200 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(d) Yard dimensions:
[1] Front yard: minimum of 15 feet on internal streets and
drives, and 35 feet on public streets, measured from the
property line. Paved areas for access to garages and
parking lots are permitted in front yards.
[2] Side yard (each side): minimum of 15 feet, exclusive of any
canopy.
[3] Rear yard: minimum of 20 feet on internal streets and
drives, measured from the property line.
(e) Maximum building height: 60 feet or five stories, whichever is
less.
(f) Maximum improvement coverage: 75%.
(2) Commercial other than hotel and office.
(a) Lot area: minimum of one acre.
(b) Lot width: minimum of 200 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
§ 200-194.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-194.3
1:951
(d) Yard dimensions:
[1] Front yard: 25 feet.
[2] Side yard (each side): minimum of 20 feet.
[3] Rear yard: minimum of 20 feet on internal streets and
drives, measured from the property line.
(e) Maximum store size: no more than 40% of the total gross floor
area.
(f) The maximum building height shall be two stories or 30 feet,
whichever is less.
(3) Office.
(a) Area, bulk, and other regulations for office uses on fee simple
lots shall be in accordance with the standards enumerated in
the ROM-1 Zoning District.
(4) All nonresidential buildings shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet
from any existing residential lot not separated by a public road.
M. Required off-street and on-street parking.
(1) All streets shall be designed to accommodate two travel lanes.
(2) The off-street parking standards set forth in § 200-27B shall apply,
except as follows:
(a) Off-street parking for the hotels shall be one space per room
plus 0.5 parking space/employee.
(b) Off-street parking for all retail or office uses shall be a
minimum of one space per each 500 square feet of gross floor
area. The applicant shall demonstrate that parking is sufficient
for each use.
(c) Off street parking for restaurants set forth in § 200-27B shall
apply in the PMN-1 District unless authorized otherwise by the
board of jurisdiction based on the applicant demonstrating that
parking is sufficient for the use.
(3) Except for the hotel and retail, off-street parking lots shall be
prohibited in any front yard setback from a public street and shall
be accessed by means of common driveways, preferably from side
streets or lanes. Cross-access easements for adjacent lots with
interconnected parking lots shall be provided where necessary.
Shared parking facilities are encouraged where possible. Where
off-street parking areas are visible from existing public streets of
the development, they shall be buffered by landscaping or a low
masonry wall.
§ 200-194.3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-194.3
1:952
N. Pedestrian and bicycle accessibility.
(1) A comprehensive bicycle and pedestrian circulation system shall be
provided between all uses, along roads, and through the open
space.
(2) The developer shall provide paved pedestrian/bicycle linkages,
including crosswalks, to all off-tract adjacent residential
developments on the project side of Meadow Road as well as a
sidewalk linkage or path to Old Meadow Road and Carnegie Center
Drive.
(3) Pedestrian crossings in streets and alleys shall include special
ground texture treatment such as brick, stone, cobblestones,
concrete and other suitable material and shall be 10 feet in width.
The treatment of any crosswalk shall be designed with materials
that indicate the different traffic characteristics of intersecting
streets.
(4) Safe and secure bicycle parking shall be provided.
O. Signs. A comprehensive sign plan shall be prepared for all use types
proposed within the PMN-1 District. The signs shall be compatible in
design and integral to the architectural design. A mix of wall and
hanging signs is required. The sign standards set forth in § 200-258D
shall apply.
P. Architectural design standards and guidelines.
(1) Buildings shall generally relate in scale to the surrounding
buildings in the development and off-tract. Buildings shall reflect a
continuity of treatment obtained by maintaining the building scale
or by subtly graduating changes; by maintaining base courses; by
maintaining cornice lines in buildings of the same height; by
extending horizontal lines of fenestration; and by reflecting
architectural styles and details, design themes, building materials,
and colors used in surrounding buildings.
(2) Buildings shall avoid long, monotonous, uninterrupted walls or roof
planes. Building wall offsets, including projections such as
balconies, canopies, and signs, recesses, and changes in floor level,
shall be used in order to add architectural interest and variety and
to relieve the visual effect of a simple, long wall. Similarly, roofline
offsets, dormers, or gables shall be provided in order to provide
architectural interest and variety to the massing of a building and
to relieve the effect of a single, long roof.
(3) The architectural treatment of the front facade shall be continued
in its major features around all visibly exposed sides of a building.
All sides of a building shall be architecturally designed to be
consistent with regard to style, materials, colors, and details. Blank
§ 200-194.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-194.3
1:953
wall or service area treatment of side and rear elevations visible
from the public views is discouraged.
(4) For residential units, gable roofs with a minimum pitch of 6/12 shall
be used to the greatest extent possible. Where hipped roofs are
used, it is recommended that the minimum pitch be 6/12. Both
gable and hipped roofs shall provide overhanging eaves on all sides
that extend a minimum of one foot beyond the building wall. Flat
roofs are permitted, provided that all visibly exposed walls have an
articulated cornice that projects horizontally from the vertical
building wall plane. Other roof types shall be appropriate to the
building's architecture. Mansard roofs are prohibited on buildings
less than three stories in height. Architectural embellishments that
add visual interest to roofs, such as dormers, belvederes, masonry
chimneys, cupolas, clock towers, and other similar elements, are
encouraged.
(5) Fenestration shall be architecturally compatible with the style,
materials, colors, and details of the building. Windows shall be
vertically proportioned wherever possible. To the extent possible,
upper-story windows shall be vertically aligned with the location of
windows and doors on the ground level.
(6) All entrances to a building shall be defined and articulated by
architectural elements such as lintels, pediments, pilasters,
columns, porticoes, porches, overhangs, railings, balustrades, or
others, where appropriate. Any such element utilized shall be
architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors, and
details of the building as a whole, as shall the doors.
(7) Ground-floor retail, services, and restaurant uses shall have largepane
display windows. Such windows shall be framed by the
surrounding wall and shall not exceed 75% of the total ground-level
facade area.
(8) For residential units, natural materials such as wood, stone and
masonry are recommended. High-quality artificial siding and metal
roof materials are permitted. Other roof materials, whether asphalt
or other material, must mimic slate or tile. Stucco or similar
treatment may be used as an accent. Materials manufactured from
local or regional manufacturers and from recycled or renewable
resources shall be considered.
(9) Heating, ventilating and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems, utility
meters and regulators, exhaust pipes and stacks, satellite dishes
and other telecommunications receiving devices shall be screened
or otherwise specially treated to be, as much as possible,
inconspicuous as viewed from the public right-of-way and adjacent
properties.
(10) Street furniture such as benches, street lamps, bicycle racks,
receptacles for litter, including mandatory recycling receptacles,
§ 200-194.3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-194.3
1:954
§ 200-195. R-1/O Residence/Office District use regulations. [Added
7-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-19]
§ 200-196. R-1/O Residence/Office District bulk and area
regulations. [Added 7-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-19; amended
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-43]
Except for the RR/C uses noted above, the following shall be the standards
for the R-1/O District:
bus stops, landscape planters and hanging baskets shall be
provided. A standard street furnishing plan shall be established for
the entire district. Options shall be established in order to permit
variety. Furnishings manufactured from recycled materials shall
be considered. Furnishings manufactured from local or regional
sources shall be considered.
(11) All ground-level residential units are encouraged to have clearly
defined front yards using landscaping, hedging, fencing or brick,
stone, or masonry walls, none of which, except for approved
planting, shall exceed three feet in height. Wood and chain link
fences are not permitted.
Q. Snow storage and removal. Procedures for snow storage and removal
shall be identified.
A. Permitted uses. In an R-1/O District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used, except for one or more of the following
uses:
(1) Any permitted use in an RR/C District, subject to the bulk, area and
other regulations of that district. [Amended 10-27-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-43]
(2) Offices for professional, financial, administrative and service
activities, such as, but not limited to, medical, dental, real estate,
insurance, travel, legal, accounting, architecture, engineer, tax and
financial advisers and similar uses.
(3) Accessory uses and accessory buildings, incidental to the above
uses located on the same lot and within the same zoning district
permitting the principal use.
B. Conditional uses. In the R-1/O District, the following uses may be
permitted as a conditional use:
(1) All conditional uses permitted in the RR/C District. [Amended
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-43]
A. Minimum lot area: 50,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot frontage: 150 feet.
§ 200-194.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-196
1:955
§ 200-197. Provision of low- and moderate-income housing. [Added
7-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-19]
C. Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
D. Minimum yards:
(1) Front yard: 50 feet.
(2) Rear yard: 15 feet.
(3) Side yard: There shall be two side yards with a minimum of 15 feet
each.
(4) Yards abutting residential uses or districts: except for one front
yard, the above yards shall be increased by 25 feet in those
instances where they abut, wholly or in part, a residential district
or lot line.
E. Maximum FAR: The maximum permitted FAR shall be allowed to vary
according to the following schedule:
(1) Uses in one-story buildings: 0.18 (maximum).
(2) Uses in multistory buildings: 0.23 (maximum).
F. Maximum improvement coverage: 60%.
G. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
A. For all nonresidential development in the R-1/O District, the developer
shall provide in the manner set forth in Subsection B below the number
of low- and moderate-income units equal to the quotient derived from
dividing the floor area of all uses by 6,600 square feet.
B. The board of jurisdiction shall determine the manner in which the lowand
moderate-income units are provided for from among one or more of
the following:
(1) On-site construction.
(2) Through a regional contribution agreement.
(3) Through a fee to the Township, pursuant to a developer's
agreement, in an amount equal to the number of low-and moderateincome
units required multiplied by the per unit regional
contribution agreement rate established by the Council on
Affordable Housing or its successor. The amount of the per square
foot fee shall be established at the time of preliminary approval and
shall be adjusted to reflect increases or decreases in the cost of
building construction as set forth in the Dodge Building Costs
Indexes for United States and Canadian Cities, utilizing the
average of the Philadelphia area and the New York Metropolitan
area or, if such index ceases to be published, another suitable
§ 200-196 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-197
1:956
index. Such fee may be used only to provide low- and moderateincome
units in addition to those units which sites in the Township's
affordable housing program are designed to generate, assuming
maximum development of the sites, except that, if such funds are
used for a site for which a development proposal is pending, they
may be used to provide low- and moderate-income units in addition
to those proposed.
C. In addition, the applicant may propose one or more of the following, in
which case the board of jurisdiction may choose from among such
proposals and from the methods set forth in Subsections B(1) through
(3) in deciding the manner in which the applicants' obligation to provide
low-and moderate-income housing shall be met.
(1) Off-site construction on a site zoned for low- and moderate-income
housing, provided that the low- and moderate-income units
proposed are in addition to the number of such units the site is
designated or proposed to generate. If no development proposal is
pending for the site at the time the application for the
nonresidential development is approved, the number of low- and
moderate-income units for which the site is designed shall be
determined by assuming the maximum development of the site. If a
development proposal is pending, the number of low- and
moderate-income units proposed shall govern.
(2) Off-site construction on a site not zoned for low- and moderateincome
housing, provided that the site is acceptable to the board of
jurisdiction.
(3) An on- or off-site land donation which shall be utilized for providing
low- and moderate-income housing. Such donation may be made in
lieu of all or part of the cash contribution.
D. The low- and moderate-income units shall comply with the affordability
and other standards set forth in § 200-237.
E. If the low- and moderate-income units are provided on site, they shall
meet the requirements of § 200-209A(8)(a)[6][c], whether or not such
units are part of a planned development. In addition, such units shall be
accessible to the common open space; be buffered in the manner set
forth in § 200-227; and be provided with active recreational facilities
consistent with § 200-36C.
F. If the board of jurisdiction determines that a cash contribution shall be
made in lieu of construction of the units, a regional contribution
agreement, or land contribution 10% of the contribution due for each
building, shall be due prior to issuance of the building permit of the
building in question. The contribution for each building shall be
calculated by multiplying the average per square foot of floor area
contribution for the development as a whole by the square footage of
the building. Any land which the board of jurisdiction agrees to accept
§ 200-197 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-197
1:957
in lieu of all or part of the cash contribution shall be conveyed to the
Township prior to the issuance of the first building permit.
G. As the R-1/O District regulations provide for the on-site construction of
low- and moderate-income housing at the board of jurisdiction's option
for proposed nonresidential use, the basic rights of an R-1/O
nonresidential development shall be 100%.
§ 200-197 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-197
1:958
ARTICLE XXVIII
Regulations for Business Districts242
§ 200-198. General.
The regulations applicable to the business districts are as designated in the
following sections.
§ 200-199. B-1 Business District (limited convenience center) use
regulations.
A. Permitted uses. In a B-1 District, no building or premises shall be used
and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged, intended
or designed to be used except for one or more of the following uses, and
all such uses shall be subject to the performance standards set forth in
Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this chapter: [Amended 11-27-1989 by
Ord. No. 89-53]
(1) A limited convenience center planned development served by
public water and subject to the following standards and conforming
to the requirements for planned developments stipulated in Article
XXXI of this Part 4:
(a) Uses.
[1] Small-scale stores and shops for the conduct of retail
business and personal services catering primarily to and
directly benefiting the residents and employees of the
surrounding neighborhood, excluding drive-in
establishments and outdoor storage facilities.
[2] Professional offices, provided that their gross floor area
does not exceed 20% of the total gross floor area to be
developed on a tract.
[3] Restaurant and tavern, excluding drive-in or curb service
establishments; beverage sales.
(b) Site/building design.
[1] The site design shall provide for a unified layout of
permitted uses served by common on-site parking and
stormwater control facilities, together with a single
driveway access point.
242. Editor's Note: Timed growth controls adopted by Ord. No. 94-01, and formerly included in
Art. XXVIII, were declared invalid by the Superior Court of New Jersey in an order dated
12-4-1997, in the matter of Toll Brothers v. West Windsor Township et al., Superior Court
Docket No. MER-L-2365-97. The order was affirmed by the Appellate Division (Docket No.
A-2550-97TS) on 6-2-1998. On 11-18-1998, the New Jersey Superior Court denied the
Township's petition for certification. Ord. No. 2008-32, adopted 10-27-2008, redesignated
former Arts. XXIX through XXXIX as Arts. XXVII through XXXVII, respectively.
§ 200-198 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-199
1:959
§ 200-200. B-1 District bulk and area regulations. [Amended
12-15-1986 by Ord. No. 86-35; 11-27-1989 by Ord. No. 89-53]
The following shall be the standards for the B-1 District:
[2] There shall be a unified architectural facade treatment and
theme for the uses contained within the convenience
center, with an integrated lighting, landscaping and
graphic business sign program designed to enhance the
small-scale character of the center.
(2) Accessory uses and accessory buildings incidental to the above
uses located on the same lot and within the same zoning district
permitting the principal use.
(3) All farm and agricultural uses permitted in residential districts in
accordance with the various provisions set forth in Article XXXI of
this Part 4.
B. Conditional uses - B-1 District. In the B-1 District, the following uses
may be permitted as conditional uses: [Amended 11-27-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-53]
(1) Billboards, in accordance with the requirements of § 200-32E.
[Added 12-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-27.
A. Minimum lot area: five acres.
B. Minimum lot frontage: 500 feet.
C. Minimum lot width: 350 feet.
D. Minimum yards.
(1) Front yard: 50 feet, with a thirty-foot landscape area at the street
right-of-way.
(2) Rear yard: 40 feet.
(3) Side yards: There shall be two side yards with a minimum of 40 feet
each.
(4) Yards abutting residential districts. Except for the front yard, the
above yards, including the landscape transition buffer and screen
requirements, shall be increased by 60 feet in those instances
where they abut, whole or in part, a residential district or lot line.
E. Additional site design standards.
(1) The minimum distance between any building, including accessory
uses except parking, and any residence district shall be 175 feet.
(2) The minimum distance between any access driveway and any
residence district shall be 100 feet.
§ 200-199 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-200
1:960
§ 200-201. B-2 Business District (neighborhood center) use
regulations. [Amended 12-15-1986 by Ord. No. 86-35; 11-27-1989
by Ord. No. 89-53]
(3) Landscape buffer design criteria for designing yard area buffers
abutting any residence district shall adhere to § 200-91R of Part 3,
Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures, of this chapter.
F. Maximum FAR. The maximum permitted FAR shall be 0.16, but in no
event shall the maximum floor area exceed 40,000 square feet.
G. Maximum improvement coverage: 50%.
H. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
A. Permitted uses. In a B-2 District, no building or premises shall be used
and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged, intended
or designed to be used except for one or more of the following uses, and
all such uses shall be subject to the performance standards set forth in
Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this chapter:
(1) Stores and shops for the conduct of any retail business, excluding
drive-in establishments.
(2) Personal service establishments (e.g., a tailor, barbershop or
beauty salon.)
(3) Offices for professional services (e.g., physicians, lawyers or
architects); commercial offices (e.g., realtors or travel agencies);
and offices incidental to uses permitted in this subsection.
(4) Restaurants and neighborhood taverns, excluding drive-in and curb
service establishments.
(5) Repair and servicing, indoor only, of any article for sale which is
permitted in this district.
(6) Attended laundry and retail dry-cleaning services, not including
bulk processing on or from other premises.
(7) Copy centers and newspaper offices.
(8) Planned commercial development, notwithstanding any other
requirements of this chapter, except as changed herein, shall also
be subject to the following special requirements:
(a) Tract area limitations: No grouping of permitted uses shall be
placed on a tract area less than five acres. [Amended
7-15-1985 by Ord. No. 85-13]
(b) Mix of uses: At a minimum, three of the permitted uses as
outlined herein shall be provided.
(c) Minimum lot frontage: 250 feet.
§ 200-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-201
1:961
(d) Maximum FAR: The maximum permitted FAR shall be allowed
to vary according to the following schedule:
Uses in Maximum FAR
One-story buildings 0.20
Multistory buildings 0.25
(e) Maximum improvement coverage: 60%.
(f) Building arrangement, lot width, frontage, depth and yards.
Buildings, lot, yard sizes and dimensions may be freely
disposed and arranged on a lot, provided that the development
conforms with a site plan approved by the Planning Board,
subject to the provisions of Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this
chapter, and the following minimum standards:
[1] Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
[2] The minimum distance between any building, including
accessory uses, except parking, and any residence district
shall be 100 feet.
[3] Minimum yard setbacks: Front yard, 50 feet; side and rear
yards, 15 feet, except in those instances where they abut,
whole or in part, a residence district or lot line, then such
yards shall be increased by 35 feet. [Amended 7-27-1987
by Ord. No. 87-20]
[4] The minimum distance between any building, including
accessory uses, except parking, and any street line shall be
50 feet.
[5] The minimum distance between any group (more than one)
of commercial uses and the lot lines of the following:
church, library, school, college, nursing home, hospital or
similar uses, 200 feet, measured along the same street line
in the same block.
[6] Minimum distance between any access driveway and any
residence district: 50 feet.
(g) Common open space. The organization, administration and
financial arrangements and guarantees governing the common
open space or other common facilities which may be a part of a
planned commercial development shall be subject to the
requirements as set forth for planned residential development
in Article XXVII of this Part 4.
(9) Building structures and uses owned or operated by the Township of
West Windsor.
§ 200-201 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-201
1:962
(10) All farm and agricultural uses permitted in residential districts in
accordance with the provisions set forth in Article XXXI of this Part
4.
(11) Accessory uses and accessory buildings incidental to the above
uses located on the same lot and within the same zoning district
permitting the principal use.
B. Conditional uses in B-2 District. In a B-2 District, the following uses may
be permitted as conditional uses:
(1) Living and/or sleeping accommodations for one household in
conjunction with a permitted use subject to the following special
requirements:
(a) Such accommodations are incidental to the business use of the
premises, are located within the principal building and only are
available above the ground floor of the permitted business use
and are not located above any uses containing toxic or
inflammable material unless it can be shown that such location
meets all necessary state health and occupancy standards
governing such conditions.
(b) The residential portion shall have a direct and separate
entrance upon a street, either directly or via an unobstructed
passageway.
(2) Public utilities, substations, electric and gas facilities, subject to
the following special requirements:
(a) No storage of materials and trucks and no repair facilities or
staging of repair crews, except within completely enclosed
buildings.
(b) The exterior of any structure shall be in keeping with the other
structures in the immediate neighborhood.
(3) Fast-food operations, subject to the following special requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 50,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
(c) Minimum lot frontage: 150 feet.
(d) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(e) Minimum setback from all street lines: 50 feet.
(f) Minimum distance between any building, including accessory
uses, and any residence district: 50 feet.
(g) Minimum distance between any access driveway and any
residence district: 50 feet.
§ 200-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-201
1:963
(h) Minimum distance between any access driveway and any
adjoining property line: 10 feet.
(i) Minimum distance between any access driveway and an access
driveway of any of the following: church, library, school,
college, nursing home, hospital and similar uses: 200 feet,
measured along the same street line in the same block.
(j) Spacing of access driveways:
[1] Entrance access driveways shall not be located within 200
feet of the intersection of any two street lines.
[2] Minimum distance from adjoining property lines: 10 feet.
[3] Minimum distance between access driveways: 40 feet.
[4] Access driveways onto state or county highways shall be
approved by the Township Engineer and state or county
Highway Department.
(4) Motion-picture theaters and/or theaters for the performing arts,
provided that they are located in enclosed buildings and are part of
a planned commercial development which has access from U.S
Route 1.
(5) Motor vehicle service stations and motor vehicle commercial
garages, subject to the following special requirements:
(a) Minimum lot width, including any lot side which permits
access: 150 feet.
(b) Minimum setback line from all street lines: 40 feet.
(c) Minimum distance of buildings from all property lines other
than street lines: 25 feet.
(d) Minimum distance between any buildings, including accessory
uses, and any residence district: 50 feet.
(e) Minimum distance between any access driveway and any
residence district: 50 feet.
(f) Minimum distance between any access driveways and the lot
line of the following uses: church, library, school, college,
nursing home, hospital and similar uses: 200 feet, measured
along the same street line in the same block.
(g) Minimum distance between structures of any service station
and/or repair garage and another service station and/or repair
garage or those for which a building permit has been issued
shall be 300 feet, measured along the same street line in the
same or adjoining block. For similar use establishments
§ 200-201 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-201
1:964
located on opposite sides of the street, the point of beginning
measurement shall be off-set to the opposite street line.
(h) Minimum distance between gasoline pump islands,
compressed air connections and similar equipment and
facilities and any street lines: 25 feet.
(i) Spacing of access driveways:
[1] Minimum distance from adjoining property lines: 10 feet.
[2] Minimum distance from minor intersections: 30 feet.
Where intersecting street(s) is(are) major or minor
arterials, as defined by the Township's Master Plan, the
minimum distance under this subsection shall be 50 feet.
This distance shall be measured from the right-of-way lines
of intersecting streets involved.
[3] Minimum distance between access driveways: 30 feet.
[4] Access driveways onto state or county highways shall be
approved by the Township Engineer and the state or
county Highway Department.
(j) Hydraulic hoists, pits and all lubrication, greasing, washing
and repair equipment shall be entirely enclosed within
buildings.
(k) Exterior lighting shall be shielded so that it is deflected away
from adjacent properties and from passing motorists.
(l) Wrecked or junked or stripped vehicles or vehicles in an
inoperative condition shall not be permitted on the premises
for a period of more than 30 days. One customer's motor
vehicle may be kept on the site for sale.
(m) Lease or rental of motor vehicles may be permitted in
conjunction with a motor vehicle service station provided that:
[1] A minimum lot area of one acre is available.
[2] No vehicle storage or parking area shall be nearer than 10
feet to any lot line.
[3] The side and real property yards abutting the area
containing such lease or rental vehicles shall be
landscaped, fenced or screened to provide, at the time of
installation, an effective visual barrier to obscure from
view at ground level the stored vehicles from adjoining
uses.
[4] The number of vehicles permitted on a lot shall not
interfere with nor impede the daily access to and
circulation of the service station operation.
§ 200-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-201
1:965
(6) Hotel/motel which has access to U.S. Route 1 and conforms to the
special requirements for such uses as contained in Article XXIX,
§ 200-211B, of this Part 4.
(7) A planned commercial development providing for a communityscale
retail convenience center, subject to the requirements for
planned developments stipulated in Article XXXI of this Part 4.
[Added 11-10-1986 by Ord. No. 86-32]
(a) Location. A planned commercial development consistent with
the goals and policies of the West Windsor Township Master
Plan shall only be permitted at the southeast corner formed by
the intersection of Route 1 and Meadow Road.
(b) Minimum development area: 28 acres in contiguous parcels
not separated by any street and served by public water and
sewer systems. For purposes of meeting this requirement, at
the option of an applicant, contiguous lands in the same
ownership located adjacent to an existing B-2 District and
zoned for ROM-1 uses may be included in a planned
commercial development. Upon such inclusion, the contiguous
lands or part thereof shall be consolidated with the planned
commercial development and subject to the application of the
herein conditions, standards and permitted land uses.
(c) Permitted uses.
[1] Community-oriented retail shopping center consisting of
an integrated development according to a uniform design
theme with common parking/service areas and pedestrian
amenities, containing retail stores and shops, personal
service establishments, specialty stores and boutiques,
banks and indoor restaurants, excluding drive-in facilities.
Theaters and professional or business offices, except those
offices related to the management of the planned
development, shall be excluded. At least one major retail
anchor store shall be provided. Any freestanding structure
not physically attached to the principal shopping center
shall contain a minimum of 3,000 square feet of gross floor
area. [Amended 4-26-1993 by Ord. No. 93-11]
[2] Accessory uses and accessory buildings incidental to the
above uses located on the same lot and within the same
zoning district permitted the principal use.
(d) Minimum lot frontage.
[1] Along Route 1: 1,000 feet, as measured along Route 1 from
its point of tangency with Meadow Road.
§ 200-201 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-201
1:966
[2] Along Meadow Road: 640 feet, as measured along Meadow
Road from the tangency point used to measure the Route 1
frontage.
(e) Maximum FAR. The maximum permitted FAR shall be 0.23,
subject to the phasing requirements set forth in Subsection
B(7)(h) herein. In no event, however, shall the planned
commercial center exceed 280,000 gross square feet of floor
area.
(f) Maximum MIC. The maximum permitted MIC shall be 60%.
(g) Bulk requirements.
[1] Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
[2] Building arrangement, lot width, frontage, depth and
yards. Buildings, lot, yard sizes and dimensions may be
freely disposed and arranged on a lot, provided that the
development conforms with a site plan approved by the
Planning Board, subject to the provisions of Part 1, Site
Plan Review, of this chapter, and the following minimum
standards:
[a] Minimum lot width shall be the same dimensions as
those stipulated for the Route 1 and Meadow Road
frontages under Subsection B(7)(d) of this section.
[b] Minimum distance between any building, including
accessory uses, except parking and any residence
district shall be 75 feet, together with such landscape
and/or berm treatment sufficient to shield from view
commercial activity at the zoning district line and
conforming to the landscape design criteria of
§ 200-91R of Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan
Procedures, of this chapter.
[c] Minimum front yard setbacks from Route 1: 125 feet,
with a seventy-five-foot landscape area at the street
right-of-way.
[d] Minimum front yard setback from Meadow Road: 50
feet, with a thirty-foot landscape area at the street
right-of-way.
[e] Minimum rear and side yard setbacks: 50 feet.
[f] Minimum distance between any access driveway and
any residence district shall be 100 feet.
(h) Phasing requirements. To permit a planned commercial
development in accordance with the standards of this section,
§ 200-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-201
1:967
a phasing plan shall be devised to attain the following
objectives:
[1] The development shall contain a minimum of two phases,
with the first phase not to exceed 220,000 square feet of
gross building floor area.
[2] Subject to positive findings by the Planning Board for a
planned commercial development as outlined in Article
XXXI of this Part 4, a developer may be permitted to
develop up to the limit established for a first phase,
provided that the developer demonstrates that he or she
will construct the necessary road improvements to
achieve, in the highway PM peak hour, a level of service E
and V/C ratio not to exceed 1.0 at the Route 1 and Meadow
Road intersection to accommodate both the projected
occupancy of the first phase planned commercial
development, together with a reasonable estimate of
traffic growth from immediate area development projects
that would be expected to utilize the intersection during
the same time period projected for the first phase
occupancy. Such intersection capacity analyses shall be
undertaken according to the latest edition of the 1985
Highway Capacity Manual.
[3] With respect to the succeeding phases of the planned
commercial development, such phase shall not be granted
final approval until it is demonstrated that funding for a
grade-separated interchange of Meadow Road and Route 1
is available and committed and contracts for such
construction have been let. The interchange design, in the
highway PM peak hour, shall be sufficient to accommodate
the planned commercial development as well as projected
traffic growth from immediate area development projects
and/or development proposals that would utilize the
proposed interchange at a level service D and V/C ratio not
to exceed 0.95. Such interchange capacity analyses shall
be undertaken according to the latest edition of the 1985
Highway Capacity Manual.
(i) Common open space. The organization, administration and
financial arrangements and guaranties governing the common
open space or other common facilities which may be part of a
planned commercial development shall be subject to the
requirements as set forth in §§ 200-190C(2) and 200-190C(3).
(8) Branch banks, including drive-in banking facilities, subject to the
following special requirements: [Added 7-27-1987 by Ord. No.
87-20]
§ 200-201 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-201
1:968
§ 200-202. B-2 District bulk and area restrictions. [Amended
12-15-1986 by Ord. No. 86-35; 11-27-1989 by Ord. No. 89-53]
The following shall be the standards for the B-2 District:
(a) Such banks, including drive-in banking facilities, shall be
located within and be an integral part of the site plan design of
a planned commerce development. Furthermore, such uses
shall be clearly subordinate to the principal retail nature of the
planned commercial development.
(b) No more than three drive-in teller windows shall be provided.
A lone for queuing purposes sufficient in length to
accommodate a minimum of 12 automobiles shall be provided
for each drive-in lane providing access to a teller window. No
parking or queuing for the bank facilities shall interfere with
required fire lanes, the overall planned commercial
development's main access drives, parking aisles and
pedestrian walks.
(c) Access to and from the banking and drive-in facilities shall not
be permitted onto public streets. Such access shall be provided
from the internal road system servicing the planned
commercial development. Ingress and egress points shall be
coordinated so as not to impede main traffic flow required for
the overall planned development.
(d) Drive-in window lanes and bank related parking shall be
physically separated from the overall planned commercial
development's traffic circulation system by means of concrete
curbed landscaped islands.
(e) An overall signage plan shall be provided according to the type
and area limitations established by the Township's sign
ordinance contained in § 200-32 of Part 1, Site Plan Review, of
this chapter. Other than instructional signs, the extent of wall
signage shall be limited to one facade of the bank. No
advertising or business signage shall be permitted on the
drive-in canopy structure.
(9) Billboards, in accordance with the requirements of § 200-243.1.
[Added 10-15-1996 by Ord. No. 96-25; amended 12-15-1997
by Ord. No. 97-27; 5-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-07]
A. Minimum lot area: one acre.
B. Minimum lot frontage: 125 feet.
C. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
D. Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
E. Minimum yards:
§ 200-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-202
1:969
§ 200-203. B-3 Business District (Retail Node) use, bulk and area
regulations. [Added 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 95-49; amended
2-5-1996 by Ord. No. 96-01]
In the B-3 District, no building or premises shall be used and no building
shall be erected or altered when it is arranged, intended or designed to
be used except as part of a planned commercial development meeting the
following standards:
(1) Front yard: 30 feet.
(2) Rear yard: 15 feet.
(3) Side yards: There shall be two side yards with a minimum of 15 feet
each.
(4) Yards abutting residential districts: Except for the front yard, the
above yards shall be increased by 60 feet in those instances where
they abut, whole or part, a residential district or lot line.
[Amended 7-27-1987 by Ord. No. 87-20]
F. Maximum FAR. The maximum permitted FAR shall be allowed to vary
according to the following schedule:
Uses in Maximum FAR
One-story buildings 0.18
Multistory buildings 0.20
G. Maximum improvement coverage: 55%.
H. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
A. Tract area. The planned commercial development shall be coterminous
with the boundaries of the B-3 District.
B. Uses permitted in the planned commercial development.
(1) Retail goods and/or services, including specialty shops and
boutiques.
(2) Restaurants and lounges, including, but not limited to, fast-food
establishments and cafeterias, but excluding drive-thru and curb
service establishments.
(3) Banks.
(4) Hotels.
(5) Dinner theaters, movie theaters, theaters for the performing arts
and other cultural facilities.
(6) Indoor health clubs and squash and racquetball facilities.
(7) Farmers' markets.
§ 200-202 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-203
1:970
(8) Entertainment and outdoor recreation facilities, but excluding
video or pinball arcades.
(9) Public uses, including, but not limited to, museums (which may be
private not-for-profit organizations), public historical displays,
municipal libraries and any facilities owned or operated by the
Township of West Windsor. The floor area and improvement
coverage of any such public uses owned or operated by West
Windsor Township or any other quasi-public or public entity such
as, but not limited to, a fire company, rescue squad or library
commission shall not be included in FAR and improvement
coverage calculations.
(10) Professional and business offices.
(11) Accessory uses and accessory buildings incidental to any of the
permitted principal uses.
C. Maximum FAR: 10% for the district as a whole.
D. Maximum improvement coverage: 50% for the district as a whole.
E. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories and no more than 50 feet.
F. Increased FAR and maximum improvement coverage for provision of
low- and moderate-income housing.
(1) The maximum FAR shall be increased to 15% for the district as a
whole and the maximum improvement coverage shall be increased
to 55% for the district as a whole if the applicant enters into a
developer's agreement with the Township in which it agrees to
provide in the manner set forth in Subsection F(2) below the
number of low- and moderate-income units equal to the quotient
derived from dividing the floor area of all uses other than those set
forth in Subsections B(8) and (9) of this section by 6,600 square
feet. Only floor area approved after the effective date of this Part 4
shall be included in such computation.
(2) The board of jurisdiction shall determine the manner in which the
low- and moderate-income units are provided for among one or
more of the following:
(a) On-site construction.
(b) Through a regional contribution agreement.
(c) Through a fee to the Township, pursuant to a developer's
agreement, in an amount equal to 1% of the equalized assessed
value of any development in the district approved after the
effective date of this Part 4, plus a fee of $2.60 per square foot
for any square footage of said development above the square
footage permitted by an FAR of 10%. The per square foot rate
shall be increased or decreased by the same percentage that
§ 200-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-203
1:971
the Council on Affordable Housing or its successor increases
or decreases the $20,000 per unit rate it has established for
regional contribution agreements. The amount of the per
square foot fee shall be established at the time of preliminary
approval. Such fee may be used only to provide low- and
moderate-income units in addition to those units which sites
in the Township's affordable housing program are designed to
generate, assuming maximum development of the sites, except
that, if such funds are used for a site for which a development
proposal is pending, they shall be used to provide low- and
moderate-income units in addition to those proposed. In
addition, the applicant may propose one or more of the
following, in which case the board of jurisdiction may choose
from among such proposals and from the methods set forth in
Subsections F(2)(a) through (c) above in deciding the manner
in which the applicant's obligation to provide low- and
moderate-income housing shall be met.
(d) Off-site construction on a site zoned for low- and moderateincome
housing, provided that the low- and moderate-income
units proposed are in addition to the number of such units the
site is designated or proposed to generate. If no development
proposal is pending for the site at the time the application for
the planned commercial development is approved, the number
of low- and moderate-income units for which the site is
designed shall be determined by assuming maximum
development of the site. If a development proposal is pending,
the number of low- and moderate-income units proposed shall
govern.
(e) Off-site construction on a site not zoned for low- and moderateincome
housing, provided that the site is acceptable to the
board of jurisdiction.
(f) An on- or off-site land donation which shall be utilized for
providing low- and moderate-income housing. Such donation
may be made in lieu of all or a part of the cash contribution.
(3) The low- and moderate-income units shall comply with the
affordability and other standards set forth in § 200-237.
(4) If the low- and moderate-income units are provided on site, they
shall:
(a) Meet the unit type, bulk and density standards for the R-4B
District.
(b) Either be integrated into the retail center or be accessible to
the common open space, entertainment and outdoor recreation
facilities, public facilities, retail uses and public transportation;
be buffered in the manner set forth in § 200-227; and be
§ 200-203 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-203
1:972
provided with active recreational facilities consistent with
§ 200-36C of Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this chapter.
(5) If the board of jurisdiction determines that a cash contribution shall
be made in lieu of construction of the units, a regional contribution
agreement or a land contribution, 10% of the contribution due for
each building shall be due prior to issuance of the building permit
for the building in question and the balance shall be due prior to
the issuance of 60% of the certificates of occupancy for the building
in question. The contribution for each building shall be calculated
by multiplying the average per square foot of floor area
contribution for the development as a whole by the square footage
of the building. Any land which the board of jurisdiction agrees to
accept in lieu of all or part of the cash contribution shall be
conveyed to the Township prior to the issuance of the first building
permit.
G. Planned retail development design and bulk requirements.
(1) District requirements.
(a) Minimum setback from state highways: 125 feet.
(b) Minimum setback from public streets: 75 feet.
(c) Minimum setback from private streets: 35 feet.
(d) Minimum setback from district boundary lines which are not
within or adjacent to rights-of-way or easement areas for
public or private streets: 50 feet.
(e) Minimum distance between the retail center pervious and
impervious surfaces and on- and off-site dwelling units: 175
feet. [Amended 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-21]
(2) Individual lot requirements. There shall be no maximum FAR or
limitation on maximum improvement coverage for individual lots,
provided that the planned commercial development conforms to a
site plan approved by the board of jurisdiction, lot widths,
frontages, rear yards, side yards, front yards, lot dimensions,
parking lot locations and building distances may be freely arranged
and disposed of. A lot need not front on a street, and there are no
minimum distances between individual buildings. The intent of this
provision is to permit individual stores to exist as separate lots.
However, each individual lot shall be subject to and may only be
improved in accordance with the final site plan approval for the
planned commercial development in accordance with these district
regulations. Final subdivision approval may be granted only as part
of or subsequent to final site plan approval for the planned
commercial development. The board of jurisdiction shall condition
final subdivision approval upon submission by the applicant and
approval by the board attorney of a declaration of covenants and
§ 200-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-203
1:973
restrictions or other suitable instrument setting forth the
mechanisms by which and providing adequate assurances that
security, outside cleaning and other routine external maintenance,
external repainting, maintenance of the common open space,
garbage collection, snow removal and other appropriate items will
be provided for the planned commercial development.
(3) Planning principles. The planned commercial development shall be
designed to create a cohesive environment integrating the
developed and undeveloped portions of the district, with a strong
visual identity, physically linked by pedestrian connections, plazas
or other amenities, and related by a single design theme.
Accordingly, the design shall be guided by the following objectives:
(a) The architectural style of the planned commercial development
shall be designed to avoid a big-box commercial center
appearance through facade ornamentation, building offsets
and entry treatments and upgraded building material and
colors.
(b) Buildings shall be sited to form a progression of pedestrian
oriented open spaces with visual as well as pedestrian
connections between such spaces.
(c) Open air or enclosed pedestrian spaces shall act as connectors
of buildings and shall contain such amenities as changes in
level, benches, water features, opportunities for entertainment
and seating areas to provide a sense of place and orientation
for its users. There shall be a pedestrian corridor connecting
the retail facilities in the portion of the district which is not
developed with the portion of the district which already
contains retail facilities. Such corridor shall include the
amenities set forth in this subsection.
(d) One or more entertainment or outdoor facilities constituting a
design focus of the planned commercial development and
acceptable to the board of jurisdiction shall be provided.
(e) At least 18% of the district acreage shall be devoted to
pedestrian spaces, including but not limited to sidewalks in
front of stores, and associated landscaping and water features,
including but not limited to fountains, plazas, any lawn or
landscaped areas, parking islands and the like (but not
preserved open space) and entertainment and outdoor
recreation amenities.
(f) At least 30% of the district shall be devoted to preserved open
space, which may include walking trails, except that such trails
shall not intrude upon or otherwise be proximate to the Port
Mercer area and to the bermed areas and detention basins.
§ 200-203 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-203
1:974
§ 200-203.1. B-4 Planned Retail Village Center District use
regulations. [Added 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-01; amended
6-28-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-18]
(g) Canal Pointe Boulevard shall not be extended to or through any
portion of the B-3 District in order to prevent disturbance to
the integrity of the greenbelt and preserved open space,
detention facilities, internal circulation, parking and
pedestrian flows and unified site and building arrangements.
(h) Access for service and deliveries shall not obstruct overall site
traffic patterns. All service areas shall be isolated from main
public circulation drives and screened from public view.
(4) Open space. All portions of the planned commercial development
not allocated to buildings or improvements shall be allocated to
deed-restricted passive recreational space, greenbelt space or
other open space.
(5) Any one store and/or building may contain any number and
combination of the uses permitted.243
A. Purposes. The purposes of the Planned Retail Village Center (B-4)
District are to encourage lot assemblage, sensitive environmental area
preservation and a comprehensive design for a village-scale center of
individual neighborhood convenience retail uses, including restaurants
providing fine dining with outdoor seating.
B. Permitted uses. In a B-4 District, no building or premises shall be used
and building altered which is arranged, intended or designed to be
used, except for the following uses, and all such uses shall be subject to
the performance standards set forth in Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this
chapter.
(1) Planned retail village center, served by public sewer and water and
subject to the requirements for planned developments stipulated in
Article XXXI of Part 4, which may include the following uses:
(a) Stores and shops for the conduct of any retail business.
(b) Personal service establishments (e.g., tailor, barbershop or
beauty salon).
(c) Offices for professional services.
(d) Branch banks and money access machines subject to
§ 200-203.2F(4) below.
243. Editor's Note: Original Subsections 22-6.5 and 22-6.6 pertaining to regulations in the B-3
Business District (Mixed use Commercial Center) were repealed in their entirety by Ord.
No. 91-01, adopted 2-16-1993.
§ 200-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-203.1
1:975
§ 200-203.2. B-4 Planned Retail Village Center District bulk and
area regulations. [Added 3-3-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-01]
The following shall be the standards for the B-4 District:
(e) Restaurants, for which outdoor seating may be provided,
subject to the following:
[1] Tandem parking may be provided. All tandem parking
spaces shall comply with the standards set forth in
§ 200-29M(9);
[2] A porte-cochere consistent with the architectural
treatment of the other buildings in the planned
development shall be provided; and
[3] The only signage permitted shall be one wall sign no
greater than 15 square feet. Freestanding signs are
prohibited.
[4] Cross-easements with uses using only daytime parking
shall be provided to the extent feasible.
[5] Off site catering shall be permitted.
[6] The sale and consumption of liquor on the premises shall
be permitted, but the bar shall have no more seats than the
minimum required by the Alcoholic Beverage Commission.
[7] The following shall not be permitted:
[a] Ordered take out.
[b] Drive-throughs.
[c] Fast-food operations.
A. Minimum tract area: five acres.
B. Minimum yard and setbacks:
(1) The parking setback from CR 571 shall be 50 feet and from
Southfield Road shall be 25 feet. The building setback from CR 571
shall be 100 feet and from Southfield Road shall be 60 feet.
(2) Rear and side yards: 25 feet to tract boundaries.
(3) Yards abutting residential districts: The above yards and setbacks
shall be increased by 75 feet in those instances where they abut,
wholly or in part, a residential district, except that, where the
above yards abut residentially zoned municipally owned property,
the minimum setback shall be 25 feet.
C. Maximum FAR: .07, except that it may be increased to 0.10 pursuant to
§ 200-203.2F(5).
§ 200-203.1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-203.2
1:976
D. Maximum improvement coverage: 30%, except that it may be increased
to 40% pursuant to § 200-203.2F(5).
E. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories, but not to exceed 40 feet.
F. Additional standards for a planned retail village center.
(1) The planned retail village center shall be designed as a single
complex according to a master site development plan. All
properties within the B-4 Zone shall be planned as if they were
under unitary control to assure coordination of vehicular and
pedestrian linkage, potential common stormwater management
facilities and architecture and site development features. The part
of the overall plan covering properties not the subject of a
development application may be conceptual.
(2) Individual stores shall not exceed 11,000 square feet of floor area.
For sites of 13 acres or greater, one anchor-type retail store,
professional office or day-care facility can be up to 20,000 square
feet of floor area, provided the building facade conveys an exterior
appearance of being two or more smaller-scale stores or utilizes
projecting or recessed sections, breaks in the facade and roofline
or other architectural design techniques acceptable to the Planning
Board.
(3) All buildings shall be designed to convey a small-scale village
character. Buildings included in the planned retail village center
shall contain the following design elements:
(a) The center shall have a consistent architectural theme and
traditional village scale.
(b) Buildings shall be topped with pitched roofs with overhanging
eaves or with flat roofs with articulated parapets and cornices.
Materials on pitched roofs shall be slate (either natural or manmade),
shingle (either wood or asphalt composition), or metal
formed to resemble standing seams. Roof color shall be
traditional and compatible with retail and residential buildings
in the area. Fascias, dormers and gables shall be used to
provide visual interest and pedestrian scale.
(c) Exterior wall materials shall be predominantly brick with
limited use of stucco, clapboard, stone or decorative split face
block, of a shape, color and texture compatible with retail and
residential buildings in the area. Painted brick, concrete block,
T-111 plywood and metal buildings shall be prohibited.
(d) Service areas shall be screened and visually separated from
customer parking and pedestrian walkways.
§ 200-203.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-203.2
1:977
(e) Buildings shall be located as close as possible to encourage
pedestrian circulation and arranged to face each other where
possible.
(4) No more than four drive-through lanes may be permitted for a
development site of 18 acres or more, and no more than three
drive-through lanes may be permitted for a development site of up
to 18 acres. In either case, drive-through lanes shall be limited to
two buildings. The Planning Board may require that automatic
teller machines be placed on by-pass lanes if consistent with the
site circulation and good traffic management.
(5) The planned retail village shall be designed to maximize greenbelt
preservation. For every acre of land in the planned Township
greenbelt as shown in the conservation element of the Master Plan
that is not wetlands, wetlands buffer or floodplain, that could have
been but is not used for detention and that is undisturbed and
permanently preserved, 2,000 square feet of floor area and
pervious and impervious surfaces may be added above the
maximum permitted floor area ratio and maximum improvement
coverage up to a maximum of .10 FAR and 40% MIC for the entire
district. The acreage used in calculating such floor area and
improvement coverage bonus shall be limited to the actual acreage
the applicant needed for stormwater management facilities that
could have been installed in the greenbelt, but located elsewhere
on the site. [Amended 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-21]
(6) The planned retail village shall accommodate bicycle access by
providing a total of either one eight-foot wide shoulder or two fourfoot
wide shoulders, striped for bicycle use, on all internal drives,
and by installing bicycle racks at appropriate locations.
(7) A landscaped interior access boulevard shall be provided to
emphasize the entrance from Southfield Road.
(8) A fifty-foot minimum landscaped buffer along CR 571 and a twentyfive-
foot minimum landscaped buffer along Southfield Road shall be
provided and designed in conformance with §§ 200-227 and
200-228.
(9) A decorative corner treatment using brick pavers, landscaping, site
furnishings and architectural and landscape architectural features
shall be provided at the intersection of Southfield Road and CR
571.
(10) An internal pathway system shall be created to provide access to
public walkways along Southfield Road, directly linking the
planned retail village center to the existing residential
neighborhood. If off-site sidewalks are provided by the applicants
for this linkage, then the applicant's obligation for installing
sidewalks along CR 571 shall be limited to its site. The internal
§ 200-203.2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-203.2
1:978
§ 200-204. P Business District (professional office) use regulations.
pathway shall provide clearly defined crosswalks across driveways
within the planned retail village center.
(11) Exterior freestanding lighting fixtures shall not exceed the height
of proposed structures and in no case shall be greater than 18 feet
in height. The source of illumination shall be recessed and shielded
within the fixture itself and shall be consistent in character with the
design of the planned retail village center.
(12)Off-street parking areas servicing retail and other permitted uses
shall be interspersed to encourage use of one parking space for
trips to different uses in the center using the center's pedestrian
linkages. Recognizing the potential use of drive-through facilities
and the internal pedestrian pathways and dispersed parking that
should encourage shared parking, an off-street parking ratio of 1
space per 300 square feet is required.
(13) The applicant shall provide a comprehensive signage plan that
covers overall project identification, individual building/tenant
identification, traffic regulation, pedestrian crossings, street
identification and parking and directional instructions. No pylon
signs shall be permitted. Freestanding signage for the center shall
be a monument sign under 10 feet in height with a sign area of no
more than 50 square feet. Wall signage shall be limited to 5% of the
facade it is affixed to and located no higher than the sills of second
story windows or 18 feet, whichever is lower. No neon window
signage shall be permitted, but non-neon signs may be displayed
inside windows, provided they occupy no more than 15% of the
window where they are displayed. All signage must be consistent
with a small-scale village character.
(14) The applicant shall provide fencing or other suitable provisions for
security acceptable to the Planning Board where the zone abuts
municipally owned land to the extent wetlands regulations permit.
A. Permitted uses. In a P District, no building or premises shall be used
and no building shall be altered which is arranged, intended or
designed to be used except for one or more of the following uses, and all
such uses shall be subject to the performance standards set forth in
Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this chapter:
(1) Offices for professional, financial and administrative activities,
including sale of products customarily incidental to the uses
permitted in this subsection, such as post office and utility offices.
(2) All farm and agricultural uses permitted in residence districts in
accordance with the provisions set forth in Article XXXI of this Part
4.
§ 200-203.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-204
1:979
§ 200-205. Bulk and area regulations - P District.
The following shall be the standards for the P District:
§ 200-206. P-1 Planned Village Center District use regulations.
[Added 4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12]
(3) Accessory uses and accessory buildings, incidental to the above
uses located on the same lot and within the same zoning district
permitting the principal use.244
A. Minimum lot area: 50,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot frontage: 150 feet.
C. Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
D. Minimum lot depth: not applicable.
E. Minimum yards:
(1) Front yard: 50 feet.
(2) Rear yard: 15 feet.
(3) Side yard: There shall be two side yards with a minimum of 15 feet
each.
(4) Yards abutting residential districts: Except for one front yard, the
above yards shall be increased by 10 feet in those instances where
they abut, wholly or in part, a residential district or lot line.
F. Maximum FAR: .18. [Amended 6-28-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-17]
G. Maximum improvement coverage: 60%.
H. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
I. Applications for property abutting easements upon which the Master
Plan shows proposed bikeways shall include an eight-foot-wide bikeway
along any perimeter for which the Planning Board determines that a
bikeway in such location is appropriate to facilitate bicycle circulation
in the area. [Added 6-28-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-17]
A. Permitted uses. In a P-1 District, no building or premises shall be used
and no building altered which is arranged, intended or designed to be
used except for the following uses, and all such uses shall be subject to
the performance standards set forth in Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this
chapter:
244. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Conditional uses in the P District, added 10-15-1996
by Ord. No. 96-25, as amended 12-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-27, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 5-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-07.
§ 200-204 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-206
1:980
(1) Planned village center, served by public water and subject to the
requirements for planned developments stipulated in Article XXXI
of this Part 4, which includes the following uses:
(a) Offices for professional services:
(b) Personal service establishments (e.g., tailor, barbershop or
beauty salon):
(c) Restaurants, stores and shops for the conduct of any specialty
retail business, excluding a drive-in or curbside establishment.
(d) Branch banks and money access machines, provided that they
are part of and integrated within other principal structures of
the planned development. Drive-in banking facilities shall be
excluded.
(2) Veterinary clinics in existence as of January 1, 2000, and meeting
the following special requirements: [Added 5-1-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-08]
(a) Minimum lot area: 3 1/3 acres.
(b) The veterinary clinic shall be sited at least 150 feet from any
residential use or zoning district.
(c) Buildings housing animals shall be soundproofed to a
maximum transmission of 65 dB measured on the outside of
the exterior wall. Other soundproofing requirements may be
imposed by the board of jurisdiction, such as, but not limited to
the following: nonopening windows and forced-air ventilation,
solid core doors and sound-absorbent ceilings.
(d) Proper and ample ventilation of all animal areas in buildings
shall be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the board of
jurisdiction and shall meet all state licensing requirements.
(e) Animals may be kept overnight for medical reasons only.
(f) Animals shall be housed indoors and may be allowed outside
only for short periods under staff supervision for hygienic or
medical reasons. When they are outside, they shall be kept in a
completely enclosed area.
(g) A maximum percentage of floor area for overnight holding of
animals shall be limited to 30% of the gross floor area of the
veterinary clinic/hospital building.
(h) A landscape buffer at least 50 feet wide within the onehundred-
fifty-foot standard set forth in Subsection A(2)(b)
above, consisting of deciduous and evergreen plant material,
shall be provided sufficient to screen parking and structures
year round from all abutting side and rear yards. Such buffer
§ 200-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-206
1:981
may be waived by the board of jurisdiction where the applicant
demonstrates to the board's satisfaction that natural on-site
vegetation, existing topography or other existing conditions
provide acceptable screening from any surrounding residential
property. In such case, the board of jurisdiction shall require a
conservation easement to preserve this buffer screening.
(i) Pitched roofs, residential building materials (such as brick,
wood and clapboard) and other architectural elements shall be
employed to make the veterinary structure compatible with
residential building types.
(j) No cremation or disposal of dead animals is allowed on the
premises. Disposal of used and contaminated veterinary
medical supplies shall meet low-level hazardous waste disposal
requirements.
B. Conditional uses. In the P-1 District, the following use may be permitted
as a conditional use:
(1) Professional office conversions or redevelopment of structures
existing at the time of adoption of this section, subject to the
following:
(a) The conversion of an existing structure to offices for
professional services shall be permitted where all parking and
other requirements contained in this section are met. Retail
uses shall not be permitted.
(b) Such conversions shall be limited to the existing floor area of
the existing structure. Expansion or addition of an existing
structure is prohibited. Any redevelopment on lots contained
within the triangular land area bounded by Route 571,
Southfield Road and McGetrick Lane that have a lot acreage in
excess of 35,000 square feet may be permitted to increase the
permitted floor area ratio to .14, provided that, at a minimum,
three existing lots are consolidated into one redevelopment
parcel.
(c) No parking shall be permitted between Route 571 and a
principal structure.
(d) There shall be no minimum lot size on which a conversion may
be permitted to occur; provided, however, that no lot existing
at the time of adoption of the amendment on which the
conversion is proposed shall be further reduced in size.
(e) All lots and structures shall take access from an internal road
which intersects with a local street. Reservation of an access
easement between abutting lots to allow for construction of a
common drive shall be required. The access easement shall be
§ 200-206 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-206
1:982
§ 200-207. P-1 District bulk and area regulations. [Added 4-20-1990
by Ord. No. 90-12]
The following shall be the standards for the P-1 District:
included as part of total lot area for purposes of calculating the
required floor area ratio or maximum improvement coverage.
A. Minimum site area: 20 acres.
B. Minimum yards.
(1) Front yard: 50 feet.
(2) Rear yard: 20 feet.
(3) Side yard. There shall be two side yards with a minimum of 15 feet
each.
(4) Yards abutting residential districts: Except for one front yard, the
above yards shall be increased by 25 feet in those instances where
they abut, wholly or in part, a residential district or lot line.
(5) Yards abutting the perimeter of a planned village center:
Notwithstanding the above yard dimensions, all such perimeter
yard areas shall be 50 feet. Any yard that abuts an arterial road
shall also be 50 feet.
C. Maximum FAR: The maximum permitted FAR shall be 0.12.
D. Maximum improvement coverage: 50%.
E. Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories, but not to exceed 35 feet.
F. Additional standards for a planned village center.
(1) The planned village center shall be designed as a single complex
according to a comprehensive master site development plan. In
addition, internal site landscaping, building design and common
area maintenance guideline control standards shall be established.
(2) No more than 10% of the total floor area of the development can be
devoted to retail uses including bank and restaurant facilities, and
in no event can the area devoted to such uses total more than
18,000 square feet. The retail uses shall be designed primarily to
service the tenants of the planned village center.
(3) Individual stores, establishments or offices shall have a minimum
floor area of 800 square feet and a maximum floor area of 4,200
square feet. Within the planned village center, the average floor
area for all permitted uses shall not exceed 3,000 square feet,
except that one office structure within the development may
exceed the maximum floor area, but in no event shall the floor area
of such office exceed 12,000 square feet.
§ 200-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-207
1:983
(4) The distance, at the closest point, between any two buildings shall
not be less than 20 feet. In the case of two or more buildings being
connected through the use of a breezeway or similar feature, the
minimum distance between buildings may be reduced, but shall not
be less than 10 feet.
(5) Off-street parking areas servicing professional offices shall be
interspersed in convenient locations intended to accommodate a
small grouping of office structures. The minimum distance between
the edge of a parking lot or driveway and any building shall be 15
feet.
(6) There shall be a minimum width fifty-foot landscape berm along all
public streets. The berm may be included in the required yard
setbacks and shall be designed in conformance with §§ 200-227 and
200-228.
(7) A comprehensive signage plan shall be provided, which covers
overall project identification, individual building/tenant
identification, traffic regulations, pedestrian crossings, street
identification and parking and directional instructions. All signage
must be consistent with a small-scale village character. A signage
hierarchy shall be established governing the above signage
categories. There shall be only one identification sign permitted for
each building within the village center. Individual tenant signage
shall be incorporated within the permitted building identification
sign. In addition, all signage must be consistent with § 200-32 of
Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this chapter.
(8) All buildings shall be designed to convey a small-scale village
character. Buildings included in the planned village center should
contain the following design elements:
(a) Provide the greatest amount of floor area on the first floor of
two-story buildings.
(b) Provide shed or pitched roofs, dormers on the second floor and
other similar design features.
(c) Provide consistency in the architectural treatment of building
facades and diversity in the horizontal length of buildings
through introduction of offsets at irregular intervals along the
facade of a building.
(d) Provide a variety of building heights not to exceed 35 feet.
(9) Exterior freestanding lighting fixtures shall not exceed the height
of proposed structures and in no case shall be greater than 15 feet
in height. The source of illumination shall be recessed and shielded
within the fixture itself and shall be consistent in character with the
design of the planned village center.
§ 200-207 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-207
1:984
§ 200-207.1. P-3 Business District (professional offices, residences)
use regulations.245 [Added 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-20]
(10) An internal pathway system shall be created to provide access to all
buildings, open space areas and parking areas to be located within
a planned village center.
A. Permitted uses. In a P-3 District, no building or premises shall be used
and no building shall be created or altered which is arranged, intended
or designed to be used except for the following uses, and all such uses
shall be subject to the performance standards set forth in Part I, Site
Plan Review, and to § 200-243.2.
(1) Single-family residences existing as of January 1, 2005, in
accordance with the regulations of the R-1A District.
(2) Child-care centers, day camps, kindergartens, and preschools
subject to the regulations in § 200-156B(9).
(3) Home occupations as part of a continued existing residential use
subject to the criteria governing such home occupations in
§ 200-232.
(4) New construction or conversion of existing residential structures to
professional, medical or dental office uses, subject to the following
special requirements:
(a) Office uses shall be limited to the existing floor area of the
residential dwelling, except that office uses on parcels of four
acres or greater are permitted to enlarge or replace the
existing residential dwelling.
(b) At the time of site plan review, the applicant shall reserve
access easements for:
[1] A future common drive with an adjacent parcel at one side
yard.
[2] A future common drive at the opposite side yard if
necessary for adequate access and circulation.
[3] A rear yard cross-access easement to permit for
interconnection of parking areas if the lot configuration
makes such appropriate.
(c) No parking shall be permitted between the front and side
building line and the property line.
245. Editor's Note: Former § 200-207.1, Princeton Junction Overlay District, added 3-19-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-03, as amended, was repealed 3-23-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04. This
ordinance also renumbered former §§ 200-207.2 and 200-207.3 as §§ 200-207.1 and
200-207.2, respectively. See now Part 5, Princeton Junction Redevelopment Plan
Regulatory Provisions.
§ 200-207 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-207.1
1:985
§ 200-207.2. P-3 Business District bulk and area regulations.
[Added 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-20]
In the P-3 District, the following bulk and area regulations shall apply to all
uses.
(d) Rear and side yards shall be a minimum of 15 feet, with
adequate landscaping and/or screening to shield parking areas
from adjoining lots.
(e) There shall be no minimum lot size on which a conversion may
be permitted to occur; provided, however, no lot existing at the
time of adoption of this amendment on which a conversion is
proposed shall be further reduced in size.
(f) Architectural character shall be compatible with nearby
residences and office and commercial buildings in terms of
rooflines, building materials, and general aesthetics.
(g) Business or advertising signage for a converted or new
professional office use shall be limited to 12 square feet in total
for the lot.
(h) Where possible, residential access shall be from Rabbit Hill
Road.
(5) Mixed-use buildings containing a residential use and an additional
use permitted in this P-3 District.
(6) Accessory uses and accessory buildings incidental to the above
uses located on the same lot and within the same zoning district
permitting the principal use.
A. Minimum lot area: 50,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot frontage: 150 feet.
C. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
D. Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
E. Minimum yards.
(1) Front yard: 40 feet.
(2) Rear yard: 20 feet.
(3) Side yard: 15 feet.
F. Maximum floor area ratio for parcels of four to five acres shall be 0.08
and maximum floor area ratio for parcels greater than five acres shall
be 0.12. Section 200-238 shall not apply.
G. Maximum improvement cover: 40%.
§ 200-207.1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-207.2
1:986
H. Maximum building height: 2.5 stories, but no greater than 35 feet.
I. No disturbance shall occur within 200 feet of a stream bank.
§ 200-207.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-207.2
1:987

ARTICLE XXIX
Regulations for Research/Office/Manufacturing, Research/Office
and Research and Development Districts
[Amended 12-27-1982 by Ord. No. 82-54; 2-14-1983 by Ord. No.
83-02; 2-28-1983 by Ord. No. 83-07; 12-15-1986 by Ord. No. 86-35;
7-27-1987 by Ord. No. 87-20; 12-27-1988 by Ord. No. 88-51;
2-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-01; 8-12-1991 by Ord. No. 91-18;
2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 93-01; 6-20-1994 by Ord. No. 94-16;
5-30-1995 by Ord. No. 95-13; 10-15-1996 by Ord. No. 96-25;
4-28-1997 by Ord. No. 97-9; 12-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-27;
4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07; 5-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-07;
5-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-08; 4-22-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-09]
§ 200-208. General.
The regulations applicable to the industrial districts are as designated in
the following sections.
§ 200-209. ROM-1 Industrial District (research, office, limited
manufacturing) use regulations.
A. Permitted uses. In a ROM-1 District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used except for one or more of the following
uses, and all such uses shall be subject to the performance standards
set forth in Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this chapter:
(1) Research, testing, analytical and product development laboratories
and pilot plant facilities not involving the manufacturing, sale,
processing, warehousing, distribution or fabrication of material,
products or goods, except as incidental to the principal permitted
uses.
(2) General, corporate, administrative and professional offices.
(3) Data processing and computer centers.
(4) Limited manufacturing associated with such specialty industry
groupings as agriculture, aerospace, computers,
telecommunications, instrumentation, biomedical, medical,
pharmaceutical and electronics.
(5) All farm and agricultural uses permitted in residential districts in
accordance with provisions set forth in Article XXXI of this Part 4.
(6) Accessory uses and accessory buildings on the same lot and within
the same zoning district with and customarily incidental to any of
the permitted principal uses, which may include but shall not be
limited to:
(a) A restaurant or cafeteria primarily for supplying meals only to
employees and guests of the principal use; and newsstand, post
§ 200-208 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-209
1:989
office, automated banking facilities and similar conveniences
serving primarily employees and guests of the principal use,
provided that there shall be no external evidence of such use,
with the exception of directional signage.
(b) In-service training schools for employees.
(c) Custodial living quarters.
(d) Indoor and outdoor recreation facilities, provided that all such
accessory buildings and uses shall be planned as an integral
part of the principal use development.
(e) Overnight lodgings for visitors to any permitted principal uses,
provided that such facilities are not open to the general public.
(f) Assembly halls for meetings incidental to the business of the
principal use.
(g) Maintenance, utility and storage facilities incidental to the
principal use.
(h) Sale of products incidental or accessory to the principal use.
(i) Warehouse facilities and wholesale storage within a completely
enclosed building, the latter being incidental and accessory to
a permitted or conditional use.
(j) Branch banks, provided that they are located within the
principal building housing the offices of a banking organization
or financial institution. Drive-up banking facilities related to
the branch bank may be permitted, provided that such
facilities do not adversely impede or conflict with the safe
traffic flow required by the principal use on or off site.
(k) A helistop located a minimum of 1,000 feet from any street line
and 1,500 feet from any residential property line. Such helistop
shall also be subject to the New Jersey Department of
Transportation Division of Aviation approval, and its hours of
operation shall be limited to between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
(7) Building structures and uses owned and operated by the Township
of West Windsor.
(8) Mixed-use planned development, notwithstanding any other
requirements of this Part 4, except as changed herein, shall also be
subject to the following special requirements:
(a) Permitted uses:
[1] All those permitted and accessory uses within the ROM-1
District.
§ 200-209 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-209
1:990
[2] Research and business development incubator facilities,
providing flexible designed spaces that can accommodate
shared administrative, laboratory, computer and related
research support services, including limited
manufacturing facilities.
[3] Conference center.
[4] Hotel.
[5] Business support uses primarily intended to service the
mixed use park tenant needs, to include but not be limited
to health clubs, child-care facilities, convenience retail,
professional offices and service uses, branch banks
(excluding drive-through facilities), restaurants, package
shipment collection points, business libraries, travel
agencies, recreational facilities and similarly related
activities.
[6] Affordable housing as an integral part of a mixed use
planned development, subject to the following provisions:
[a] Dwelling unit type, bulk and density standards shall
be governed by the criteria contained in § 200-183,
regarding the R-4B District, of this Part 4.
[b] Affordable housing units shall comply with the
affordability criterion and other provisions governing
such units as contained in § 200-237, Application and
interpretation of low/moderate-income housing
provisions, of this Part 4.
[c] There shall be no more than one affordable housing
project located within any one mixed use planned
development.
[d] Location of housing within a planned development
shall be conducive to fostering a residential
neighborhood environment and shall be accessible to
the development's common open space and public
facilities or shopping services, if provided.
[e] Recreational uses shall be appropriately buffered from
nonresidential uses within the planned development
and shall comply with landscape buffer requirements
contained in Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan
Procedures, of this chapter. To the extent practicable,
residential uses shall be in proximity to other
residentially zoned areas of comparable dwelling unit
type and density which may be adjacent to the ROM-1
District. Accessibility to public transportation or
§ 200-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-209
1:991
provisions for such accessibility shall be provided
within the overall site design of such residential uses.
[f] Residential areas shall be provided with appropriate
active recreational facilities as governed by
recreational design criteria contained in § 200-36C of
Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this chapter.
(b) Minimum mixed use planned development area: 20 acres in
contiguous parcels not separated by an existing street and
served by public water and sewer systems.
(c) Minimum lot area within mixed use development: four acres.
(d) Minimum mixed use development and lot frontage: 300 feet.
(e) Mixed use development design, building arrangement, lot
width, frontage, depth and yards.
[1] The mixed use design shall be based on a planned
development concept providing for a unified Master Plan
governing the land use, circulation, open space and utility
needs of the development. Comprehensive design
guidelines for building and site layout as well as landscape
treatment shall be provided along with provision for
maintenance of common areas and spaces. The Plan shall
also contain a staging component to ensure the orderly
completion of the project in relationship to the capacity of
the existing or planned infrastructure to absorb a
particular stage or stages of the development. Such
staging component shall be consistent with any Township
timed growth control ordinance that may be in effect.
[2] Buildings, lots, yard sizes and dimensions may be freely
disposed and arranged and shall conform to the provisions
of Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this chapter, and subject to
the minimum standards below. The Planning Board may
reduce the following standards for setback requirements
from internal access roads of a mixed use development
based on an approved Master Plan for the planned
development, provided that such reduction does not create
undesirable visual and spatial impacts on abutting
properties or when viewed from the public right-of-way.
[a] Minimum setback from the street line: 100 feet for lots
located along a mixed use development internal
access road with a fifty-foot landscape area at the
street right-of-way; and 125 feet with a seventy-fivefoot
landscape area at the street right-of-way when
located along arterial roads as designated on the
Township's Circulation Master Plan.
§ 200-209 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-209
1:992
[b] Minimum setback from side and rear property lines:
40 feet, except where such yards are located on the
perimeter of the mixed use development, they shall be
50 feet. Yards that abut a residential zone district line
shall be increased according to the requirements set
forth within the bulk standards for the ROM-1 District.
[Amended 8-12-1991 by Ord. No. 91-18]
[c] Where more than one structure is located on a lot
within the planned development, the structures shall
be no closer to each other than 35 feet or the average
height of the structure, whichever is greater.
(f) Maximum building height and placement: six stories, but not
more than 75 feet, provided that four or more storied buildings
conform to the following standards, notwithstanding other
provisions of this article to the contrary:
[1] Four or more storied buildings shall be located only within
a band 1,800 feet in width as measured from the right-ofway
line of Route 1. An optional band width plan may be
proposed to achieve an average width across the entire
development tract of 1,800 feet, provided that such
optional plan does not exceed 2,000 feet at its widest when
measured parallel to the Route 1 right-of-way line.
However, where such an averaging plan is proposed, those
portions of a development tract abutting or opposite the
plan projection of a residential zone district shall be
located in a band width containing not more than 1,800
feet.
[2] The minimum setback requirements from arterial or
collector roads as designated in the Township's Circulation
Master Plan shall be increased an additional three feet of
setback for every one foot of building height which
exceeds 45 feet. [Amended 8-12-1991 by Ord. No.
91-18]
[3] Building heights may vary up to six stories, provided that
the maximum floor area of the stories above a threestoried
building shall not exceed 25% of the total FAR for
the planned development as may be approved on a
preliminary development application.
(g) Common open space design covenants, conditions and
restrictions: The organization, administration and financial
arrangements and guaranties governing the common open
space or other common facilities which may be a part of the
park shall be subject to the requirements set forth for planned
residential developments in Article XVII of this Part 4.
Furthermore, a document containing the design covenants,
§ 200-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-209
1:993
conditions and restrictions governing the internal
implementation of the mixed use Master Plan shall be prepared
by the applicant, addressing the following items: regulation
of operations and uses permitted within the planned
development, design guidelines for site improvements and
buildings, a design review procedure, restrictions during
construction and maintenance guidelines and standards
regarding common open space, on-site landscaping and all
paved surfaces.
(h) Development staging program.
[1] A program identifying the various stages of the
development, including the necessary on-site, off-site and
off-tract improvements to support each stage of the
development shall be prepared by an applicant. In
addition, the plan shall include:
[a] Adequate protection to ensure the completion of each
stage through the use of maintenance and
performance guaranties, covenants and other formal
agreements.
[b] Proof that the stage is substantially self-functioning
and self-sustaining with regard to access, utility
services, parking, common open space, all amenities
and other similar physical features. Further, each
stage shall be capable of occupancy, operation and
maintenance upon completion of construction and
development of that stage or, in the case of
subsequent stages, such subsequent stages shall
likewise be in harmony with those under construction
or in place. It is not intended that the creation of a
tract-wide stormwater management system or other
common elements be precluded by the above
individual stage self-sustaining requirement. If a
particular stage is dependent upon a common
detention system located in another stage, then
adequate assurances are to be provided so that its
construction supports the development stage for
which approval is being sought.
[c] Proof that each stage is properly related to every
other segment of the planned development and to the
community as a whole and to all necessary community
services which are available or which may be needed
to serve the planned development in the future.
[d] A description of the off-tract and off-site improvements
that would be necessitated by each respective stage
and proposed responsibility for construction of such
§ 200-209 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-209
1:994
improvements, including pro rata share computations,
according to the Township's Off-Tract Improvement
Ordinance, if appropriate. If the proposed
development is located within a designated
transportation improvement district (TID), then the
applicable regulations of that TID shall govern the
calculation of the pro rata share for off-tract road
improvements.
[2] The Planning Board in its review of the adequacy of the
length and timing of the staging program and the extent of
off-site and off-tract improvements associated with the
initial stage of development or a subsequent stage seeking
final approval shall be guided by any Township timed
growth control ordinance as well as traffic management or
trip reduction policies and/or ordinances that may be in
effect. [Amended 8-12-1991 by Ord. No. 91-18]
(i) Affordable housing incentives:
[1] At least 100 affordable housing units may be provided
within a mixed use planned development. For every unit
constructed on-site, an additional 550 square feet of
nonresidential use over and above the maximum
development program proposed by an applicant shall be
permitted. Such additional nonresidential square footage
shall not be utilized in the calculation of either off-tract
improvement obligations or pro rata contributions for offtract
infrastructure improvements.
[2] In lieu of on-site affordable housing construction,
dedication to the Township of a suitable area for such
housing construction by a Township designee of at least 15
acres for each 100 affordable units or portion thereof
within the planned development may be offered. For the
provision of such a site area, an additional 50 square feet
of nonresidential use over and above the maximum
development program proposed by an applicant shall be
permitted for each dwelling unit to be constructed. Such
additional nonresidential square footage development
potential shall not be utilized in the calculation of either
off-tract improvement obligations or pro rata contributions
for off-tract infrastructure improvements.
(9) Veterinary clinics meeting the following special requirements:
[Added 5-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-08]
(a) Minimum lot area: 3 1/3 acres.
(b) The veterinary clinic shall be sited at least 150 feet from any
residential use or zoning district.
§ 200-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-209
1:995
(c) Buildings housing animals shall be soundproofed to a
maximum transmission of 65 dB measured on the outside of
the exterior wall. Other soundproofing requirements may be
imposed by the board of jurisdiction, such as, but not limited to
the following: nonopening windows and forced-air ventilation,
solid core doors and sound-absorbent ceilings.
(d) Proper and ample ventilation of all animal areas in buildings
shall be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the board of
jurisdiction and shall meet all state licensing requirements.
(e) Animals may be kept overnight for medical reasons only.
(f) Animals shall be housed indoors and may be allowed outside
only for short periods under staff supervision for hygienic or
medical reasons. When they are outside, they shall be kept in a
completely enclosed area.
(g) A maximum percentage of floor area for overnight holding of
animals shall be limited to 30% of the gross floor area of the
veterinary clinic/hospital building.
(h) A landscape buffer at least 50 feet wide within the onehundred-
fifty-foot standard set forth in Subsection A(9)(b)
above, consisting of deciduous and evergreen plant material,
shall be provided sufficient to screen parking and structures
year round from all abutting side and rear yards. Such buffer
may be waived by the board of jurisdiction where the applicant
demonstrates to the board's satisfaction that natural on-site
vegetation, existing topography, or other existing conditions
provide acceptable screening from any surrounding residential
property. In such case, the board of jurisdiction shall require a
conservation easement to preserve this buffer screening.
(i) Where the veterinary clinic abuts residential uses or
residentially zoned land, pitched roofs, residential building
materials (such as brick, wood and clapboard) and other
architectural elements shall be employed to make the
veterinary clinic compatible with residential building types.
(j) No cremation or disposal of dead animals is allowed on the
premises. Disposal of used and contaminated veterinary
medical supplies shall meet low-level hazardous waste disposal
requirements.
B. Conditional uses in ROM-1 District. In a ROM-1 District, the following
uses may be permitted as conditional uses:
(1) Transmission lines, transmitting and receiving antennae or aerials
subject to the special requirements contained in Article XXVIII,
§ 200-156B, of this Part 4.
§ 200-209 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-209
1:996
§ 200-210. ROM-1 District bulk and area regulations. [Amended
2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 93-01]
The following shall be the standards for the ROM-1 District:
(2) Public utilities (e.g., electric, gas, telephone, water, sewer, etc.)
substation, electric and gas facilities subject to the requirements
contained in Article XXVIII, § 200-156B, of this Part 4, except those
utilities which are necessary to service the permitted uses.246
(3) Billboards in accordance with the requirements of § 200-243.1.
Notwithstanding any ordinance to the contrary, this use shall not be
permitted in any other ROM Zone except ROM-1 Zone. [Added
10-15-1996 by Ord. No. 96-25; amended 12-15-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-27; 5-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-07]
A. Minimum lot area: seven acres.
B. Minimum lot frontage: 350 feet.
C. Minimum lot width: 400 feet.
D. Minimum lot depth: not applicable.
E. Minimum yards:
(1) Front yard: 125 feet with a seventy-five-foot landscape area at the
street right-of-way.
(2) Rear yard: 40 feet.
(3) Side yards: There shall be two side yards with a minimum of 40 feet
each.
(4) Yards abutting residential districts. [Amended 8-12-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-18]
(a) The above yards, including the landscape transition buffer and
screen requirements, shall be increased by 35 feet in those
instances where they abut, in whole or in part, a residential
zone district or lot line.
(b) Furthermore, in those instances involving greater than a twostory
building or structure with an associated parking facility
for both nonresidential and residential uses, the minimum
setbacks as measured to the nearest residential district zone
line shall be as set forth below. These increased setback
requirements shall apply only to a development application
which contains a planned commercial development.
246. Editor's Note: Original Subsection 22-7.1.2c, as amended 8-12-1991 by Ord. No. 91-18,
which immediately followed this subsection and dealt with retail commons, was deleted by
Ord. No. 96-1.
§ 200-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-210
1:997
§ 200-211. ROM-2 Industrial District (research, office, limited
manufacturing) use regulations.
[1] For buildings and structures the minimum setback shall be
500 feet.
[2] For pervious and impervious surfaces the minimum
setback shall be 300 feet. [Amended 9-15-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-21]
(c) The Planning Board may reduce these setback standards, but
in no event shall the setback be reduced by more than 50%,
upon a satisfactory showing by the applicant that, through the
provision of berming and landscaping, or in combination with
building site placement, a complete visual screen of the
nonresidential uses is achieved when viewed from existing
grade level at an adjacent residential property line. The
following criteria shall be used as a guide by the Planning
Board in its review of a request to relax the increased setback
standards:
[1] The height of berm and its associated landscaping,
including the density of plant material on the berm, shall
be increased above the minimum buffer requirements
established by the Township's landscape standards
contained in § 200-91P of Part 3, Subdivision and Site Plan
Procedures, of this chapter. Such increase in berm height
or plant materials or combinations thereof shall be
provided so that the proposed structure is not visible
above the proposed buffer at the reduced setback line
when viewed from existing grade level at the adjacent
residential property line. An effective visual buffer shall be
established within two growing seasons of its initial
installation.
[2] Grading and planting plans, together with site section
drawings showing lines of sight from a residential property
line, shall be provided to demonstrate a site plan's
conformance with these requirements.
F. Maximum FAR: The maximum permitted FAR shall be allowed to vary
according to the following schedule:
Use in Maximum FAR
One-story buildings 0.22
Multistory buildings 0.30
G. Maximum improvement coverage: 50%.
H. Maximum building height: three stories, but not more than 45 feet.
§ 200-210 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-211
1:998
A. Permitted uses: In an ROM-2 District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used except for one or more of the following
uses, and all such uses shall be subject to the performance standards
set forth in Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this chapter.
(1) Research, testing, analytical and product development laboratories
not involving the manufacturing, sale, processing, warehousing,
distribution or fabrication of material, products or goods, except as
incidental to the principal permitted uses.
(2) General, corporate, administrative and professional offices.
(3) Computer centers.
(4) Limited manufacturing.
(5) Publishing houses and commercial printing plants.
(6) Commercial recreation facilities within an existing or former
warehouse building. [Added 8-25-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-16247]
(7) Research offices and limited manufacturing park developments,
notwithstanding any other requirements of this Part 4, shall be
subject to those special requirements as listed for ROM-1 Park
District, except as changed herein:
(a) Minimum park area: six acres in contiguous parcels.
(b) Minimum lot area: three acres.
(c) Minimum park and lot frontage: 250 feet.
(d) Maximum building height and placement. The minimum
setback requirements from arterial or collector roads as
designated in the Township's circulation Master Plan or from
the perimeter boundary of a planned park development as
established in this section shall be increased an additional
three feet of setback for every one foot of building height
which exceeds 45 feet, except where the perimeter boundary
abuts a residence district, in which case the setback shall be
increased an additional four feet for every one foot of building
height which exceeds 45 feet. [Amended 12-27-1988 by Ord.
No. 88-51]
(e) Building arrangement, lot width, frontage, depth and yards:
Where a building exceeds 45 feet in height and the lot on which
it is located abuts a residential zone, a landscape berm and
buffer being a minimum eight feet in height and containing a
continuous planting of evergreen trees on top of the berm
247. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsection
A(6) through (11) as Subsection A(7) through (12), respectively.
§ 200-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-211
1:999
including understory shrubs to provide an effective screening
of residences from the nonresidential use shall be provided.
Landscape design criteria for buffers, as contained in the Part
1, Site Plan Review, of this chapter, shall serve as a guide
for the design of the landscape berm and buffer. [Added
12-27-1988 by Ord. No. 88-51]
(8) All farm and agricultural uses permitted in residential districts in
accordance with provisions set forth in Article XXXI of this Part 4.
(9) Accessory uses and accessory buildings on the same lot and within
the same zoning district with and customarily incidental to any of
the permitted principal uses, which may include but shall not be
limited to:
(a) A restaurant or cafeteria primarily for supplying meals only to
employees and guests of the principal use.
(b) In-service training schools for employees.
(c) Custodial living quarters.
(d) Indoor and outdoor recreation facilities, provided that all such
accessory buildings and uses shall be planned as an integral
part of the principal use development.
(e) Assembly halls for meetings incidental to the business of the
principal use.
(f) Maintenance, utility and storage facilities incidental to the
principal use.
(10) Building structures and uses owned or operated by the Township of
West Windsor for municipal purposes.
(11) Conversion of existing residential structures to office uses, subject
to the following special requirements: [Added 12-15-1986 by
Ord. No. 86-35]
(a) Such conversions shall be limited to the existing floor area of
the residential dwelling. Addition to or expansion of the
existing structure is prohibited.
(b) At the time of site plan review, placement of an access drive
shall be determined so as to allow for a future common drive
with an adjacent residential parcel at one side yard. In
addition, reservation of an access easement to allow for such a
possibility at the opposite side yard may be required. Similarly,
depending on lot configuration, rear yard cross-easements to
permit for interconnection of parking areas may be required.
(c) No parking shall be permitted in the existing front yard of the
dwelling.
§ 200-211 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-211
1:1000
(d) Rear and side yards shall be a minimum of 15 feet, with
adequate landscaping and/or screening to shield parking areas
from adjoining lots.
(e) There shall be no minimum lot size on which a conversion may
be permitted to occur; provided, however, no lot existing at the
time of adoption of this amendment, on which a conversion is
proposed, shall be further reduced in size. [Added 7-27-1987
by Ord. No. 87-20]
(f) Any vacant lots with frontage on Alexander Road and abutting
existing lots containing a residential dwelling may be
developed for professional office use subject to the following
standards: [Added 7-27-1987 by Ord. No. 87-20]
[1] Maximum FAR: 0.08.
[2] Maximum MIC: 0.50.
[3] Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
[4] Minimum yards:
[a] Front yard: 40 feet.
[b] Rear yard: 10 feet.
[c] Side yard: There shall be two side yards with a
minimum of 15 feet each.
(g) Business or advertising signage for a converted or new
professional office use shall be limited to 12 square feet in total
for the lot. [Added 7-27-1987 by Ord. No. 87-20]
(h) Home occupations as part of a continued existing residential
use may occur subject to the criteria governing such home
occupations as contained in § 200-232 of this Part 4. [Added
7-27-1987 by Ord. No. 87-20]
(12) Veterinary clinics in existence as of January 1, 2000, and meeting
the following special requirements: [Added 5-1-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-08]
(a) Minimum lot area: 3 1/3 acres.
(b) The veterinary clinic shall be sited at least 150 feet from any
residential use or zoning district.
(c) Buildings housing animals shall be soundproofed to a
maximum transmission of 65 dB measured on the outside of
the exterior wall. Other soundproofing requirements may be
imposed by the board of jurisdiction, such as, but not limited to
the following: non-opening windows and forced-air ventilation,
solid core doors and sound-absorbent ceilings.
§ 200-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-211
1:1001
(d) Proper and ample ventilation of all animal areas in buildings
shall be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the board of
jurisdiction and shall meet all state licensing requirements.
(e) Animals may be kept overnight for medical reasons only.
(f) Animals shall be housed indoors and may be allowed outside
only for short periods under staff supervision for hygienic or
medical reasons. When they are outside, they shall be kept in a
completely enclosed area.
(g) A maximum percentage of floor area for overnight holding of
animals shall be limited to 30% of the gross floor area of the
veterinary clinic/hospital building.
(h) The building setback shall be twice that of the zone: 100 feet
for front yard and 60 feet for individual side yards and rear
yard.
(i) A landscape buffer at least 50 feet wide within the onehundred-
fifty-foot standard set forth in Subsection A(11)
above, consisting of deciduous and evergreen plant material,
shall be provided sufficient to screen parking and structures
year round from all abutting side and rear yards. Such buffer
may be waived by the board of jurisdiction where the applicant
demonstrates to the board's satisfaction that natural on-site
vegetation, existing topography or other existing conditions
provide acceptable screening from any surrounding residential
property. In such case, the board of jurisdiction shall require a
conservation easement to preserve this buffer screening.
(j) No cremation or disposal of dead animals is allowed on the
premises. Disposal of used and contaminated veterinary
medical supplies shall meet low-level hazardous waste disposal
requirements.
B. Conditional uses in ROM-2 District. In an ROM-2 District, the following
uses may be permitted as conditional uses:
(1) Transmission lines, transmitting and receiving antennae or aerials,
subject to the special requirements contained in Article XXVIII,
§ 200-156B, of this Part 4.
(2) Public utilities (e.g., electric, gas, telephone, water, sewer, etc.)
substation, electric and gas facilities, subject to the requirements
contained in Article XXVIII, § 200-156B, of this Part 4.
(3) Hotel/motel, subject to the following special requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: four acres.
(b) Minimum lot width: 300 feet.
§ 200-211 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-211
1:1002
(c) Minimum lot frontage: 300 feet.
(d) Minimum yards: Shall be the same as yard requirements
established for a ROM-1 Park Development.
(e) Maximum FAR: 0.30.
(f) Maximum improvement coverage: 50%.
(g) Maximum building height: four stories, but not more than 45
feet.
(h) Other conditions:
[1] Any motel or hotel that may be constructed on a lot must
contain a minimum of at least 20 units of accommodation,
exclusive of any permanent, on-site superintendent's living
quarters.
[2] Each unit of accommodation shall contain a minimum floor
area of 250 square feet.
(4) Warehouse and wholesale storage facilities in conformity with the
provisions of Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this chapter, and subject to
the following minimum standards:
(a) Such facilities shall be within completely enclosed buildings.
(b) Such facilities shall not be freight forwarding or transshipping
terminals.
(c) No loading dock or service area may be on or visible from the
lot line or any street frontage. Provision for handling all freight
shall be on those sides of any building which do not face on any
street or proposed streets.
(d) No accessory use shall be construed to permit open storage of
materials or goods on the lot.
(e) Trucking services at permitted facilities shall be limited in
hours of operation to between 5:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
(f) Rear and side property yards shall be landscaped so as to
provide an effective screen, at time of planting, to obscure
from view at ground level the permitted use from adjoining
primary uses of a dissimilar nature.
(g) The exterior design of all permitted buildings on lots which
abut a residence district or any street opposite land in a
residence district shall be in harmony with the general
character of the residential neighborhood.
§ 200-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-211
1:1003
§ 200-212. ROM-2 District bulk and area regulations.
The following shall be the standards for the ROM-2 District:
(5) Nursing homes, provided that adequate safeguards to assure the
security and safety of the patients are provided. [Added
6-20-1994 by Ord. No. 94-16]
A. Minimum lot area: five acres.
B. Minimum lot frontage: 300 feet.
C. Minimum lot width: 350 feet.
D. Minimum lot depth: not applicable.
E. Minimum yards:
(1) Front yard: 125 feet, with a seventy-five-foot landscaping area at
the street right-of-way.
(2) Rear yard: 40 feet.
(3) Side yard: There shall be two side yards with a minimum of 40 feet
each.
(4) Yards abutting residential districts: The above yard including the
landscape transition buffer and screen requirements shall be
increased by 20 feet in those instances where they abut, in whole or
in part, a residential district or lot line.
F. Maximum FAR: The maximum permitted FAR shall be allowed to vary
according to the following schedule, depending on the intended use and
building height: [Amended 6-20-1994 by Ord. No. 94-16]
Primarily Research/Office
Uses1
Maximum FAR
In one-story buildings 0.22
In multistory buildings 0.30
Primarily1Manufacturing/
Warehousing Uses and
Nursing Homes
Maximum FAR
In one-story buildings 0.30
In multistory buildings 0.40
NOTE:
1"Primarily" shall mean more than 80% of total building use on a lot.
The maximum FAR shall be adjusted proportionately where less than
80% of the designated building uses are proposed for a lot.
§ 200-211 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-212
1:1004
§ 200-213. ROM-3 Industrial District (research, office, limited
manufacturing) use regulations.
§ 200-214. ROM-3 District bulk and area regulations.
The following shall be the standards for the ROM-3 District:
G. Maximum improvement coverage: 50%.
H. Maximum building height: three stories, but not to exceed 45 feet.
A. Permitted uses. In an ROM-3 District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used except for one or more of the following
uses, and all such uses shall be subject to the performance standards
set forth in Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this chapter.
(1) All those permitted uses as listed for an ROM-2 District.
(2) Research-office. Limited manufacturing park developments,
notwithstanding any other requirements of this chapter, shall be
subject to those special requirements as listed herein for a ROM-1
Park District, except as changed herein:
(a) Minimum park area: 12 acres in contiguous parcels.
(b) Minimum lot area: three acres.
(c) Minimum park and lot frontage: 250 feet.
(d) Maximum building height: three stories, but not to exceed 45
feet. [Added 12-27-1982 by Ord. No. 82-54]
B. Conditional uses: In an ROM-3 District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses:
(1) Any use permitted by condition in an ROM-2 District, with the
exception of §§ 200-212B(3) and 200-212B(4).
A. Minimum lot area: five acres.
B. Minimum lot frontage: 300 feet.
C. Minimum lot width: 350 feet.
D. Minimum lot depth: not applicable.
E. Minimum yards:
(1) Front yard: 125 feet, with a seventy-five-foot landscape area at the
street right-of-way.
(2) Rear yard: 40 feet.
§ 200-212 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-214
1:1005
§ 200-215. ROM-4 Industrial District (research, office, limited
manufacturing) use regulations.
(3) Side yard: There shall be two side yards with a minimum of 40 feet
each.
(4) Yards abutting residential districts. The above yard, including the
landscape transition buffer and screen requirements, shall be
increased by 20 feet in those instances where they abut, in whole or
in part, a residential district or lot line.
F. Maximum FAR: The maximum permitted FAR shall be allowed to vary
according to the following schedule, depending on the intended use and
building height:
Primarily1 Research/Office
Uses1
Maximum FAR
In one-story buildings 0.22
In multistory buildings 0.30
Primarily1 Manufacturing/
Warehousing Uses1
Maximum FAR
In one-story buildings 0.30
In multistory buildings 0.40
NOTE:
1"Primarily" shall mean more than 80% of total building use on a lot.
The maximum FAR shall be adjusted proportionately where less than
80% of the designated building uses are proposed for a lot.
G. Maximum improvement coverage: 50%, but not to exceed 45 feet.
[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
H. Maximum building height: three stories, but not to exceed 45 feet.
A. Permitted uses. In an ROM-4 District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used except for one or more of the following
uses, and all such uses shall be subject to the performance standards
set forth in Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this chapter:
(1) Research, testing, analytical and product development laboratories
not involving the manufacturing, sale, processing, warehousing,
distribution or fabrication of material, products or goods, except as
incidental to the principal permitted uses.
(2) General, corporate, administrative and professional offices.
(3) Computer centers.
§ 200-214 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-215
1:1006
§ 200-216. ROM-4 District bulk and area regulations.
The following shall be the standards for the ROM-4 District:
(4) Commercial recreation facilities within an existing or former
warehouse building. [Added 8-25-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-16248]
(5) All farm and agricultural uses permitted in residential districts in
accordance with provisions set forth in Article XXXI of this Part 4.
(6) Accessory uses and accessory buildings on the same lot and within
the same zoning district with and customarily incidental to any of
the permitted principal uses, which may include but may not be
limited to:
(a) A restaurant or cafeteria primarily for supplying meals only to
employees and guests of the principal use.
(b) In-service training schools for employees.
(c) Custodial living quarters.
(d) Indoor and outdoor recreation facilities, provided that all such
accessory buildings and uses shall be planned as an integral
part of the principal use development.
(e) Assembly halls for meetings incidental to the business of the
principal use.
(f) Maintenance, utility and storage facilities incidental to the
principal use, provided that they are in fully enclosed
buildings.
(7) Building structures and uses owned or operated by the Township of
West Windsor.
(8) Limited manufacturing.
B. Conditional uses. In an ROM-4 District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses:
(1) Transmission lines, transmitting and receiving antennas or aerials
subject to the special requirements contained in Article XXVIII,
§ 200-156B, of this Part 4.
(2) Public utilities (e.g., electric, gas, telephone, water, sewer, etc.)
substation, electric and gas facilities, subject to the requirements
contained in Article XXVIII, § 200-156B, of this Part 4.249
248. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsection
A(4) through (7) as Subsection A(5) through (8), respectively.
249. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), concerning billboards, added 10-15-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-25, as amended 12-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-27, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 5-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-07.
§ 200-215 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-216
1:1007
§ 200-217. (Reserved)250
§ 200-218. RO Industrial District (research, office) use regulations.
A. Minimum lot area: five acres.
B. Minimum lot frontage: 300 feet.
C. Minimum lot width: 350 feet.
D. Minimum lot depth: not applicable.
E. Minimum yards:
(1) Front yard: 125 feet, with a seventy-five-foot landscape area at the
street right-of-way.
(2) Rear yard: 40 feet.
(3) Side yard. There shall be two side yards with a minimum of 40 feet
each.
(4) Yards abutting residential districts. The above yards, including the
landscape transition buffer and screen requirements, shall be
increased by 20 feet in those instances where they abut, in whole or
in part, a residential district or lot line.
F. Maximum FAR. The maximum permitted FAR shall be allowed to vary
according to the following schedule, depending on the intended use and
building height:
Uses in Maximum FAR
One-story buildings 0.22
Multistory buildings 0.30
G. Maximum improvement coverage: 50%.
H. Maximum building height: three stories, but not to exceed 45 feet.
A. Permitted uses. In an RO District, no building or premises shall be used
and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged, intended
or designed to be used except for one or more of the following uses, and
all such uses shall be subject to the performance standards set forth in
Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this chapter:
(1) Research, testing and analytical laboratories.
(2) General, corporate, administrative and professional offices.
250. Editor’s Note: Former § 200-217, ROM-5 Industrial District (research, office, limited
manufacturing) use, bulk and area regulations, was repealed 3-18-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-06.
§ 200-216 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-218
1:1008
§ 200-219. RO District bulk and area regulations.
The following shall be the standards for the RO District:
(3) Municipal center activities, to include building structures and uses
owned or operated by the Township of West Windsor for municipal
purposes, indoor and outdoor public recreation uses, libraries,
community theaters, other cultural activities and associated public
or semipublic uses.
(4) All farm and agricultural uses permitted in residential districts in
accordance with provisions set forth in Article XXXI of this Part 4.
(5) Accessory uses and accessory buildings incidental to the above
uses located on the same lot and within the same zoning district
permitting the principal use.
B. Conditional uses. In an RO District, the following uses may be permitted
as conditional uses:
(1) Transmission lines transmitting and receiving antennae or aerials,
subject to the special requirements contained in Article XXVIII,
§ 200-156B, of this Part 4.
(2) Public utilities (e.g., electric, gas, telephone, water, sewer, etc.)
substation, electric and gas facilities, subject to the requirements
contained in Article XXVIII, § 200-156, of this Part 4.251
A. Minimum lot area: five acres.
B. Minimum lot frontage: 300 feet.
C. Minimum lot width: 350 feet.
D. Minimum lot depth: not applicable.
E. Minimum yards:
(1) Front yard: 125 feet, with a seventy-five-foot landscape area at the
street right-of-way.
(2) Rear yard: 40 feet.
(3) Side yard. There shall be two side yards with a minimum of 40 feet
each.
(4) Yards abutting residential districts. The above yards, including the
landscape transition buffer and screen requirements, shall be
increased by 20 feet in those instances where they abut, in whole or
in part, a residential district or lot line.
251. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(3), concerning billboards, added 10-15-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-25, as amended 12-15-1997 by Ord. No. 97-27, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 5-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-07.
§ 200-218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-219
1:1009
§ 200-219.1. R&D Research and Development (research, office) use
regulations.
§ 200-219.2. R&D District bulk and area regulations.
The following shall be the standards for the R&D District:
F. Maximum FAR. The maximum permitted FAR shall be allowed to vary
according to the following schedule, depending on the intended use and
building height:
Uses in Maximum FAR
One-story buildings 0.22
Multistory buildings 0.30
G. Maximum improvement coverage: 50%.
H. Maximum building height: three stories, but not to exceed 45 feet.
A. Permitted uses. In a R&D District, no building or premises shall be used
and no building shall be created or altered which is arranged, intended
or designated to be used except for one or more of the following uses,
and all such uses shall be subject to the performance standards set
forth in Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this chapter:
(1) Mixed used planned developments as set forth in the ROM-1
District, provided that no less than 30% of the floor area be low
traffic-generating uses as set forth in § 200-219.2G(3). The
development in the R&D District existing at the time of adoption of
this section shall be considered to be a mixed use planned
development. The square footage of business support uses
permitted in § 200-209A(8)(a)[5] shall not exceed four percent of
the total square footage in the mixed use planned development.
Business support uses other than day-care centers shall be
incorporated into buildings with other uses and may not be in
freestanding buildings.
(2) Outdoor athletic facilities open to the general public at no charge.
B. Conditional uses. In a R&D District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses:
(1) All those conditional uses permitted in the ROM-l District.
A. Minimum tract area: the R&D District shall be developed in accordance
with a comprehensive plan, and the minimum tract area shall be the
entirety of the district.
B. Standards for lots within the mixed use planned development: none.
C. Development design, building arrangement, lot width, depth and yards
shall be the same as the standards for a mixed use planned
§ 200-219 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-219.2
1:1010
development in the ROM-1 District, except as modified by
§ 200-219.2G(4)(a).
D. Maximum building height and placement standards shall be the same
as the standards for a mixed use planned development in the ROM-1
District.
E. Common open space design covenants, conditions and restrictions shall
be the same as the standards for a mixed use planned development in
the ROM-1 District.
F. There shall be a development staging program complying with the
standards therefor for a mixed use planned development in the ROM-1
District and with § 200-219.2G(5)(b) and (c).
G. Permitted floor area and parking spaces; minimum percentage of low
traffic-generating uses; provision of transit-friendly design; installation
of special roadway project and shuttle service; and development
phasing with respect thereto.
(1) Maximum FAR. The maximum floor area permitted is .21 and shall
be calculated on a district-wide basis.
(2) Parking spaces. The applicant shall provide no more than one
parking space per 500 square feet of research uses, 445 square
feet of hotel and conference uses, and 300 square feet for all other
uses. The applicant shall not create any more spaces through
restriping or other means.
(3) Low traffic-generating uses.
(a) The minimum floor area devoted to low traffic-generating uses
shall be 30%.
(b) The following shall be considered low traffic-generating uses:
[1] Research and research laboratories, provided that the
facilities do not generate a need for more than one parking
space per 500 square feet of floor area.
[2] Hotels and conference centers.
(4) Transit-friendly design.
(a) The development shall be designed in a transit-friendly manner
in accordance with the following design elements and shall
show a transit way consistent therewith, except that such
elements shall be superceded by any transit-friendly design
criteria specific to this transit way adopted by a higher level
jurisdiction having authority over such transit way:
[1] All of the building main entrances shall be within 1,000
feet, measured by using the sidewalk system, of a transit
stop.
§ 200-219.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-219.2
1:1011
[2] Transit stops within the developed site area shall be
spaced 1,000 feet to 2,000 feet apart.
[3] Right-of-way width dedicated for transit shall
accommodate two one-way directional track ways with
boarding areas on each side at each transit stop.
[4] Transit stops shall be designed to include amenities in the
form of shelters with benches, lighting, and directional
signage and shall be proximate to such business support
uses as are included in the development.
[5] Site design shall provide the shortest and most convenient
distances from transit stops to the main entrances of the
buildings on site.
[6] The following standards shall be relaxed when the
applicant provides a transit-friendly design.
[a] Minimum spacing between buildings:
[i] The requirement in § 200-209A(8)(e)[2][c] of 35
feet between buildings or average height of the
structures, whichever is greater, may be reduced
to the standards set forth in § 200-30A(1) and (4)
and B.
[ii] The requirement in § 200-30A(5) of a minimum
window wall to window wall distance of 75 feet
may be reduced to 50 feet.
[b] Minimum spacing between buildings and parking:
[i] The requirement in § 200-30A(3) of a twelve-foot
minimum between any building face and parking
area may be reduced to 10 feet.
[c] Minimum spacing between buildings and parking and
on-site roadways:
[i] The requirement in § 200-209A(8)(e)[2][a] of 100
feet from an internal road right-of-way with a fiftyfoot
landscape area may be reduced to 20 feet
with no required landscape area.
(b) The applicant shall dedicate the right-of-way for the proposed
light rapid transit, bus rapid transit, or other transit way to the
Township, provided its layout and location have been approved
by the Planning Board. Such dedication shall take place at such
time as the Township Council requires in order for the fixed
guideway transit or other transit system in the right-of-way to
operate, but no earlier than when the alignment of the roadway
improvement project described in the Circulation Element of
§ 200-219.2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-219.2
1:1012
the Master Plan as the Millstone By-Pass or its functional
equivalent, as defined in § 200-219.2G(5)(a), has been set.
(5) Provision of special roadway improvement and shuttle service and
phasing with respect thereto.
(a) The Millstone By-Pass as described in the Circulation Element
of the Master Plan or its functional equivalent shall be shown
on any application in the R&D District. Such functional
equivalent shall be acceptable to the Planning Board and shall
(b) Be a public street;
(c) Have the same right-of-way width as is shown on the
Circulation Element for the Millstone By-Pass; and
(d) Be located on the R&D District tract, but not in close proximity
to the adjoining residences.
(e) The R&D District shall not contain more than 1,200,000 square
feet of floor area before the special project set forth in
§ 200-219.2G(5)(a) is constructed.
(f) The R&D District shall not contain more than 1,200,000 square
feet of floor area before the developer paves a portion of the
approved transit way right-of-way or such other right-of-way as
is approved on a temporary basis by the Planning Board to
support a shuttle bus service to the Princeton Junction train
station and commences a shuttle bus service using such line.
The service's operation shall be acceptable to Township
Council and the Office of Community Development.
(6) Agreement with Township. The applicant and owner shall enter into
an agreement with the Township in recordable form and binding on
their successors-in-title. It shall include:
(a) A statement of the floor area being used for low trafficgenerating
uses and the nature of such uses.
(b) A provision that the low traffic-generating use space cannot be
used for other than the approved uses when doing so results in
less than 30 percent of the floor area being devoted to low
traffic-generating uses except upon a determination by the
Planning Board that a proposal made after the original
approval, including limiting use to a portion of the space,
contains only permitted uses and will not generate more peak
hour traffic than did the approved space.
(c) A provision that makes the agreement a covenant running with
the land.
H. Maximum improvement coverage: 45%.
§ 200-219.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-219.3
1:1013
§ 200-219.3. ROR Industrial District (research, office, recreation).
[Added 6-2-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-16]
A. Permitted uses. In an ROR District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used except for one or more of the following
uses, and all such uses shall be subject to the performance standards
set forth in Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this chapter:
(1) All the permitted and accessory uses permitted in the ROM-1
District by § 200-209A, except that the limited manufacturing uses
set forth in § 200-209A(4) shall not be permitted. Additionally, the
limited manufacturing uses set forth in portions of
§ 200-209A(8)(a)[1] and [2] shall not be permitted.
(2) Private or municipal cultural and social community campuses,
consisting of one or multiple buildings and facilities (all of which
may be, but do not have to be, located on one lot). Cultural and
social community campuses may include one or more of the
following independent uses:
(a) Gymnasiums;
(b) Indoor and outdoor swimming pools;
(c) Fitness centers;
(d) Athletic fields and appropriate appurtenances;
(e) Indoor and outdoor tennis courts;
(f) Indoor and outdoor basketball courts;
(g) Playgrounds;
(h) Year-round sports programs;
(i) Summer day camps;
(j) Early childhood centers (daycare, nursery school) conforming
to state and federal standards;
(k) Primary and/or secondary schools conforming to the standards
set forth in § 200-156B(3), which incorporates
§ 200-156B(2)(a) and (b) by reference, except that in the case
of cultural and social community campuses in the ROR
Industrial District, the words "lot line" in § 200-156B(2)(b)
shall be deemed to be "tract line;"
(l) Auditoriums;
(m) Conference and meeting facilities;
(n) Classrooms;
§ 200-219.3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-219.3
1:1014
§ 200-219.4. ROR District, bulk, area, and other regulations.
[Added 6-2-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-16]
(o) Senior citizen centers;
(p) Youth centers;
(q) Places of worship and associated parish houses and religious
school buildings;
(r) General and professional offices for recreational, religious,
social, social service and/or cultural organizations; and
(s) Uses customarily incidental to any of the primary principal
uses, including lighting, rest rooms, storage, pavilions,
picnicking facilities, and concession stands.
(3) Places of worship and associated parish houses and religious
school buildings and other uses customarily incidental thereto that
are not part of a cultural and social community campus.
B. Conditional uses. In a ROR district, the following uses may be permitted
as conditional uses:
(1) Those conditional uses permitted in the ROM-1 District by
§ 200-209B(1) and (2).
A. The following standards shall apply to all uses in the ROR District
except for cultural and social community campuses and places of
worship and associated parish houses and religious school buildings:
(1) The lot area, size, and yard standards shall be as set forth in
§ 200-210, except as provided in § 200-209A(8) in the case of
mixed-use planned developments.
(2) Maximum FAR: 0.21.
(3) Maximum improvement coverage: 45%.
(4) Maximum building height: three stories, but not more than 45 feet.
(5) The development shall include a pedestrian and bicycle circulation
plan acceptable to the Planning Board and providing for
appropriate connections to neighboring properties.
(6) The development shall include easements for future bus stops and
bus rapid transit/light rail transit rights-of-way.
(7) No development other than drainage improvements when no other
location is suitable, Clarksville Road access drives, pedestrian and
bicycle paths, and pedestrian bridges shall be permitted in the
Greenbelt shown on the Conservation Element of the Master Plan,
except that recreation uses shall be permitted in upland woodlands
if tree clearing is not required.
§ 200-219.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-219.4
1:1015
B. The following standards shall apply to cultural and social community
campuses on tracts of more than 75 acres in the ROR District:
(1) Minimum tract size: 75 acres.
(2) Tract area, size and yard standards:
(a) Minimum tract frontage: 350 feet.
(b) Minimum tract width: 400 feet.
(c) Minimum tract depth: not applicable.
(d) Minimum yards for the tract:
[1] Front yard: 125 feet with a seventy-five-foot landscape
area at the street right-of-way.
[2] Rear yard: 40 feet, except that there is no required
minimum for rear yards that abut property owned by the
Township of West Windsor.
[3] Side yards: There shall be two side yards of at least 40 feet
each, except that there is no required minimum for a side
yard that abuts property owned by the Township of West
Windsor, provided that the other side yard is at least five
feet.
(3) The development shall include a pedestrian and bicycle circulation
plan acceptable to the Planning Board and providing for
appropriate connections to neighboring properties.
(4) The development shall include easements for future bus stops and
bus rapid transit/light rail transit rights-of-way.
(5) No development other than drainage improvements when no other
location is suitable, Clarksville Road access drives, pedestrian and
bicycle paths, and pedestrian bridges shall be permitted in the
Greenbelt shown on the Conservation Element of the Master Plan,
except that recreation uses shall be permitted in upland woodlands
if tree clearing is not required.
C. The following standards shall apply to places of worship and associated
parish houses and religious school buildings that are not part of a
cultural and social community campus and for cultural and social
community campuses on tracts of 20 acres or less in the ROR District:
(1) Minimum tract size: seven acres.
(2) Tract area, size and yard standards:
(a) Minimum tract frontage: 100 feet.
(b) Minimum tract width: 200 feet.
§ 200-219.4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-219.4
1:1016
(c) Minimum tract depth: 250 feet.
(d) Minimum yards for the tract:
[1] Front yard: 50 feet.
[2] Rear yard: 30 feet, except that there is no required
minimum for rear yards for recreation uses in rear yards
that abut property owned by the Township of West
Windsor.
[3] Side yard: 30 feet, except that there is no required
minimum for a side yard for recreation uses in side yards
that abut property owned by the Township of West
Windsor, provided that the other side yard is at least five
feet.
D. The following standards shall apply to all cultural and social community
campuses:
(1) All land in common ownership shall be developed as one integrated
cultural and social community campus.
(2) Maximum tract-wide FAR: 0.21, except that recreational uses may
not exceed 90,000 square feet for a tract up to 20 acres and shall
be exempt from such FAR requirement.
(3) Maximum tract-wide improvement coverage: 45%, except that
recreational structures on a tract up to 20 acres shall be exempt
therefrom.
(4) Maximum building height: three stories, but not more than 45 feet.
(5) Individual lot requirements. There shall be no maximum FAR or
limitation on maximum improvement coverage for individual lots in
cultural and social community campuses in the ROR District,
provided that the cultural and social community campus conforms
to a site plan approved by the board of jurisdiction. Lot widths,
frontages, rear yards, side yards, front yards, lot dimensions,
parking lot locations, and building distances may be freely
arranged and disposed of. A lot need not front on a street, and there
are no minimum distances between buildings. However, each
individual lot shall be subject to and may only be improved in
accordance with the final site plan approval for the cultural and
social community campus development in accordance with these
district regulations. Final subdivision approval may be granted only
as part of or subsequent to final site plan approval for the cultural
and social community campus. The board of jurisdiction shall
condition final subdivision approval upon submission by the
applicant and approval by the board attorney of a declaration of
covenants and restrictions or other suitable instrument setting
forth the mechanisms by which, and providing adequate
§ 200-219.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-219.4
1:1017
§ 200-219.5. RO-1 District (research, office) use regulations.
[Added 11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-19]
assurances that, routine external maintenance, maintenance of the
common open space, garbage collection, snow removal, and other
appropriate items will be provided for the cultural and social
community campus.
A. Permitted uses. In an RO-1 District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be created or altered which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used except for the following uses, and all
such uses shall be subject to the performance standards set forth in
Part I, Site Plan Review, and to § 200-243.2.
(1) Research, testing and analytical laboratories.
(2) General, corporate, administrative and professional offices.
(3) Public activities, including structures and uses owned or operated
by the Township of West Windsor for municipal purposes, indoor
and outdoor public recreation uses, libraries, community theaters,
other cultural activities and associated public or semipublic uses.
(4) Commercial recreation facilities.
(5) Child-care facilities, subject to the regulations in § 200-241.
(6) Business incubator facilities.
(7) All farm and agricultural uses permitted in residential districts in
accordance with provisions set forth in § 200-146.
(8) Planned research office parks, which shall be subject to those
special requirements listed in § 200-209A(8) for ROM-1 Districts,
except as changed herein.
(a) Permitted uses:
[1] All uses permitted in this RO-1 District.
[2] Restaurants, provided that they are physically attached to
and part of other buildings in the planned office
development and designed to be an integral part of the
planned development. There shall be no freestanding
restaurants. The amount of area devoted to restaurant
purposes shall be limited to one square foot of restaurant
floor area for every 20 square feet of floor area for other
uses in the planned development.
(b) Accessory uses. Accessory uses and accessory buildings
incidental to the above uses located on the same lot and within
the same zoning district permitting the principal use,
including:
§ 200-219.4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-219.5
1:1018
[1] Personal services such as, but not limited to: hair cutters,
banks, dry cleaner and tailor, real estate, insurance, legal
offices, travel agencies.
[2] Retail business services such as, but not limited to:
package shipment facilities, copying centers, employment
agencies, office equipment rental.
[3] Retail showrooms.
[4] Limited manufacturing.
[5] Storage.
(c) Minimum park area: 25 acres of contiguous parcel(s) not
separated by an existing street and served by public water and
sewer.
(d) Maximum tract floor area ratio: 0.18.
(e) Maximum tract improvement coverage: 50%.
(f) Planned research office park design, building arrangement, lot
width, frontage, depth and yards:
[1] The planned development design shall be based on a
planned development concept providing for a unified
master plan governing the land use, circulation, open
space and utility needs of the development.
Comprehensive design guidelines for building and site
layout as well as landscape treatment shall be provided
along with provision for maintenance of common areas
and spaces.
[2] The plan shall contain a staging component to ensure the
orderly completion of the project in relationship to the
capacity of the existing and/or planned infrastructure to
absorb a particular stage or stages of the development.
[3] There shall be no maximum floor area ratio or maximum
improvement coverage for individual lots, provided that
the planned development conforms to a site plan approved
by the board of jurisdiction. A lot need not front on a
street. The intent of this provision is to permit individual
buildings to exist as separate lots.
[4] Buildings, lots, yard sizes and dimensions may be freely
disposed and arranged and shall conform to the provisions
of Part I, Site Plan Review, and subject to the minimum
standards below. The applicant shall provide the following
setbacks, except that it may provide a lesser setback from
internal access roads if the board of jurisdiction finds that
the reduction is based on an approved master plan for the
§ 200-219.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-219.5
1:1019
§ 200-219.6. RO-1 District bulk and area regulations. [Added
11-13-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-19]
The bulk and area regulations for uses other than those in planned research
office parks are as follows:
planned development and does not create undesirable
visual and spatial impacts on abutting properties or when
viewed from the public right-of-way.
[a] Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet for lots located
along an internal access road with a twenty-five-foot
landscape area at the street right-of-way; and 125 feet
for lots located along existing public roads with a
seventy-five-foot landscape area at the street right-ofway.
[b] Minimum side and rear yard setbacks: 40 feet except
where such yards are located on the tract boundary;
75 feet when located on the tract boundary.
[c] Yards abutting residential districts: The above yards
shall be increased to 200 feet and shall provide a
vegetative buffer where they abut, in whole or in part,
a residential district or lot line. Such buffers shall
comply with the provisions of § 200-91P(6),
nonconforming buffer.
[5] Maximum building height: three stories, but not greater
than 50 feet.
[6] Open space.
[a] A minimum of 30% of the total tract area shall be in
open space. Open space in parcels created by
subdivision shall be contiguous.
[b] Areas of proposed greenbelt, as delineated in the West
Windsor Township Master Plan, shall be preserved.
A. Minimum lot area: five acres.
B. Minimum lot frontage: 300 feet.
C. Minimum lot width: 300 feet.
D. Minimum yards:
(1) Front yard: 125 feet with a seventy-five-foot landscape area at the
street right-of-way.
(2) Rear yard: 75 feet.
(3) Side yard: 75 feet.
§ 200-219.5 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-219.6
1:1020
E. Maximum floor area ratio: 0.15.
F. Maximum improvement cover: 40%.
G. Maximum building height: three stories, but no greater than 50 feet.
§ 200-219.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-219.6
1:1021

ARTICLE XXX
Regulations for Educational Districts
§ 200-220. General.
The regulations applicable to the educational districts are as designated in
the following sections.
§ 200-221. E Education District use regulations.
A. Permitted uses. In an E District, no building or premises shall be used
and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged, intended
or designed to be used except for one or more of the following uses, and
all such uses shall be subject to the performance standards set forth in
Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this chapter:
(1) Public and private educational facilities of higher learning that are
organized and operated not for pecuniary profit and such related
activities as are customary.
(2) Residences exclusively for the faculty, students and staff of a higher
learning educational facility, including their families; provided,
however, that such uses are related to a college or university, and
public water and sewer are available. For every three faculty or
staff residences developed, one affordable housing unit shall be
developed. Such requirement shall not apply to undergraduate
dormitories and multifamily post doctorate and graduate student
housing. The affordable housing shall meet all of the applicable
standards and requirements for affordable units, including those
set forth in the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC),
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., and § 200-237. At least 50% of the
affordable units shall be affordable to low-income households, and
at least 13% of all rental affordable units shall be affordable to
very-low-income households earning 30% or less of the regional
median household income by household size, which very-lowincome
units shall be included as part of the low-income
requirement. The remaining affordable units shall be made
affordable to moderate-income households. The affordable housing
shall be open to the general public, and a preference may not be
given to persons affiliated with the higher learning educational
facility for whom the faculty and staff housing is being built. The
affordable housing shall be provided, on or off site, in a location
within West Windsor and in a manner acceptable to the Township.
[Amended 2-25-1985 by Ord. No. 85-1; 4-29-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-15]
(3) A planned educational development containing a combination of
uses as permitted in in this Subsection A, subject to the following
conditions and standards and conforming to the requirements for
planned developments stipulated in Article XXXI of this Part 4.
§ 200-220 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-221
1:1023
(a) Mix of uses. A planned development shall contain a variety of
the permitted uses in the E District.
(b) Minimum planned tract area: 100 acres.
(c) Minimum tract frontage: 400 feet.
(d) Maximum permitted bulk and density of development.
[1] For educational, accessory and other nonresidential uses,
the FAR for the designated use area shall be allowed to
vary according to the following schedule:
Uses in Maximum FAR
One-story buildings 0.25
Multistory buildings 0.35
[2] For residential designated use areas other than single
detached dwellings, the bulk and area regulations of the
R-5A District, as outlined in Article XXVIII, § 200-187, of
this Part 4, shall apply. Single-family detached dwellings
shall be governed by the bulk and area regulations of the
R-3 District, as outlined in Article XXVIII, § 200-175, of this
Part 4.
(e) Maximum improvement coverage: 50%.
(f) Maximum building height: six stories, but not more than 70
feet.
(g) Building arrangement lot, lot width, frontage, depth and yards.
Buildings, lots, yard sizes and dimensions may be freely
disposed and arranged on a tract, provided that the
development conforms with a site plan approved by the
Planning Board, subject to Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this
chapter:
[1] A building buffer area at the perimeter of the planned
development that abuts a different zoning district of 100
feet with a fifty-foot landscape screen/strip is established.
Within this buffer area, no structures or parking areas
shall be constructed within the fifty-foot landscape area.
The height of all structures within the remaining buffer
area shall be limited to the minimum height requirements
of § 200-222H of this article, except in the case of a
planned development abutting a different zoning district,
where the height limitations of the abutting district shall
prevail.
[2] No portion of a structure shall be closer than 25 feet to the
right-of-way of a local internal access road or 50 feet to a
§ 200-221 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-221
1:1024
§ 200-222. Bulk and area regulations - E District.
The following shall be the standards for the E District:
local, collector or arterial road as designated by the
Township's Master Plan.
[3] Notwithstanding other provisions of this article to the
contrary, the required setback from arterial roads shall be
300 feet for four or more storied buildings.
(h) Common open space. The organization, administration and
final arrangements and guaranties governing common open
space or other common facilities which may be part of the
planned development shall be subject to the requirements as
set forth for planned residential development in Article XXVII
of this Part 4.
(4) All farm and agricultural uses permitted in residential districts in
accordance with provisions set forth in Article XXXI of this Part 4.
(5) Accessory uses and accessory buildings on the same lot and within
the same zoning district with and customarily incidental to any of
the permitted principal uses.
B. Conditional uses - E District. In an E District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses:
(1) Transmission lines, transmitting and receiving antennas or aerials
subject to the special requirements contained in Article XXVIII,
§ 200-156B, of this Part 4.
(2) Public utilities (e.g., electric, gas, telephone, water, sewer etc.)
substation, electric and gas facilities, subject to the requirements
contained in Article XXVIII, § 200-156B, of this Part 4.
A. Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
B. Minimum lot frontage: 450 feet.
C. Minimum lot width: 500 feet.
D. Minimum lot depth: not applicable.
E. Minimum yards:
(1) Front yard: 125 feet, with a seventy-five-foot landscape area at the
street right-of-way.
(2) Rear yard: 40 feet.
(3) Side yards: There shall be two side yards with a minimum of 40 feet
each.
§ 200-221 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-222
1:1025
(4) Yards abutting residential districts. The above yards, including the
landscape transition buffer and screen requirements, shall be
increased by 20 feet in those instances where they abut, whole or in
part, a residential district or lot line.
F. Maximum FAR and density of development.
(1) For educational, related activities and other nonresidential uses,
the maximum permitted FAR shall be allowed to vary according to
the following schedule:
Use in Maximum FAR
One-story building 0.15
Multistory buildings 0.20
(2) For residential uses, the bulk and area regulations of the R-3
District, as outlined in Article XXVIII, § 200-175, of this Part 4, shall
apply.
G. Maximum improvement coverage: 50%.
H. Maximum building height: three stories, but not more than 45 feet.
§ 200-222 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-222
1:1026
ARTICLE XXXI
General Provisions and Supplemental Regulations Governing
Certain Uses
§ 200-223. Nonconforming uses.
§ 200-224. Additions and alterations to nonconforming buildings.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent normal maintenance
and repair, structural alteration in or the reconstruction of a noncomplying
building, provided that such action does not increase or extend the degree
of or create any new nonconformity with regard to the regulations
pertaining to such buildings or the lot upon which they are constructed
(e.g., an undersized house, situated closer to the street line than now
specified may have an addition on the back, provided that side and rear
yards are not invaded), except that the floor area of a single-family house
that occupies a lot that is smaller than the minimum lot area for the district
in which the house is located may be increased by not more than 20% of
the floor area existing as of the date of adoption of this Part 4, provided
that all other provisions of this Part 4 are complied with. Yard reductions for
such undersized lots may be permitted according to criteria established in
§ 200-225 of this article. This latter exception shall not apply to those lots
in which an increase in floor area of a nonconforming building has occurred
since August 15, 1975.
A. General. The following provisions shall apply to all buildings and uses
lawfully existing on the effective date of this Part 4 which do not
conform to the requirements set forth in this Part 4 and to all buildings
and uses that become nonconforming by reason of any subsequent
amendment to this Part 4.
B. Regulations. Any nonconforming use of buildings or open land and any
nonconforming buildings may be continued indefinitely, but such uses:
(1) Shall not be enlarged, altered, extended, reconstructed or
restored, except as provided in § 200-224 herein, nor placed on a
different portion of the lot or parcel of land occupied by such use on
the effective date of this Part 4, nor shall any external evidence of
such use be increased by any means whatsoever.
(2) Shall not be moved to another location where such use would be
nonconforming.
(3) Shall not be reestablished if such use has been voluntarily
discontinued for any reason for a period of one year or more or has
been changed to or replaced by a conforming use.
(4) Shall not be restored for other than a conforming use after
substantial destruction thereof.
§ 200-223 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-225
1:1027
§ 200-225. Nonconforming lots of record.
No nonconforming vacant lot existing prior to August 15, 1975, shall be
further reduced in size. In residential districts, such lots, as well as those
which are consolidated into a single lot but still are nonconforming in
area or dimension, may be improved for a single-family residence and its
permitted accessory uses without appeal for variance relief, provided that
the following provisions are met:
§ 200-225.1. Reconstruction of partially or totally destroyed singlefamily
dwellings and structures accessory thereto. [Added
10-18-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-27; amended 9-15-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-24]
A partially or totally destroyed single-family dwelling and structures
accessory thereto, whether or not the lot and structures are conforming,
A. The lot is in separate ownership and not contiguous to lots in the same
ownership and the owner had made a conscientious effort to acquire
additional property. However, in the case of two or more contiguous lots
under the same ownership, regardless of whether or not each may have
been approved as a subdivision, acquired by separate conveyance or by
other operation of law, where one or more of said lots does not conform
with the area and/or division requirements for the zone in which it is
located, the contiguous lots shall be considered as a single lot and the
provisions of the applicable zoning district shall apply.
B. As appropriate, all necessary health approvals are given by the
responsible municipal agency or its agent.
C. FAR/MIC exceptions. The FAR/MIC of the zoning district in which the
vacant lot is located may either be the maximum permitted FAR/MIC of
the zoning district or 120% of the average FAR/MIC of dwellings
immediately adjacent to the vacant lot, whichever is smaller. In the case
of all vacant lots in a particular block or area, the permitted FAR/MIC of
the zoning district may be increased by 10%.
D. Yard exceptions.
(1) Where the lot does not have the required width, each side yard may
be reduced by one foot for each five feet that the lot is below the
minimum required width, except that no side yard shall be less than
1/2 that required by the zoning district.
(2) Where the lot does not have required depth, the rear yard may be
reduced six inches for every foot below 100 feet in depth, except
that no rear yard shall be less than 1/2 that required by the zoning
district.
(3) If after application of the exceptions of Subsections D(1) and (2)
above front yard infringement is necessary, no building shall be set
back less than 75% of the required front yard in the zoning district.
§ 200-225 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-225.1
1:1028
may be reconstructed, provided that the structure is no larger than, and is
the same location as, the structure that was partially or totally destroyed.
§ 200-226. Accessory structures and uses.
A. General requirements.
(1) Accessory uses shall be permitted only on the same lot and within
the same zoning district unless otherwise indicated, with the
principal building to which they are accessory, except for parking
as required in Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this chapter, and
retention/detention basins as noted in Part 3, Subdivision and Site
Plan Procedures, of this chapter. All accessory uses shall be such as
do not alter the character of the premises on which they are located
or impair the neighborhood. Such accessory uses shall not be
located in any front, side or rear yard area, unless otherwise
permitted in this Part 4. Accessways to off-street parking and
loading areas may cross front yard areas or the yard area abutting
a principal street from which site access is to be provided.
(2) Bulk and area regulations. No distinction is made in nonresidential
districts regarding the dimensional limitations between principal
and other buildings or structures referred to as accessory, except
as permitted in this article. All such accessory buildings or
structures or uses in nonresidential districts shall be governed by
the bulk and area regulations of the district within which they are
located. All accessory structures and uses in residential districts
shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from side and rear property
lines, except as herein modified by this chapter. [Amended
10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-42]
B. Farm and agricultural uses. In the districts where farm and agricultural
uses are permitted, the following additional provisions governing their
use shall apply:
(1) Such uses are conducted upon a lot not less than five acres in area.
(2) No building or structure used for shelter or enclosure of fowl,
game, horses, farm livestock or adult dogs shall be closer to any
property line than 200 feet.
(3) Buildings used for the shelter of fowl of any kind shall have a
maximum usable floor area of 2,000 square feet for the first 10
acres and 5,000 additional square feet for each additional acre.
(4) One domestic horse for the personal use of the occupants of the
residence may be maintained on any lot at least three acres in size.
(5) The display for sale of products grown or raised by the owner,
tenant or lessee on a roadside stand shall only be permitted where:
§ 200-225.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-226
1:1029
(a) The sale of such products are within the confines of the
property upon which they have been grown or raised.
(b) The place of sale or storage of any such products, whether of a
permanent or temporary nature, shall not be closer than 100
feet to any side lot line.
(c) The sale of any such products shall not have a deleterious
effect on adjoining properties by reason of nuisance or health
hazard.
(d) The sale of any such products shall also require that a suitable
amount of off-street parking and loading space as required in
Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this chapter, be provided.
C. Swimming pools and similar personal recreational facilities in
residential zones.252 Except for portable swimming pools less than three
feet in height and less than 10 feet in length or diameter, the following
regulations shall apply to permanent and portable swimming pools and
similar recreational facilities accessory to a residential use: [Amended
4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12]
(1) Said use shall be erected on the same lot as the principal structure.
(2) Said use shall comply with a minimum setback of 20 feet from side
and rear property lines. [Amended 10-27-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-42]
(3) Said use shall be appropriately screened and fenced so as not to
adversely affect adjoining properties.
(4) Said use shall meet all applicable codes and ordinances of the
Township of West Windsor and any regulations of a county or state
agency.
(5) A pool or water surface shall not be counted as part of a lot's
maximum improvement coverage requirements.
D. Storage sheds in residential districts. Such storage facilities on the
same lot as the principal structure may be located within 10 feet of the
required side and rear yards, but shall conform to front yard setback
requirements for principal structures. Storage sheds on corner lots
shall not be located closer to the side street property line than the
required setback line for a front yard in the zoning district within which
the lot is located.
E. Tennis courts and multipurpose sports patios in residential zones. The
following regulations shall apply to all tennis courts and multipurpose
sports patios accessory to a residential use, except that only
Subsections E(6) and (7) shall apply to multipurpose sports patios of
252. Editor's Note: See Ch. 162, Swimming Pools.
§ 200-226 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-226
1:1030
less than 225 square feet: [Added 4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12;
12-19-1994 by Ord. No. 94-62]
(1) A minimum lot area of one acre is required for a tennis court; a
minimum lot area of not less than 3/4 of an acre is required for a
multipurpose sports patio.
(2) Tennis courts and multipurpose sports patios shall be erected on
the same lot as the principal structure.
(3) Neither tennis courts nor multipurpose sports patios shall be
permitted in any front yard area and shall be a minimum of 30 feet
from any property line.
(4) The courts and patios shall be appropriately screened with
vegetative landscaping and fenced so as not to adversely affect
adjoining properties.
(5) No fencing greater than 10 feet in height shall be permitted for
either tennis courts or multipurpose sports patios.
(6) No lighting shall be permitted for the courts or patios in order to
ensure that the courts and patios are used only during daytime
hours.
(7) In no case can the court or sports patio be located between the
dwelling and street, nor shall they infringe upon any yard setback
area.
(8) One backstop and not more than two basketball backboards shall
be permitted at a maximum height of 10 feet on either tennis courts
or sports patios. For the purpose of basketball backboards, the
maximum 10 feet height shall be measured from the ground to the
basketball rim.
(9) The area of tennis courts and multipurpose sports patios shall be
included in the calculation of maximum improvement coverage.
F. Satellite dish antennas. [Added 4-20-1992 by Ord. No. 92-11]
(1) Satellite dish antennae are permitted accessory structures when
located on a single-family dwelling lot, provided that the same is
located a distance of at least 10 feet from the side and rear
property lines. Satellite dish antenna shall mean a combination of a
dish whose purpose is to receive communications or other signals
from orbiting satellites, a low-noise amplifier which is situated in
the focal point of the receiving dish and whose purpose is to
magnify and transfer signals and a cable and appurtenances whose
purpose is to carry the signal to the interior of a structure.
(2) Such satellite dish antennas shall be subject, in addition, to the
following standards:
§ 200-226 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-226
1:1031
§ 200-227. Landscape transition buffers, strips, fences; screening of
nonresidential from residential uses.
(a) No satellite dish antenna shall be located in the front yard.
(b) No satellite dish antenna shall extend higher than 15 feet
above ground level or be greater than 15 feet in diameter;
provided, however, that a satellite dish whose diameter is 12
inches or less may extend more than 15 feet above the ground.
(c) A satellite dish antenna shall not be placed on any lot which
does not contain a permitted principal residential structure.
(d) No lot shall contain more than one satellite dish antenna.
(e) Construction of all facilities including wires, conduits and
cables shall be constructed, where applicable, in accordance
with the Uniform Construction Codes.253All installations of
satellite dish antenna shall meet local, state and federal
requirements and shall be constructed in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations, provided that the same are
at least as comprehensive as local, state and federal
regulations.
(f) The satellite dish shall be colored in a manner to blend with
existing surfaces and backdrops, to the extent practicable.
(g) Landscaping shall be provided in the area of the pad of the
antenna to soften its appearance; however, there is no
requirement for landscaping which will interfere with the
ability of the disk to receive signals.
(h) Satellite dish antennas shall be installed in a manner so as not
to interfere with television, radio or similar reception in
adjacent areas and shall in all cases meet state and federal
requirements.
(i) Satellite dish antennas on corner lots shall not be located
closer to the side street property line than the required setback
line for a front yard in the zoning district within which the lot is
located.
A. Landscape transition buffer. A landscape transition buffer satisfactory
to the Planning Board of not less than 25 feet in width shall be provided
and maintained by the owner or lessee of a property between any
nonresidential use and contiguous residentially zoned districts.
(1) The Planning Board may waive the requirements to provide a
transition buffer where natural or man-made physical barriers exist
such that an effective visual separation exists between residential
253. Editor's Note: See Ch. 63, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 200-226 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-227
1:1032
§ 200-228. Landscaping.
and nonresidential uses or a landscape strip, screen or fence as
stipulated in Subsection B of this section is provided.
(2) Yard requirements shall be deemed to be counted as part of the
landscape transition buffer area. Where yard areas are less than
the required buffer area, they shall be increased accordingly.
B. Landscape strips, fences or screens.
(1) A landscape strip of at least 10 feet in width, or, in lieu thereof, a
fence, shall be provided and maintained by the owner or lessee of a
property within landscape transition buffers or in any case where a
nonresidential use as permitted in this Part 4 is contiguous to or
abuts upon any property or area classified for residential purposes
or the rear or either side line which abuts upon a street separating
it from any property classified for residential purposes.
(2) Such landscape strip, screen or fence shall be of such a type and
designed in such manner as to obscure from view at ground level
such nonresidential property from the contiguous or abutting or
neighboring residential properties and be constructed of materials
and be of a design subject to the special requirements for such
strips, screens or fences as stipulated in Part 1, Site Plan Review, of
this chapter. Such planting strip, screen or fence shall be not less
than six feet high at the time of installation, nor shall a fence be
more than eight feet high.
C. Fences, residential districts. No fence or wall forward of the front
setback line shall exceed four feet in height.
A. Landscaping in nonresidential districts. Other provisions of this Part 4
notwithstanding, in any nonresidential district, the entire lot, except for
areas covered by buildings or surfaced as parking, recreation or service
areas, shall be seeded, sodded or planted with ground cover and
suitably landscaped in accordance with an overall landscape plan
consistent with the natural surroundings. All landscaping shall be
properly maintained throughout the life of any use on said lot. Existing
trees or landscaping located within 20 feet of any street line, lot or
zoning district line shall not be removed, except upon written approval
by the Planning Board, nor shall the existing grade within that space be
disturbed without such approval.
B. Landscaping requirements where parking is in front yard areas.
(1) So as to obstruct from view at the street line any parking area in
the front yard, the front yard area not containing parking shall
contain a landscape strip or screen. Landscaped earth berms may
also be used in front yard areas where there is sufficient area to
allow for their construction and long term maintenance. Such
landscaping shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Board
§ 200-227 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-228
1:1033
§ 200-229. Exceptions and supplemental requirements to bulk and
area regulations for all districts.
and shall be maintained throughout the effective period of any
certificate of occupancy on a lot.
(2) Landscaping within parking areas. Any single parking area with 50
or more spaces shall, notwithstanding other requirements of this
Part 4 and Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this chapter, provide at least
5% of its area in landscaping.
C. Natural landscape area along watercourses. No building or parking
area shall be located within 200 feet from the center line of any stream
or within a flood hazard area, except as may be modified by Part 6 of
this chapter, Flood Damage and Prevention. Such area shall be deemed
to be part of any landscape area or landscape transition buffer when
required.
D. Screening of outdoor storage. Any article or material stored outside an
enclosed building as an incidental part of the primary operation on a lot
shall be so screened by fencing, walls or evergreen planting that it
cannot be seen from adjoining public streets or adjacent lots when
viewed by a person standing on the ground level.
A. Corner lots.
(1) Obstruction to vision at street intersections. At all street
intersections in all districts, no obstructions to vision exceeding 30
inches in height above curb level shall be erected or maintained on
any lot within the sight triangle as required by Part 2, Subdivision,
of this chapter. This requirement shall apply to existing as well as
proposed street intersections.
(2) Yards. On a corner lot, one yard other than the front yard shall be
deemed to be a rear yard and the other or others side yards.
B. Through lots. On a through lot, front yards are required on all street
lines.
C. Lot frontage/width. When a lot adjoins a cul-de-sac or is on a curved
alignment with an outside radius of less than 500 feet, such frontage
may be reduced to not less than 1/2 the required lot width, and the
minimum lot width at the setback line may be reduced to not less than
75% of the required lot width.
D. Lot depth. The required lot depth at any point may be decreased by 25%
if the average lot depth conforms with the minimum requirement.
E. Measurement of setbacks, Where a building lot has frontage upon a
street, or streets in the case of a corner lot, which on the Master Plan or
Official Map of West Windsor Township is contemplated for right-of-way
§ 200-228 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-229
1:1034
widening, the required setback distance shall be measured from such
proposed right-of-way line.
F. Height exceptions. The height limitations of this Part 4 shall not apply
to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not used for human
occupancy, nor to chimneys or radio and television antennas or wireless
communication antennas for the sole use of the business on the site and
required by federal law for emergency communications purposes if they
are less than 55 feet above average grade, which grade shall be
substantially unchanged from the natural grade at the time of a
construction permit application. Mechanical equipment, such as
penthouse elevators, condensers, exhaust fans, air conditioners and
similar equipment, stair enclosures and skylights or atrium structures,
may exceed the maximum permitted height in the district by up to 10
feet, provided that such structures in the aggregate do not exceed 10%
of the roof area on which they are located and are properly shielded or
screened. Except for walls of elevators and stair enclosures when
required by the plan of the building, all such screened mechanical
equipment structures may be either 10 feet from the perimeter walls of
a building or integral with the front facade of the building if designed as
an architectural extension of the facade and contain similar building
materials. [Amended 12-27-1982 by Ord. No. 82-54; 12-27-1988
by Ord. No. 88-51; 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-23]
G. Courts. The minimum dimension of an inner court shall not be less than
twice the average height of all surrounding walls. However, in no case
shall an inner court have a dimension of less than 30 feet. The height of
walls surrounding an inner court shall be measured from finished grade
at the base thereof to the top of such wall, except that in the case of
roofs with a slope exceeding five inches vertical to 12 inches horizontal,
the height shall be measured to the mean point between the top of said
wall and the highest point of the roof. The minimum dimension of an
outer court shall be 20 feet, and its depth shall not exceed its width.
H. Minimum net habitable floor area. Minimum net habitable floor areas
for permitted residential uses in this Part 4 shall comply with the least
restrictive of the most current minimum floor areas as promulgated by
the New Jersey Housing Finance Agency or by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development minimum property
standards manuals.
I. Number of buildings restricted. There shall be not more than one
principal structure on each lot in any residence district except as may
be allowed in planned residential neighborhoods, planned residential
developments or in R-3 to R-5 Districts. In any other zone, applicants
seeking to develop more than one principal structure on each lot shall
comply with the provisions of Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this chapter,
and submit for Planning Board approval a site plan showing existing,
proposed and all future developments on the site.
§ 200-229 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-229
1:1035
§ 200-230. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
Off-street parking and loading for uses allowed in this Part 4 shall be subject
to the requirements stipulated in Part 1, Site Plan Review, of this chapter.
No parking or loading spaces shall be permitted in the front yard area of
any business district.
§ 200-231. Signs.
Permanent signs shall be subject to the requirements stipulated in Part 1,
Site Plan Review, of this chapter. Temporary signs shall be governed by
the regulations contained in Article XXVI herein with design standards, if
not stipulated in Article I, conforming to the provisions of Part 1, Site Plan
Review, of this chapter.
§ 200-232. Home occupations. [Amended 8-22-1988 by Ord. No.
88-15]
Home occupations shall be permitted in all resident districts, provided that:
J. Frontage upon a street. Every principal building shall be built upon a lot
with the minimum lot width fronting upon an improved and approved
street in accordance with the road standards established by the
Township or on a private road shown on an approved site plan.
K. Minimum occupancy requirements. The number of occupants per
permitted residential use in this Part 4 shall comply with the most
current occupancy guidelines as established by the Unite States
Department of Housing and Urban Development (Manual 7465.1),
which establishes reasonable criteria limiting the number of occupants
per dwelling unit to available sleeping and bedroom facilities.
L. Application of reverse frontage buffer requirements on arterial roads
and major collector streets. For all multifamily units and attached
dwelling units that abut an arterial or major collector street, the
required reverse frontage buffer easement shall be excluded from the
calculation of all setback requirements. [Amended 4-20-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-12]
A. No person other than members of the family residing on the premises
plus one outside employee shall be engaged in such occupation. The
person whose occupation is being operated from the home shall reside
on the premises.
B. The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants, and not more than 25% of the floor area of the principal
dwelling on the lot, except those used for farm purposes, shall be used
in the conduct of the home occupation.
C. Such occupation shall be pursued only in single-family dwelling units,
shall give no external evidence of nonresidential use other than a small
§ 200-229 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-232
1:1036
§ 200-233. Calculation of common open space.
For purpose of this Part 4, calculation of common open space shall not
include parking areas or accessways thereto, lands privately owned or in
fee simple or open space lands that are part of a residential condominium
or rental project and used for the calculation of net density requirements.
nameplate sign not to exceed one square foot in size and shall not
display products visible from the street.
D. The lot upon which the premises is located is 3/4 acre or larger, and no
traffic or parking shall be generated in excess of three passenger
automobiles at any one time, in addition to those used by the owner or
tenant, all of which must be parked off-street, in properly designed
spaces, except that a home occupation may be located in a single-family
dwelling unit on a lot smaller than 3/4 acre if no employees are hired
therefor, the occupation does not generate more than one passenger
automobile at any one time, in addition to those used by the owner or
tenant, and only one off-street parking space is provided for use of
customers of the home occupation.
E. No mechanical or electrical equipment is used that will be detectable to
the normal senses or that will create electrical or audio interference.
F. The retail sale of goods shall not be construed to be a home occupation
under the terms of this Part 4.
G. There shall be no more than one home occupation in any one dwelling
unit.
H. Applicants for home occupation permits proposing to hire an employee
or provide more than one off-street parking space for customers shall
by certified mail, return receipt requested, provide notice to all
property owners within 200 feet of the lot upon which the home
occupation is proposed to be located specifying that the applicant has
applied for a home occupation permit, setting forth the substance of the
application and stating that the Zoning Officer will decide the
application 30 days from the date of the notice unless the Zoning
Officer receives written objections thereto. If the Zoning Officer
receives written objections, he or she shall grant or deny the
application, with or without conditions, or refer the application to the
Planning Board for site plan review.
I. No change shall be permitted to the exterior of the home to
accommodate the home occupation. [Added 12-16-1991 by Ord. No.
91-34]
J. Adequate indoor and outdoor play areas shall be provided for any family
day-care home. The determination of whether adequate play areas are
provided shall be based upon guidelines established in the Manual of
Requirements for Child Care Centers by the New Jersey Division of
Youth and Family Services. [Added 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 91-34]
§ 200-232 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-234
1:1037
§ 200-234. Planned developments.
§ 200-235. Utilities.
Electric and telephone lines shall be underground to the structures from
existing utility poles.
§ 200-236. (Reserved)254
§ 200-237. Affordable housing regulations. [Amended 2-25-1985 by
Ord. No. 85-1; 10-7-1985 by Ord. No. 85-25; 2-21-1989 by Ord. No.
89-04; 10-2-1989 by Ord. No. 89-28; 10-16-1989 by Ord. No. 89-43;
9-26-1994 by Ord. No. 94-45; 1-9-1995 by Ord. No. 94-63; 6-6-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-08; 10-15-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-18; 3-18-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-12]
A. General. Various types of planned developments listed as permitted or
conditional uses in certain districts herein may be permitted by the
Planning Board only after it has determined that the development
proposal complies with the conditions and standards set forth in this
section, notwithstanding other applicable regulations of this Part 4 or
additional conditions for the particular planned development.
B. Findings for planned developments. Prior to approval of any planned
development, the Planning Board shall find as required by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-45 the following facts and conclusions:
(1) That the departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to
the zoning standards applicable to the planned development.
(2) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
common open space are reliable and the amount, location and
purpose of the common open space are adequate.
(3) That provision through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic and the amenities of light and air, recreation and
visual enjoyment are adequate.
(4) That the proposed planned development will not have an
unreasonably adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed
to be established.
(5) In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents,
occupants and owners of the proposed development in the total
completion of the development are adequate.
254. Editor's Note: Former § 200-236, Flag lots, was repealed 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-20.
§ 200-234 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-237
1:1038
A. Purpose.
(1) The title of this section shall be the "Affordable Housing
Regulations."
(2) The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in the Fair Housing
Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., delegated the authority to local
governments to adopt an ordinance to provide a realistic
opportunity for sound shelter for low- and moderate-income
households.
B. Monitoring requirements.
(1) On the first anniversary of the entry of a final judgment, and every
anniversary thereafter through the end of 2025, the Township shall
provide annual reporting of its Affordable Housing Trust Fund
activity to the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs (DCA),
Council on Affordable Housing (COAH), Local Government Services
(LGS) or other entity designated by the State of New Jersey, with a
copy provided to Fair Share Housing Center (FSHC) and posted on
the municipal website, using forms developed for this purpose by
the DCA, COAH or LGS.
(2) On the first anniversary of the entry of a final judgment, and every
anniversary thereafter through the end of 2025, the Township shall
provide annual reporting of the status of all affordable housing
activity within the Township through posting on the municipal
website, with copies provided to FSHC, using forms previously
developed for this purpose by COAH or any other forms agreed to
by the Township, the court-appointed Special Master and FSHC.
(3) For the midpoint realistic opportunity review, due on July 1, 2020,
as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, the Township shall
post on its municipal website, with a copy provided to FSHC, a
status report as to its implementation of its Plan.
(4) For the review of very-low-income housing requirements required
by N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1, within 30 days of the third anniversary of
the entry of final judgment, and every third year thereafter, the
Township will post on its municipal website, with a copy provided to
FSHC, a status report as to its satisfaction of its very-low-income
requirements.
C. Definitions. The following terms when used in this section shall have
the meanings given in this section:
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq.)
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
§ 200-237 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-237
1:1039
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity designated by the Township
to administer affordable units in accordance with this section, N.J.A.C.
5:93, and UHAC (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26).
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median
income at which new restricted units in an affordable housing
development are affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent level that is within the means of a
low- or moderate-income household as defined within N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4,
and, in the case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit
conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be
amended and supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that
the rent for the unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.12, as may be amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included
in or approved pursuant to the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan or
otherwise intended to address the Township's fair share obligation, and
includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal
construction project or a 100% affordable housing development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in a
municipal Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a
municipality's fair share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to
the Act and approved for crediting by the Court and/or funded through
an affordable housing trust fund.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of
the population such that all the residents of the development wherein
the unit is situated are 62 years of age or older; or at least 80% of
the units are occupied by one person who is 55 years of age or older;
or the development has been designated by the Secretary of the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development as "housing for older
persons" as defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act, 42
U.S.C. § 3607.
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1, et seq.).
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENT — A structure in which
households live in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing
facilities, central heat and common areas. Alternative living
arrangements include, but are not limited to: transitional facilities for
the homeless; Class A, B, C, D and E boarding homes as regulated by
the State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs; residential
health care facilities as regulated by the New Jersey Department of
§ 200-237 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-237
1:1040
Health; group homes for the developmentally disabled and mentally ill
as licensed and/or regulated by the New Jersey Department of Human
Services; and congregate living arrangements.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility that is licensed by the New
Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartmentstyle
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living
services are available when needed for four or more adult persons
unrelated to the proprietor and that offers units containing, at a
minimum, one unfurnished room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and
a lockable door on the unit entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
administrative agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, as established by the New
Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301, et seq.), or any successor
agency charged with the administration of the Act.
COURT — The Superior Court of New Jersey, Law Division, Mercer
County.
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety
code violations that requires the repair or replacement of a major
system. A major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including
septic systems), lead paint abatement and/or load bearing structural
systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or
any land included in a proposed development including the holder of an
option to contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable
proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of
any building or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill,
and any use or change in the use of any building or other structure, or
land or extension of use of land, for which permission may be required
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1, et seq.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market rate units. This term includes, but is not
limited to new construction, the conversion of a nonresidential
structure to residential use and the creation of new affordable units
through the gut rehabilitation or reconstruction of a vacant residential
structure.
§ 200-237 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-237
1:1041
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the regional median
household income by household size.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a lowincome
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include, but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including
septic systems), lead paint abatement and load-bearing structural
systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for the
applicable housing region, as adopted annually by COAH or a successor
entity approved by the Court.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the
regional median household income by household size.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
NONEXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than
the transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of
ownership between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial
decree of divorce or judicial separation, but not including sales to third
parties; the transfer of ownership between family members as a result
of inheritance; the transfer of ownership through an executor's deed to
a class A beneficiary and the transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently
income-eligible households are selected for placement in affordable
housing units such that no preference is given to one applicant over
another except for purposes of matching household income and size
with an appropriately priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each
housing region affordable to a four-person household with an income at
80% of the regional median as defined by duly adopted regional income
limits published annually by COAH or a successor entity.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or
reconstruction of any building or structure, pursuant to the
Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including
the rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid
utilities computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA
§ 200-237 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-237
1:1042
for its Section 8 program. In assisted living residences, rent does not
include charges for food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or an
ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as amended and supplemented, but does not include a
market-rate unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26, et seq.
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income equal to 30% or less of the regional median
household income by household size.
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
very-low-income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and
crawl space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm
windows, replacement storm doors, replacement windows and
replacement doors, and is considered a major system for purposes of a
rehabilitation program.
D. Applicability.
(1) The provisions of this section shall apply to all affordable housing
developments and affordable housing units that currently exist and
that are proposed to be created within West Windsor Township
pursuant to the Township's most recently adopted Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan.
(2) Moreover, this section shall apply to all developments that contain
low- and moderate-income housing units, including any currently
anticipated future developments that will provide low- and
moderate-income housing units.
(3) All low and moderate income units, including all units created
through low-income housing tax credits and other outside funding
sources, shall have minimum thirty-year affordability controls and
shall comply with the income and bedroom distribution
requirements of UHAC, except that instead of 10% of all affordable
rental units being affordable to households earning 35% or less of
the regional median household income by household size, 13% of
all affordable rental units shall be affordable to very-low-income
households earning 30% or less of the regional median household
income by household size, which very-low-income units shall be
counted as part of the low-income housing requirements set forth
in UHAC.
(4) Affordable housing set-aside. West Windsor Township has a
mandatory affordable housing set-aside requirement that is
imposed on certain types of multifamily development. See
§ 200-243.2 for the requirements.
§ 200-237 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-237
1:1043
E. Rehabilitation program.
(1) West Windsor's rehabilitation program shall be designed to
renovate deficient housing units occupied by low- and moderateincome
households such that, after rehabilitation, these units will
comply with the New Jersey State Housing Code pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:28.
(2) Both owner-occupied and renter-occupied units shall be eligible for
rehabilitation funds.
(3) All rehabilitated units shall remain affordable to low- and
moderate-income households for a period of 10 years (the control
period). For owner occupied units the control period will be
enforced with a lien and for renter occupied units the control
period will be enforced with a deed restriction.
(4) West Windsor Township shall dedicate a minimum of $10,000 for
each unit to be rehabilitated through this program.
(5) West Windsor Township shall adopt a resolution committing to fund
any shortfall in the rehabilitation programs for the Township.
(6) West Windsor Township shall designate, subject to the approval of
the Court, one or more administrative agents to administer the
rehabilitation program in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96 and
N.J.A.C. 5:97. The administrative agent(s) shall provide a
rehabilitation manual for the owner-occupancy rehabilitation
program and a rehabilitation manual for the rental-occupancy
rehabilitation program to be adopted by resolution of the governing
body and subject to approval of the Court. Both rehabilitation
manuals shall be available for public inspection in the office of the
Municipal Clerk and in the office(s) of the administrative agent(s).
(7) Units in a rehabilitation program shall be exempt from N.J.A.C.
5:97-9 and Uniform Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC), but
shall be administered in accordance with the following:
(a) If a unit is vacant, upon initial rental subsequent to
rehabilitation, or if a renter-occupied unit is rerented prior to
the end of controls on affordability, the deed restriction shall
require the unit to be rented to a low- or moderate-income
household at an affordable rent and affirmatively marketed
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-9 and UHAC.
(b) If a unit is renter-occupied, upon completion of the
rehabilitation, the maximum rate of rent shall be the lesser of
the current rent or the maximum permitted rent pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:97-9 and UHAC.
(c) Rents in rehabilitated units may increase annually based on
the standards in N.J.A.C. 5:97-9.
§ 200-237 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-237
1:1044
(d) Applicant and/or tenant households shall be certified as
income-eligible in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:97-9 and UHAC,
except that households in owner-occupied units shall be
exempt from the regional asset limit.
F. Alternative living arrangements.
(1) The administration of an alternative living arrangement shall be in
compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.8 and Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls (UHAC), with the following exceptions:
(a) Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15), provided,
however, that the units or bedrooms may be affirmatively
marketed by the provider in accordance with an alternative
plan approved by COAH or the Court;
(b) Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.3).
(2) With the exception of units established with capital funding
through a twenty-year operating contract with the Department of
Human Services, Division of Developmental Disabilities, alternative
living arrangements shall have at least thirty-year controls on
affordability in accordance with UHAC, unless an alternative
commitment is approved by COAH or the Court.
(3) The service provider for the alternative living arrangement shall
act as the administrative agent for the purposes of administering
the affirmative marketing and affordability requirements for the
alternative living arrangement.
G. Inclusionary zoning.
(1) To implement the fair share plan in a manner consistent with the
affordable housing regulations, to ensure the efficient use of land
through compact forms of development and to create realistic
opportunities for the construction of affordable housing, West
Windsor Township has created several inclusionary housing zones.
These inclusionary housing zones are detailed in the Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan, dated February 27, 2019.
H. Phasing schedule for inclusionary zoning. In inclusionary development
the following schedule shall be followed:
Maximum Percentage of
Market-Rate Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
25 0
25+1 10
50 50
§ 200-237 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-237
1:1045
Maximum Percentage of
Market-Rate Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
75 75
90 100
I. New construction.
(1) Low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing
units:
(a) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between lowand
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd
number of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a
low-income unit. At least 13% of all restricted rental units shall
be very-low-income units (affordable to a household earning
30% or less of median income). The very-low-income units shall
be counted as part of the required number of low-income units
within the development.
(b) At least 25% of the obligation shall be met through rental units,
including at least half in rental units available to families.
(c) A maximum of 25% of the Township's obligation may be met
with age restricted units. At least half of all affordable units in
the Township's Plan shall be nonrestricted.
(d) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted
units within each bedroom distribution shall be low-income
units, including that at least 13% of the restricted units in each
bedroom distribution shall be very-low-income units.
(e) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such
that:
[1] The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and
moderate-income units;
[2] At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
two-bedroom units;
[3] At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three-bedroom units; and
[4] The remaining units may be allocated among two- and
three-bedroom units at the discretion of the developer.
(f) In accordance with the Uniform Housing Affordability
Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3(c), for low- and moderate-income
age-restricted units, at a minimum, the number of bedrooms
§ 200-237 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-237
1:1046
shall equal the number of age-restricted low- and moderateincome
units within the affordable development. This standard
may be met by having all one-bedroom units or by having a
two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit. The Township shall
not be permitted to claim credit to satisfy its obligations for
age-restricted units that exceed 25% of all units developed.
(2) Accessibility requirements.
(a) The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be
subject to the technical design standards of the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
(b) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units
in other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit
is attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the
following features:
[1] An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor;
and
[2] An adaptable kitchen on the first floor; and
[3] An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor; and
[4] An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a
door or casing for the installation of a door, on the first
floor; and
[5] If not all of the foregoing requirements in Subsection
I(2)(b)[1] through [4] can be satisfied, then an interior
accessible route of travel must be provided between
stories within an individual unit, but if all of the terms of
Subsection I(2)(b)[1] through [4] above have been
satisfied, then an interior accessible route of travel shall
not be required between stories within an individual unit;
and
[6] An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a, et seq.) and the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, or evidence that West Windsor
has collected funds from the developer sufficient to make
10% of the adaptable entrances in the development
accessible:
[a] Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a person with
disabilities who is purchasing or will reside in the
dwelling unit, an accessible entrance shall be
installed.
§ 200-237 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-237
1:1047
[b] To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within West Windsor Township's Affordable
Housing Trust Fund sufficient to install accessible
entrances in 10% of the affordable units that have
been constructed with adaptable entrances.
[c] The funds deposited under Subsection I(2)(b)[6][b]
above shall be used by West Windsor Township for the
sole purpose of making the adaptable entrance of an
affordable unit accessible when requested to do so by
a person with a disability who occupies or intends to
occupy the unit and requires an accessible entrance.
[d] The developer of the restricted units shall submit a
design plan and cost estimate to the Construction
Official of West Windsor Township for the conversion
of adaptable to accessible entrances.
[e] Once the Construction Official has determined that
the design plan to convert the unit entrances from
adaptable to accessible meet the requirements of the
Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and that the
cost estimate of such conversion is reasonable,
payment shall be made to the Township's Affordable
Housing Trust Fund in care of the Township Chief
Financial Officer who shall ensure that the funds are
deposited into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund and
appropriately earmarked.
[f] Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall
not be required where an entity can demonstrate that
it is "site impracticable" to meet the requirements.
Determinations of site impracticability shall be in
compliance with the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-7.
(3) Design.
(a) In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, low- and
moderate-income units shall be integrated with the market
units.
(b) In inclusionary developments, low- and moderate-income units
shall have access to all of the same common elements and
facilities as the market units.
(4) Maximum rents and sales prices.
(a) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing
units, the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set
forth in UHAC, utilizing the regional income limits, which shall
be updated by the Township annually within 30 days of the
§ 200-237 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-237
1:1048
publication of determinations of median income by HUD as
follows below. This does not include units established through
a federal program exempted from UHAC pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1.
[1] Regional income limits shall be established for the housing
region in which the Township is located (in this case,
Housing Region 4) based on the median income by
household size, which shall be established by a regional
weighted average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits
published by HUD. To compute this regional income limit,
the HUD determination of median county income for a
family of four is multiplied by the estimated number of
households within the county according to the most recent
decennial census. The resulting product for each county
within the housing region is summed. The sum is divided
by the estimated total number of households from the most
recent decennial census in the Township's housing region.
This quotient represents the regional weighted average of
median income for a household of four. The income limit
for a moderate-income unit for a household of four shall be
80% of the regional weighted average median income for a
family of four. The income limit for a low-income unit for a
household of four shall be 50% of the HUD determination
of the regional weighted average median income for a
family of four. The income limit for a very-low-income unit
for a household of four shall be 30% of the regional
weighted average median income for a family of four.
These income limits shall be adjusted by household size
based on multipliers used by HUD to adjust median
income by household size. In no event shall the income
limits be less than those for the previous year.
[2] The income limits attached to the settlement agreement as
Exhibit D255 are the result of applying the percentages set
forth in Subsection I(4)(a)[1] above to HUD's
determination of median income for FY 2018, and shall be
utilized until the Township updates the income limits after
HUD has published revised determinations of median
income for the next fiscal year.
[3] The regional Asset limit used in determining an applicant's
eligibility for affordable housing pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.16(b)3 shall be calculated by the Township
annually by taking the percentage increase of the income
limits calculated pursuant to Subsection I(4)(a)[1] above
over the previous year's income limits, and applying the
same percentage increase to the regional asset limit from
255. Editor’s Note: Exhibit D is on file in Township offices.
§ 200-237 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-237
1:1049
the prior year. In no event shall the regional asset limit be
less than that for the previous year.
[4] The resale prices of owner-occupied low- and moderateincome
units may increase annually based on the
percentage increase in the regional median income limit
for each housing region determined pursuant to the
process outlined above. In no event shall the maximum
resale price established by the administrative agent be
lower than the last recorded purchase price.
[5] The rent levels of very-low-, low- and moderate-income
units may be increased annually based on the percentage
increase in the Housing Consumer Price Index for the
Northeast Urban Area, upon its publication for the prior
calendar year. This increase shall not exceed 9% in any one
year. Rents for units constructed pursuant to low income
housing tax credit regulations shall be indexed pursuant to
the regulations governing low-income housing tax credits.
(b) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households
earning no more than 60% of median income, and the average
rent for restricted rental units shall be affordable to
households earning no more than 52% of median income.
(c) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental
units shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for
both low-income and moderate-income units, provided that at
least 13% of all low- and moderate-income rental units shall be
affordable to very-low-income households, earning 30% or less
of the regional median household income, with such very-lowincome
units counted the low-income housing requirement.
(d) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within
each affordable development shall be affordable to households
earning no more than 70% of median income, and each
affordable development must achieve an affordability average
of 55% for restricted ownership units; in achieving this
affordability average, moderate-income ownership units must
be available for at least three different sales prices for each
bedroom type, and low-income ownership units must be
available for at least two different sales prices for each
bedroom type.
(e) In determining the initial sales prices and rent levels for
compliance with the affordability average requirements for
restricted units other than assisted living facilities and agerestricted
developments, the following standards shall be used:
[1] A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
§ 200-237 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-237
1:1050
[2] A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a 1 1/2 person
household;
[3] A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
[4] A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a 4 1/2 person
household; and
[5] A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(f) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance
with the affordability average requirements for restricted units
in assisted living facilities and age-restricted developments,
the following standards shall be used:
[1] A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
[2] A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a 1 1/2 person
household; and
[3] A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or two one-person households.
(g) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units
shall be calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the
unit, including principal and interest (based on a mortgage
loan equal to 95% of the purchase price and the Federal
Reserve H.15 rate of interest), taxes, homeowner and private
mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowner
association fees do not exceed 28% of the eligible monthly
income of the appropriate size household as determined under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as it may be amended and supplemented;
provided, however, that the price shall be subject to the
affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as it
may be amended and supplemented.
(h) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so
as not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the
appropriate size household, including an allowance for tenant
paid utilities, as determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as it may
be amended and supplemented; provided, however, that the
rent shall be subject to the affordability average requirement
of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as it may be amended and supplemented.
(i) The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units
may increase annually based on the percentage increase in the
regional median income limit for each housing region. In no
event shall the maximum resale price established by the
administrative agent be lower than the last recorded purchase
price.
§ 200-237 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-237
1:1051
(j) The rent of low- and moderate-income units may be increased
annually based on the permitted percentage increase in the
Housing Consumer Price Index for the United States. This
increase shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for units
constructed pursuant to low-income housing tax credit
regulations shall be indexed pursuant to the regulations
governing low-income housing tax credits.
J. Utilities.
(1) Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating/ventilation/
air conditioning (HVAC) source as market units within an
inclusionary development.
(2) Tenant-paid utilities included in the utility allowance shall be set
forth in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility allowance
approved by HUD for the Section 8 program.
K. Occupancy standards. In referring certified households to specific
restricted units, the administrative agent shall, to the extent feasible
and without causing an undue delay in the occupancy of a units, strive
to:
(1) Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
(2) Provide children of different sexes with separate bedrooms;
(3) Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children; and
(4) Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
L. Control periods for restricted ownership units and enforcement
mechanisms.
(1) Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and
supplemented, and each restricted ownership unit shall remain
subject to the requirements of this section for a period of at least 30
years, until West Windsor takes action to release the unit from such
requirements; prior to such action, a restricted ownership unit
must remain subject to the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as
may be amended and supplemented.
(2) The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to
the unit.
(3) Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the administrative agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine
the nonrestricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an
§ 200-237 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-237
1:1052
appraisal or the unit's equalized assessed value without the
restrictions in place.
(4) At the time of the initial sale of the unit, the initial purchaser shall
execute and deliver to the administrative agent a recapture note
obligating the purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs,
successors and assigns) to repay, upon the first nonexempt sale
after the unit's release from the restrictions set forth in this
section, an amount equal to the difference between the unit's
nonrestricted fair market value and its restricted price, and the
recapture note shall be secured by a recapture lien evidenced by a
duly recorded mortgage on the unit.
(5) The affordability controls set forth in this section shall remain in
effect despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of
foreclosure with respect to restricted ownership units.
(6) A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the
Construction Official stating that the unit meets all Code standards
upon the first transfer of title following the removal of the
restrictions provided under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be
amended and supplemented.
M. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units, homeowner
association fees and resale prices. Price restrictions for restricted
ownership units shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may
be amended and supplemented, including:
(1) The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the administrative agent.
(2) The administrative agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing
and in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the
foregoing standards.
(3) The master deeds of inclusionary developments shall provide no
distinction between the condominium or homeowner association
fees and special assessments paid by low- and moderate-income
purchasers and those paid by market purchasers.
(4) The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the
unit on the basis of anticipated capital improvements. Eligible
capital improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable
for a larger household or the addition of a bathroom. See
Subsection O.
N. Buyer income eligibility.
(1) Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
§ 200-237 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-237
1:1053
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than
or equal to 50% of median income and moderate-income ownership
units shall be reserved for households with a gross household
income less than 80% of median income.
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the administrative agent may, upon
approval by the Township Council, and subject to the Court's
approval, permit a moderate-income purchaser to buy a low-income
unit if and only if the administrative agent can demonstrate that
there is an insufficient number of eligible low-income purchasers in
the housing region to permit prompt occupancy of the unit and all
other reasonable efforts to attract a low-income purchaser,
including pricing and financing incentives, have failed. Any such
low-income unit that is sold to a moderate-income household shall
retain the required pricing and pricing restrictions for a lowincome
unit.
(3) A certified household that purchases a restricted ownership unit
must occupy it as the certified household's principal residence and
shall not lease the unit; provided, however, that the administrative
agent may permit the owner of a restricted ownership unit, upon
application and a showing of hardship, to lease the restricted unit
to another certified household for a period not to exceed one year.
(4) The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the
unit, and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private
mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowner association
fees, as applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's eligible
monthly income.
O. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership unit; subordination.
(1) Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the owner shall apply to the administrative agent
for a determination in writing that the proposed indebtedness
complies with the provisions of this section, and the administrative
agent shall issue such determination prior to the owner incurring
such indebtedness.
(2) With the exception of first purchase money mortgages, neither an
owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or permit the total
indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to exceed 95%
of the maximum allowable resale price of the unit, as such price is
determined by the administrative agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.6(b).
P. Capital improvements to ownership units.
§ 200-237 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-237
1:1054
(1) The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the
unit on the basis of capital improvements made since the purchase
of the unit. Eligible capital improvements shall be those that render
the unit suitable for a larger household or that add an additional
bathroom. In no event shall the maximum sales price of an
improved housing unit exceed the limits of affordability for the
larger household.
(2) Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit, all items of property
that are permanently affixed to the unit or were included when the
unit was initially restricted (for example, refrigerator, range,
washer, dryer, dishwasher, wall-to-wall carpeting) shall be included
in the maximum allowable resale price. Other items may be sold to
the purchaser at a reasonable price that has been approved by the
administrative agent at the time of the signing of the agreement to
purchase. The purchase of central air conditioning installed
subsequent to the initial sale of the unit and not included in the
base price may be made a condition of the unit resale provided the
price, which shall be subject to ten-year, straight-line depreciation,
has been approved by the administrative agent. Unless otherwise
approved by the administrative agent, the purchase of any property
other than central air conditioning shall not be made a condition of
the unit resale. The owner and the purchaser must personally
certify at the time of closing that no unapproved transfer of funds
for the purpose of selling and receiving property has taken place at
the time of or as a condition of resale.
Q. Control periods for restricted rental units.
(1) Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented,
and each restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the
requirements of this section for a period of at least 30 years, until
West Windsor takes action to release the unit from such
requirements. Prior to such action, a restricted rental unit must
remain subject to the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be
amended and supplemented.
(2) Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed
restriction shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records
office of the County of Mercer. A copy of the filed document shall be
provided to the administrative agent within 30 days of the receipt
of a certificate of occupancy.
(3) A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability
controls of this section despite the occurrence of any of the
following events:
§ 200-237 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-237
1:1055
(a) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(b) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit;
or
(c) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure on
the property containing the unit.
R. Rent restrictions for rental units; leases.
(1) A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units and
tenants shall be responsible for security deposits and the full
amount of the rent as stated on the lease. A copy of the current
lease for each restricted rental unit shall be provided to the
administrative agent.
(2) No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover
the customary charges for food and services) without the express
written approval of the administrative agent.
(3) Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall
not exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit
and shall be payable to the administrative agent to be applied to
the costs of administering the controls applicable to the unit as set
forth in this section.
(4) No rent control ordinance or other pricing restriction shall be
applicable to either the market units or the affordable units in any
development in which at least 15% of the total number of dwelling
units are restricted rental units in compliance with this section.
S. Tenant income eligibility.
(1) Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(a) Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for households
with a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of the
regional median household income by household size.
(b) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 50% of the
regional median household income by household size.
(c) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households
with a gross household income less than 80% of the regional
median household income by household size.
(2) The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very-low-income
household, low-income household or a moderate-income
§ 200-237 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-237
1:1056
§ 200-237.1. Municipal Housing Liaison.
household, as applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for
the unit does not exceed 35% (40% for age-restricted units) of
the household's eligible monthly income as determined pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may be amended and supplemented;
provided, however, that this limit may be exceeded if one or more
of the following circumstances exists:
(a) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross
household income for rent, and the proposed rent will reduce
its housing costs;
(b) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(c) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded
living conditions;
(d) The household documents the existence of assets with which
the household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
(e) The household documents reliable anticipated third-party
assistance from an outside source such as a family member in a
form acceptable to the administrative agent and the owner of
the unit.
(3) The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in Subsections (2)(a) through (e)
above with the administrative agent, who shall counsel the
household on budgeting.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to create the administrative
mechanisms needed for the execution of West Windsor Township's
responsibility to promote and oversee the provision of affordable
housing pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of 1985.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering
the affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing
program, and all units in inclusionary developments, for West Windsor
to ensure that the restricted units under administration are
affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as applicable, only to lowand
moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The municipal employee duly
designated by the governing body with the responsibility for
monitoring, reporting oversight and general administration of the
affordable housing program for the Township of West Windsor.
§ 200-237 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-237.1
1:1057
§ 200-237.2. Administrative agent.
C. Establishment of position and compensation; powers and duties.
(1) Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is
hereby established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison for
West Windsor Township.
(2) Subject to the approval of the Court, the Municipal Housing Liaison
shall be appointed by the governing body and may be a full- or parttime
municipal employee.
(3) The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for monitoring,
reporting, oversight and general administration of the affordable
housing program for West Windsor Township, including the
following responsibilities which may not be contracted out to an
administrative agent:
(a) Serving as West Windsor Township's primary point of contact
for all inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents, and interested households;
(b) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in West Windsor
Township's Housing Element and Fair Share Plan;
(c) Compiling, verifying and publishing on the Township's website
all referenced monitoring reports as required by the Court;
(d) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
the administrative agent(s) as applicable; and
(e) Attending continuing education programs as required to obtain
and maintain certification as a Municipal Housing Liaison.
(4) Subject to approval by the Court, West Windsor Township may
contract with or authorize a consultant, authority, government or
any agency charged by the governing body, which entity shall have
the responsibility of administering the affordable housing program
of West Windsor Township. If West Windsor Township contracts
with another entity to administer all or any part of the affordable
housing program, including the affordability controls and
affirmative marketing plan, the Municipal Housing Liaison shall
supervise the contracting administrative agent.
(5) Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the governing body
at the time of the appointment of Municipal Housing Liaison.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to create the administrative
mechanisms needed for the execution of West Windsor Township's
responsibility to promote and oversee the provision of affordable
housing pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of 1985.
§ 200-237.1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-237.2
1:1058
B. Establishment of position; powers and duties. An administrative agent
may be an independent entity serving under contract to and reporting
to the municipality. The fees of the administrative agent shall be paid by
the owners of the affordable units for which the services of the
administrative agent are required. The administrative agent shall
perform the duties and responsibilities of an administrative agent as set
forth in UHAC, including those set forth in Sections 5:80-26.14, 16 and
18 thereof, which includes:
(1) Affirmative marketing:
(a) Conducting an outreach process to affirmatively market
affordable housing units in accordance with the Affirmative
Marketing Plan of West Windsor Township and the provisions
of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
(b) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low-and moderate-income applicants on subjects
such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental
lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
(2) Household certification:
(a) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
(b) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low or moderate-income unit;
(c) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(d) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(e) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located;
(f) Employing a random selection process as provided in the
affirmative marketing plan of West Windsor Township when
referring households for certification to affordable units.
(3) Affordability controls:
(a) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
§ 200-237.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-237.2
1:1059
(b) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(c) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the Mercer County Register of Deeds or Mercer
County Clerk's office after the termination of the affordability
controls for each restricted unit;
(d) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(e) Ensuring the issuance of Continuing Certificates of Occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
(4) Resales and rerentals:
(a) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or rerental; and
(b) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- (or very-low-) and
moderate-income households regarding the availability of
restricted units for resale or re-rental.
(5) Processing requests from unit owners:
(a) Reviewing and approving requests for determination from
owners of restricted units who wish to take out home equity
loans or refinance during the term of their ownership that the
amount of indebtedness to be incurred will not violate the
terms of this section;
(b) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the
depreciated cost of central air conditioning systems;
(c) Notifying the municipality of an owner's intent to sell a
restricted unit; and
(d) Making determinations on requests by owners of restricted
units for hardship waivers.
(6) Enforcement:
(a) Securing annually from the municipality a list of all affordable
housing units for which tax bills are mailed to absentee
§ 200-237.2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-237.2
1:1060
§ 200-237.3. Affirmative marketing requirements.
owners, and notifying all such owners that they must either
move back to their unit or sell it;
(b) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the administrative agent;
(c) Posting annually, in all rental properties (including two-family
homes), a notice as to the maximum permitted rent together
with the telephone number of the administrative agent where
complaints of excess rent or other charges can be made;
(d) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling
units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined
in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(e) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to
the municipality's Affordable Housing Trust Fund; and
(f) Creating and publishing a written operating manual for each
affordable housing program administered by the
administrative agent, to be approved by the Township Council
and the Court, setting forth procedures for administering the
affordability controls.
(7) Additional responsibilities:
(a) The administrative agent shall have the authority to take all
actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its
responsibilities hereunder.
(b) The administrative agent shall prepare monitoring reports for
submission to the Municipal Housing Liaison in time to meet
the Court-approved monitoring and reporting requirements in
accordance with the deadlines set forth in this section.
(c) The administrative agent shall attend continuing education
sessions on affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and
affirmative marketing at least annually and more often as
needed.
A. The Township of West Windsor shall adopt by resolution an affirmative
marketing plan, subject to the approval of the Court that is compliant
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-25.15, as it may be amended and supplemented.
B. The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority
groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
§ 200-237.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-237.3
1:1061
marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual orientation,
disability, age or number of children to housing units which are being
marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of affordable housing.
The affirmative marketing plan is intended to target those potentially
eligible persons who are least likely to apply for affordable units in
that region. In addition, as a result of the settlement agreement with
FSHC, the affirmative marketing plan shall require the notification of
the FSHC, New Jersey State Conference of the NAACP, the Latino
Action Network, STEPS, Ocean, Inc., the Greater Red Bank, Asbury
Park/Neptune, Bayshore, Greater Freehold, Greater Long Branch and
Trenton Branches of the NAACP, and the Supportive Housing Alliance
of affordable housing opportunities. It is a continuing program that
directs marketing activities toward Housing Region 4 and is required to
be followed throughout the period of restriction.
C. The affirmative marketing plan shall provide a regional preference for
all households that live and/or work in Housing Region 4, comprised of
Mercer, Monmouth and Ocean Counties.
D. The Township has the ultimate responsibility for adopting the
affirmative marketing plan and for the proper administration of the
affirmative marketing program, including initial sales and rentals and
resales and rerentals. The administrative agent designated by the
Township shall implement the affirmative marketing plan to assure the
affirmative marketing of all affordable units.
E. In implementing the affirmative marketing plan, the administrative
agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and moderateincome
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant
law.
F. The affirmative marketing plan shall describe the media to be used in
advertising and publicizing the availability of housing. In implementing
the affirmative marketing plan, the administrative agent shall consider
the use of language translations where appropriate.
G. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall
begin at least four months (120 days) prior to the expected date of
occupancy.
H. Applications for affordable housing shall be available in several
locations, including, at a minimum, the Mercer County Library
Headquarters, Monmouth County Library Headquarters, Ocean County
Library, West Windsor Library, the West Windsor Municipal Building
and the developer's rental office. Preapplications may be emailed to
prospective applicants upon request. Otherwise, hard copies are
available from the Township's Municipal Housing Liaison.
I. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner.
§ 200-237.3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-237.4
1:1062
§ 200-237.4. Enforcement of affordable housing regulations.
A. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing an
affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant, the municipality shall
have all remedies provided at law or equity, including but not limited to
foreclosure, tenant eviction, a requirement for household
recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a mortgage,
recuperation of any funds from a sale in violation of the regulations,
injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the regulations, entry on
the premises, and specific performance.
B. After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer or
tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the municipality
may take the following action(s) against the owner, developer or tenant
for any violation that remains uncured for a period of 60 days after
service of the written notice:
(1) The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation or violations of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer or
tenant is adjudged by the Court to have violated any provision of
the regulations governing affordable housing units the owner,
developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the following
penalties, at the discretion of the Court:
(a) A fine of not more than $500 per day or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days, or both, provided that each and
every day that the violation continues or exists shall be
considered a separate and specific violation of these provisions
and not a continuation of the initial offense;
(b) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment into West Windsor Township's
Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the gross amount of rent
illegally collected;
(c) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's reasonable
relocation costs, as determined by the Court.
(2) The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment that would result in the termination of the
owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a
mortgage foreclosure. Any such judgment shall be enforceable as if
the same were a judgment of default of the first purchase money
mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low- or moderateincome
unit.
§ 200-237.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-237.4
1:1063
(a) The judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
municipality, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at
which time the low- and moderate-income unit of the violating
owner shall be sold at a sale price which is not less than the
amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off any first purchase
money mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the
enforcement proceedings incurred by the municipality,
including attorney's fees. The violating owner shall have his
right to possession terminated as well as his title conveyed
pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
(b) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to
satisfy the first purchase money mortgage lien and any prior
liens upon the low- and moderate-income unit. The excess, if
any, shall be applied to reimburse the municipality for any and
all costs and expenses incurred in connection with either the
court action resulting in the judgment of violation or the
Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the Sheriff's
sale are insufficient to reimburse the municipality in full as
aforesaid, the violating owner shall be personally responsible
for the full extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and all
costs incurred by the municipality in connection with collecting
such deficiency. In the event that a surplus remains after
satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall be placed
in escrow by the municipality for the owner and shall be held in
such escrow for a maximum period of two years or until such
earlier time as the owner shall make a claim with the
municipality for such. Failure of the owner to claim such
balance within the two-year period shall automatically result in
a forfeiture of such balance to the municipality. Any interest
accrued or earned on such balance while being held in escrow
shall belong to and shall be paid to the municipality, whether
such balance shall be paid to the owner or forfeited to the
municipality.
(c) Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the
regulations governing affordable housing units shall not
extinguish the restrictions of the regulations governing
affordable housing units as the same apply to the low- and
moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the purchaser
at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions
of the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. The
owner determined to be in violation of the provisions of this
plan and from whom title and possession were taken by means
of the Sheriff's sale shall not be entitled to any right of
redemption.
(d) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient
amounts are bid to satisfy the first purchase money mortgage
and any prior liens, the municipality may acquire title to the
§ 200-237.4 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-237.4
1:1064
§ 200-238. Calculation of gross density and floor area. [Amended
12-15-1986 by Ord. No. 86-35; 4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12;
10-7-1991 by Ord. No. 91-23]
low- and moderate-income unit by satisfying the first purchase
money mortgage and any prior liens and crediting the violating
owner with an amount equal to the difference between the
first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and costs
of the enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price for which the low- and moderate-income
unit could have been sold under the terms of the regulations
governing affordable housing units. This excess shall be
treated in the same manner as the excess which would have
been realized from an actual sale as previously described.
(e) Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold
at the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality shall
obligate the owner to accept an offer to purchase from any
qualified purchaser which may be referred to the owner by the
municipality, with such offer to purchase being equal to the
maximum resale price of the low- and moderate-income unit as
permitted by the regulations governing affordable housing
units.
(f) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable
for complying with the terms and restrictions of governing
affordable housing units until such time as title is conveyed
from the owner.
C. Appeals. Appeals from all decisions of an administrative agent
appointed pursuant to this section shall be filed in writing with the
Court.
A. Adjustments required.
(1) The maximum permitted FAR as contained in various
nonresidential zoning districts as well as the permitted residential
density in residential zoning districts of this Part 4 are to be
amended according to the following reduction schedule in
recognition of the extent of environmentally constrained areas
located on a tract. Environmentally constrained areas shall include
areas designated as freshwater wetlands, as delineated by an
applicant and as approved by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection or other governmental agencies, and
water bodies as generally indicated on the most recent edition of
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection wetlands
maps contained on United States Geological Survey Topographic
Quadrangle maps. Also included as environmentally constrained
areas shall be areas within the one-hundred-year floodplain as
indicated on the New Jersey Delineation of Floodway and Flood
Hazard Areas Map (DFFHA.) Detailed soil engineering and
§ 200-237.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-238
1:1065
geotechnical test data undertaken in accordance with acceptable
engineering standards and practices or permits received from
governmental agencies having jurisdiction over such wetlands,
water bodies or floodplains indicating a different geographic area
may be submitted by an applicant if the applicant seeks
amendment to the boundary limits which define such
environmentally constrained areas depicted by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection wetlands maps and
DFFHA.
(2) Multiple environmentally constrained areas on a tract shall be
additive, except those instances where various environmentally
constrained areas overlap. In overlap cases, the largest constrained
area shall be used for calculation purposes.
(3) The FAR or residential density permitted by a particular zoning
district for a tract containing environmentally constrained areas
shall require an adjustment to be made based on the following
chart. Once the reduction factor is determined, it shall be
subtracted from the base FAR or residential density allowed in the
zoning district to arrive at the adjusted FAR or residential density
permitted for a parcel containing environmentally constrained
areas.
Extent of Environmentally
Constrained Areas Expressed
as % of Total Tract
Percent Reduction of
Maximum Base Permitted
FAR/ Residential Density
0 to 30 None
31 to 50 40
51 to 60 60
61 to 100 85
(4) By way of example in application of the above chart, if a tract
located within a nonresidential zone permitting a maximum FAR of
0.30 contained 70% environmentally constrained areas, the
adjusted maximum permitted FAR would be 0.045, derived as
follows:
(a) Maximum base permitted FAR = 0.30.
(b) Percent reduction due to environmentally constrained areas =
85%.
(c) FAR reduction = 0.30 x 85% = 0.255.
(d) Adjusted maximum permitted FAR= 0.30 - 0.255 = 0.045 FAR.
(5) The Planning Board, upon review of a development application
containing environmentally constrained areas, shall evaluate the
resultant adjusted FAR or residential density, including those
instances where no adjustment results through application of the
§ 200-238 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-238
1:1066
§ 200-239. Recreation preservation development credits. [Added
10-15-1990 by Ord. No. 90-28; amended 2-25-1991 by Ord. No.
91-06]
above table, with respect to its impact on a site's environmental
resources, and may further reduce the adjusted FAR or residential
density by up to 50% if the proposed development application
cannot assure positive findings with respect to the following
performance criteria:
(a) The development application's compliance with all applicable
transition buffers and/or setback limitations that may be
required by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection pursuant to the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7A-1 et seq.,
Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act.
(b) The extent to which fill or encroachment exceeds that allowed
by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
with respect to wetlands or floodplain disturbance.
(c) Bulk variances are not requested as a result of an attempt to
utilize adjusted FAR building potential or residential density.
(d) Site design and development on upland portions of the site
cause significant degradation of groundwater or surface water
quality and further significantly impair the wetland's or
floodplain's environmental and hydrological purposes as
defined by standard engineering and environmental resource
protection practices.
B. The provisions of Subsection A of this section shall not apply to any
zone in which low- and moderate-income housing is permitted, except
that they shall apply to the ROM-1 Zone. [Amended 1-9-1995 by Ord.
No. 94-65256]
A. General. In order to preserve existing recreational open space lands
within an R-2 District, one or more tracts located within the ROM-1 or
ROM-2 District may be permitted to increase the permitted floor area of
development on those tract(s) in exchange for maintaining in perpetuity
separate and properly subdivided lot(s) for continued open space or
recreational use.
B. Standards.
(1) The minimum lot size for the land to be preserved shall be 100
contiguous acres in a properly subdivided lot(s).
256. Editor's Note: Original Section 22-9.16, Calculation of Floor Area, which immediately
followed this subsection and containing portions of Ord. Nos. 87-20 and 90-12, was
repealed in its entirety by Ord. No. 91-23.
§ 200-238 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-239
1:1067
(2) The tract to be preserved shall be designated on the Township's
Community Facilities Master Plan as existing semipublic
recreation/open space.
(3) The extent of preservation development credits to be received from
such preserved lands shall be determined by the Planning Board
and be based on a hypothetical subdivision layout conforming to all
zoning and subdivision criteria. Sufficient information shall be
provided for a determination by the Planning Board as to the
number of proposed lots which would be buildable if developed as
shown. Based on the number of hypothetical building lots, the
maximum residential building square footage that is permitted on
such lots by the zone district in which the preservation tract is
located can be established.
(4) The preservation development credits once established pursuant to
Subsection B(5) herein are valid and may be utilized within the
receiving areas set forth in Subsection B(6) herein for a period of
18 years following the date of recording of a deed imposing a
restriction on the use of the land within the R-2 zone to open space
or recreational uses in perpetuity. If the preservation development
credits are incorporated as part of an approval of a development
application for a receiving tract during the eighteen-year period,
the right to utilize such incorporated credits shall be for the
duration that such approval remains valid. Banking and subsequent
transfer of excess preservation development credits from one
property in the ROM-1 and ROM-2 Districts to another shall not be
permitted.
(5) The utilization of the preservation development credits shall be
authorized upon the recording by the owner of a deed restriction,
in a form acceptable to the Township Attorney, and running with
the land from which the preservation development credits are
proposed to be transferred and restricting such land to open space
or recreational uses permitted in the R-2 District in perpetuity, and
limited by applicable bulk and area regulations. Such restrictions
shall also be made a part of the final subdivision or site plan
application of a development which proposes to utilize such credits
and shall be filed with the appropriate agencies as a condition to
such development application approval. In addition, right-of-way
dedication in accordance with the Circulation Element of the
Township's Master Plan shall be required from the parcel to be
preserved.
(6) The receiving tract for the recreation preservation development
credits shall be permitted to utilize the approved credits for
permitted but not for conditional use, provided that the tract
complies with the following:
(a) It is located within an ROM-1 District southwest of Washington
Road (Route 571) or an ROM-2 District, except that area north
§ 200-239 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-239
1:1068
of Alexander Road and west of the Bearbrook Creek, as such
zones are delineated on the Zoning Map of West Windsor
Township dated January, 1990, notwithstanding any changes
in such district boundaries which may be enacted subsequent
to the adoption of this Part 4, except that if any tract within
the area bounded by Washington Road to the north, the New
Jersey Transit Railroad to the east, Quakerbridge Road to the
south and the Delaware and Raritan Canal to the west is
subsequently zoned to ROM-1 or ROM-2, such tract shall be
eligible to utilize the approved credits. [Amended 3-11-1991
by Ord. No. 91-08]
(b) It is part of a planned development of a minimum of 20 acres
which proposes a general development plan indicating
generally how the additional floor area will be utilized.
(7) The additional floor area credit shall conform to all zoning,
subdivision, site plan and other ordinance controls governing
development within the ROM-1 and ROM-2 zones, including any
traffic management, peak hour traffic reduction and pro rata offtract
improvement obligations, with the following exceptions/
conditions:
(a) Applications for development which include preservation
development credits will be subject to the currently effective
maximum improvement coverage (MIC) of 0.50 where required
to accommodate the additional floor area credits, and in that
case subsequent changes in the MIC of these ordinances will
not apply.
(b) For developments which are proposed under the provisions of
§ 200-209A or § 200-211A(6) (for research-office limited
manufacturing park developments), the additional floor area
which the credits represent is specifically exempt from the
requirements of § 200-209A(8)(f)[3] which limit the floor area
of the stories above a three-storied building. All or a portion of
the credit floor area may be utilized within stories above the
third story of a building or buildings within a planned
development solely to the extent necessary to utilize such
credits and only where the improvement coverage has been
fully utilized in the opinion of the board of jurisdiction.
(c) Notwithstanding the three-story height limitation otherwise
imposed by § 200-210H and § 200-212H, building heights may
be up to four stories but not more than 55 feet solely to the
extent necessary to utilize such credits within the areas of the
ROM-1 and ROM-2 Districts set forth in Subsection B(6) of this
section which are outside a band 1,800 feet in width as
measured from the right-of-way line of the state's principal
arterial designated as Route One, provided that the additional
floor area which the credits represent is at least equal to the
§ 200-239 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-239
1:1069
§ 200-240. Affordable housing fee requirements. [Added 2-16-1993
by Ord. No. 93-01]
Development applications in all nonresidential and residential zones,
excluding those involving a public agency or those containing a required
affordable housing component, shall be subject to the payment of an
affordable housing fee. The amount of the fee and its collection, accounting
and disposition shall be in accordance with New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing guidelines.
§ 200-241. Child-care centers. [Added 12-16-1991 by Ord. No.
91-34]
total floor area proposed within the fourth story of the building
or buildings in the proposed development.
A. Child-care centers shall be a permitted use in all nonresidential
districts, subject to the following minimum requirements: [Amended
3-5-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-02]
(1) The following minimum standards shall apply to any freestanding
child-care center:
(a) Minimum lot area: two acres.
(b) Minimum lot frontage: 150 feet.
(c) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
(d) Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
(e) Minimum yards:
[1] Front yard: 50 feet.
[2] Side yard: 25 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 25 feet.
(2) The maximum number of children enrolled in any child-care center,
whether freestanding or within a building, the minimum number of
square feet of usable activity indoor space, and the minimum
number of square feet of outdoor play space shall be as is required
by the New Jersey Department of Human Services.
(3) The maximum improvement coverage for freestanding child-care
centers shall be 30%.
(4) The maximum building height for freestanding child-care centers
shall be 35 feet.
(5) The hours of operation for any child-care center, whether
freestanding or within a building, shall be limited to 6:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.
§ 200-239 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-241
1:1070
§ 200-242. Minimum floor area of lower income units. [Added
12-23-1996 by Ord. No. 96-35]
(6) For any child-care center, maneuvering room shall be provided onsite
for parking and unloading/loading of children so as to preclude
the necessity for stacking or backing out onto a public street. No
unsafe conditions for pickup and dropoff of children shall be
permitted.
(7) For any child-care center, parking areas, pedestrian walkways or
other exterior portions of the premises subject to use by day care
occupants at night shall be illuminated to provide safe entrance
and egress from the center. Any site illumination shall not reflect
over the property lines of the premises.
(8) The outdoor play area shall be well-drained, completely fenced and
shall not include driveways, parking areas or land otherwise
unsuitable as play areas. No part of any outdoor play area shall be
situated in the front yard.
(9) For any child-care center, all outdoor play areas shall be fenced and
adequately screened from adjacent properties or uses and
roadways by screen plantings within a fifteen-foot setback area
along all property lines. Gate doors, where provided, shall be
equipped with safety locking devices so as to preclude inadvertent
opening of the fenced enclosure.
(10) The applicant shall include a project statement indicating the
number of children to be enrolled, the ages of children to be
enrolled, the number of full- and part-time employees and the hours
of operation.
(11) All child-care centers shall be licensed by the New Jersey
Department of Human Services.
A. The minimum floor area of living space within the lower income units
shall be as follows, as established by the Balanced Housing Program of
the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, as the same may be
amended from time to time:
Type of Unit
Required Floor Area
(square feet)
Efficiency 500
One-bedroom 600
Two-bedroom 750
Three-bedroom 950
Four-bedroom 1,150
§ 200-241 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-242
1:1071
§ 200-243. Wireless communication facilities. [Amended 4-6-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-07]
B. The Planning Board may reduce the minimum floor area required if the
unit is in congregate care housing or housing which otherwise provides
communal eating arrangements and other communal space for social
services, is designed for and deed restricted to persons over the age of
62 and the Planning Board finds that the design meets or exceeds
reasonable habitability and health standards.
A. Intent. To minimize the adverse impacts associated with the potential
proliferation of communication towers, the Township of West Windsor is
pursuing a proactive policy of requiring collocation of wireless
communication antennas on existing towers, on buildings, and on a new
tower(s) at a public site(s) which may be designated by the Township
Council.
B. Communication antennas not attached to towers. Any communication
antenna which is not attached to a communication tower, along with its
associated equipment compound and support structure, shall be a
permitted accessory use to any commercial, industrial, professional,
institutional or office structure, provided that:
(1) The wireless communications facility does not exceed more than 20
feet above the highest point of the structure.
(2) Amateur radio antennas are exempt from this section.
(3) The antennas and associated equipment shall be located on the
building roof and screened so as to minimize their visual impact or
be located inside the building.
Site plan review shall not be required for wireless communication
antennas and associated equipment proposed in accordance with
this Subsection B.
C. Collocation of communication antennas on existing towers. Collocation
of wireless communication antennas on existing towers and associated
equipment compounds is permitted as a conditional use in all zoning
districts and shall be treated as a minor site plan. The conditional use
standards that apply to such use are those standards set forth below in
this Subsection C and those standards set forth in Subsection E.
(1) Height. An existing communication tower may be modified or
rebuilt to a taller height, not to exceed 12 feet over such tower's
existing height, to accommodate the collocation of additional
communication antennas. The wireless communication antennas
shall be no higher than necessary to achieve service area
requirements.
(2) Need analysis. The applicant shall submit as part of its application
a statement as to the purpose of the proposed wireless
§ 200-242 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-243
1:1072
communication facility (e.g., to address a coverage or capacity
issue, or a combination of both) and the type/mode (e.g., in vehicle
or in building) and geographic area(s) where this is an issue (e.g.,
what streets, facilities or neighborhoods). The applicant shall
provide propagation studies showing both current (without the
proposed site) and projected (with the proposed site) coverage and
service in the area of the application, including all surrounding
sites (built and approved). The report shall include the design
parameters used for the propagation studies, including antenna
types, location, orientation and elevation, operating frequencies,
ERP, and signal strength thresholds or "cut-offs." The analysis shall
show the entire area where there is insufficient service or coverage
and which the application is intended, at least in part, to address.
Additional supporting data can be submitted, including (but not
limited to) traffic data, drive tests, etc. No wireless
communications facility shall be approved unless the applicant
demonstrates a need for the facility at the location proposed.
(3) Visual impact. The proposed facility shall be designed so as to have
the least visual impact reasonably possible.
(4) Alternatives analysis. The applicant shall undertake an alternatives
analysis describing other approaches, solutions or sites it evaluated
to address the need as stated in Subsection C(2) above and shall
submit a report with respect thereto. This analysis shall include the
location of all of its existing wireless communications facilities
within the Township and outside the Township but providing
service within the boundaries of the Township; the location and
type of other sites considered; the availability of those sites; the
extent to which other sites do not meet the applicant's service,
engineering, or other needs; and the reason why the subject site
was chosen over the alternatives. The analysis shall also address
any alternative technologies that may be available and why such
technologies are not being used. The analysis of alternatives shall
include a comprehensive approach to address the need in the area
where the need analysis shows insufficient service or coverage,
demonstrating how the applicant intends to address the entirety of
the need, including any areas or issues that would not be addressed
by the proposed facility. The plan shall provide for the fewest
feasible number of sites for wireless communications facilities. The
applicant shall indicate any future sites it anticipates at the time of
the application, to the extent currently known or forecast. Future
applications by the applicant or its successor will be evaluated for
consistency with this plan, and any deviation from it shall be
justified to the satisfaction of the board of jurisdiction. No wireless
communication facility shall be approved unless the applicant
demonstrates that there are no suitable alternatives that are less
visually intrusive than the proposed application.
§ 200-243 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-243
1:1073
(5) Additional submission requirements. In addition to the applicable
documentation required for site plan approval, the following
documentation shall be submitted as part of the minor site plan
submission:
(a) Documentation by a qualified expert that any proposed
wireless communications facility will have sufficient structural
integrity to support the proposed antennas and anticipated
future collocated antennas and that the structural standards
developed for antennas by the Electronic Industries
Association (EIA) and/or the Telecommunications Industry
Association (TIA) have been met;
(b) A letter of intent by the applicant, in a form to be reviewed and
approved by the board attorney, indicating that the applicant,
to the extent it has the authority to do so, will share the use of
the tower, including extensions, and compounds to the extent
feasible, with other approved providers of wireless
communications services; and
(c) A visual impact study, graphically simulating, through models,
computer-enhanced graphics, or similar techniques, the
appearance of any proposed wireless communications facility
and indicating its view from at least five locations around and
within one mile of the proposed wireless communications
facility where such facility will be most visible. Aerial
photographs of the impact area shall also be submitted.
D. Collocation of communication antennas on towers on public property.
(1) Collocation policy. The Township of West Windsor shall plan for and
accommodate the growing demand for communication antennas by
collocating such new antennas on towers sited on publicly owned
sites controlled or designated by the Township and which are
appropriate locations for facilitating wireless communications and
for minimizing visual and other impacts on the public associated
with communication antennas.
(2) Public/Private partnership to implement collocation policy.
(a) Any collocation communication towers will be installed,
maintained and operated by a private business and/or
regulated public utility on public property under lease
agreement with the Township of West Windsor pursuant to the
Local Land and Buildings Law257 and/or the Local Public
Contracts Law258 of the State of New Jersey and in compliance
with the ordinance requirements of the Township.
257. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:12-1 et seq.
258. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 200-243 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-243
1:1074
(b) In order to assure that any tower at the above-referenced
location will accomplish the intent of this section, any lease
agreement with the private operator or regulated public utility
shall include, but not be limited to, the following requirements:
[1] The tower will be constructed to be capable of supporting
at least 200 antennas which meet radiofrequency
requirements.
[2] The tower shall not exceed 225 feet from grade.
[3] Antenna space shall be rented to all interested carriers at
a rate reflecting the fair market price for such services.
[4] The tower shall comply with the standards set forth in
Subsections E and F.
(c) The private entity or regulated public utility which will install,
maintain and operate the collocation tower will be selected
through an open public bidding process under specifications
and a lease agreement to be prepared for the Mayor and
Council under applicable New Jersey law governing publicprivate
agreements. Specifications will include, but not be
limited to, a demonstration of suitable past site management
experience and compliance with prescribed construction
standards with a cost and revenue analysis for the first five
years of operation.
(d) Installation of wireless communication facilities on or at towers
on public property shall not require site plan review.
E. Conditional use standards. The following design and performance
standards shall apply as additional conditional use standards to
communication antennas collocated on existing towers, support
structures, and associated equipment compounds proposed pursuant to
Subsection C hereof and shall be the standards applicable to towers,
antennas, and support structures, and associated equipment
compounds on public property proposed pursuant to Subsection D.
(1) Telecommunications equipment compound design. No buildings
shall be permitted in the equipment compound. Communication
equipment may be stored in cabinets.
(2) Fencing. A chain-link fence or wall not less than seven feet in
height from finished grade shall be provided around each
communication tower and equipment compound. Access to the
tower shall be through a locked gate. The fence and supporting
structures shall have a black matte finish.
(3) Landscaping. The visual impact of a communication tower and
equipment compound shall be mitigated for nearby viewers
through landscaping or other screening materials at the equipment
§ 200-243 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-243
1:1075
compound. The following landscaping and buffering shall be
required around the perimeter of the tower and equipment
compound, except that the standards may be waived by the
Planning Board for those sides of the proposed tower that are
located adjacent to undevelopable lands and lands not in public
view. Landscaping shall be installed on the outside of fences.
Further, existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum
extent practicable and may be used as a substitute for or in
supplement towards meeting landscaping requirements.
(a) A continuous evergreen hedge at least seven feet high at
planting.
(b) All landscaping shall be of the evergreen variety.
If the landscaping set forth above cannot be installed because
it is prohibited, either by the owner of the site, by law, or
otherwise, the applicant shall propose alternative landscaping
designed to mitigate the visual impact of the communication
tower and equipment compound.
(4) Method of determining communication tower height. For purposes
of measurement, communication tower height shall include
antenna, base pad and other appurtenances and shall be measured
from the finished grade of the parcel.
(5) Illumination. Communication towers shall not be artificially lighted
except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), in
which case the least intrusive type of lighting permitted by the FAA
shall be used, and except as necessary for inspection of and repairs
within the equipment compound, in which case the lighting may
only be located within the compound and may only be turned on
manually, with a mechanism to shut it off after a reasonable time to
be set by the Planning Board after testimony by the applicant's
representative. Lighting within the equipment compound shall not
produce glare and shall be designed so as to minimize its spillover
outside the compound.
(6) Finished color. Wireless communication improvements to existing
communication towers not requiring FAA painting/marking shall
have a finish that matches the existing tower.
(7) Structural design. Communication towers shall be constructed to
the EIA/TIA 222-F standards, or such subsequent revision as is in
place at the time of the Planning Board decision, as published by
the Electronic Industries Association, which may be amended from
time to time, and all Township construction/building codes.
Further, any improvements and/or additions (e.g., antennas,
satellite dishes, etc.) to existing communication towers shall
require submission of site plans sealed and verified by a
professional engineer which demonstrate compliance with the EIA/
§ 200-243 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-243
1:1076
TIA 222-E standards. The applicant shall include in its design the
opportunity for collocation by others or explain why collocation is
not feasible.
(8) Underground utilities. All utilities serving any wireless
communications facility shall be underground.
F. Standards applicable to all wireless communications facilities. The
following standards, which are not conditional use standards, shall
apply to all wireless communications facilities:
(1) Maintenance. Wireless communications facilities shall be
maintained to ensure their continued structural integrity. The
owner of a wireless communications facility shall also perform such
other maintenance of the structure and of the site as to ensure that
it does not create a visual nuisance.
(2) Inspection.
(a) An applicant may be required to inspect its wireless facility
upon notice from the Township.
(b) Inspections shall be conducted by an engineer licensed to
practice in the State of New Jersey. The results of such
inspections shall be provided to the Township Engineer. Based
upon the results of an inspection, the Township may require
repair or removal of a communication tower. Upon removal of
the wireless communications facility, if such facility is a tower,
the site shall be restored in the manner acceptable to the
Township Landscape Architect.
(3) Abandonment. Any wireless communications facility that is not
operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered
abandoned. The owner of such facility shall remove it within 90
days of notice from the Zoning Officer that the facility is
abandoned. If such facility is not removed within 90 days, the
Township may remove such facility at the owner's expense. If the
facility is to be retained, the provider shall establish that the facility
will be reused within one year after such abandonment. If the
facility is not reused within one year, the facility shall be removed.
At the discretion of the Zoning Officer, upon good cause shown, the
one-year reuse period may be extended for a period not to exceed
one additional year.
(4) The wireless communications facility shall comply with all
applicable FCC and FAA regulations.
(5) The wireless communications facility shall comply with all
applicable building codes.
§ 200-243 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-243
1:1077
(6) Signs. Signs displaying owner contact information, warnings, and
equipment information and safety instructions shall be provided.
No other signage shall be permitted.
(7) Noise. No equipment shall be operated so as to produce a noise
level on adjoining properties that exceeds the noise level permitted
by Township Code.
(8) Activity and access. All equipment shall be designed and automated
to the greatest extent possible in order to reduce the need for onsite
maintenance and thereby to minimize the need for vehicular
trips to and from the site. Access shall be from established site
access points whenever possible. No more off-street parking than is
necessary shall be permitted.
(9) Each application for any wireless communications facilities shall
include either a preliminary or a certified statement that the
operation of the facility, including reception and transmission
functions, will operate within the parameters established by the
applicable FCC licenses and regulation, so as to minimize the
possibility of interfering with the usual and customary transmission
or reception of radio, television, etc., and other licensed services
enjoyed by adjacent residential and nonresidential properties. In
the event that only a preliminary statement is submitted with the
application, a final, certified statement of noninterference will be
provided and approved by the Township prior to the issuance of a
building permit. The statement shall be prepared by an engineer
licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey or other professional
accepted by the Township.
(10) Approval required from other governmental agencies. Each
application shall include written approval or a statement of no
objection from other federal, state or county agencies that regulate
communication tower sighting, design and construction.
(11) The applicant shall submit a report certifying that its facilities will
operate in accordance with all legal requirements regarding RF
exposure (FCC Report and Order 96-326 regarding Guidelines for
Evaluating the Environmental Effects of Radiofrequency Radiation
and FCC OET Bulletin-65, Evaluating Compliance with FCC
Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radiofrequency
Electromagnetic Fields, and others). This report shall include the
class of service, frequencies, maximum effective radiation power
(ERP) of the antennas, anticipated operating ERP(s), antenna
types, heights and orientation of all antennas and indicate
predicted RF exposure levels under normal operations at the
nearest occupied structure. A copy of the FCC license applicable to
the use of the wireless communications facility shall also be
submitted. The statement shall be prepared by an engineer
licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey or other professional
accepted by the Township.
§ 200-243 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-243.1
1:1078
§ 200-243.1. Billboards. [Added 5-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-07]
Billboards are permitted as a conditional use in the B-2 Business and
ROM-1 Research Office and Manufacturing Zones, subject to the following
conditions:
A. Not more than one billboard structure containing not more than two
advertising faces shall be constructed on any lot. The resulting
billboard shall be one single- or double-faced sign.
B. Such billboard structure shall only be permitted on the following
parcels as designated on the West Windsor tax rolls:
(1) Block 7.13, Lot 47.
(2) Block 86, Lot 11.
(3) Block 8, Lot 7 and Block 7, Lot 16.01, and such areas of State
Highway Route 1 that may become part of these two lots.
C. Billboard use as permitted on the parcels identified above shall not be
subject to any minimum lot size or leasable area requirement; however,
those lots shall not be further subdivided unless in accordance with the
applicable zoning requirements for the zone or as modified herein.
D. Each billboard shall be supported by a steel monopole and shall have
dimensions not greater than 14 feet (vertical) and 48 feet (horizontal)
with no advertising face greater than 672 total square feet. In no event
shall any billboard exceed the height limits given in Subsection E below.
E. The top of a permitted billboard shall not exceed the following heights
as measured from the adjacent grade of U.S. Route 1:
(1) Block 8, Lot 7: 30 feet.
(2) Block 7.13, Lot 47: 32 feet.
(3) Block 86, Lot 11: 30 feet.
(4) Block 7, Lot 16.01: 35 feet.
F. In addition, there shall be a distance of not less than 12 feet from grade
to the bottom support of a billboard so as to provide a site distance
underneath the billboard.
G. A billboard may be developed on one of the lots identified in Subsection
B in conjunction with any other use which may be permitted on the
same lot. Such other use shall be developed in accordance with the use
and bulk provisions of the related zone or as modified in this section.
The distance of any billboard to any building shall not be less than the
height of the billboard, and in no case shall it be less than 30 feet.
H. No billboard shall be sited in a manner that results in the crossing of
any existing or proposed right-of-way or existing property line. Also, all
§ 200-243.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-243.1
1:1079
§ 200-243.2. Affordable housing set aside. [Added 6-28-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-12; amended 6-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-07;
3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
portions of any proposed billboard structure shall be located within 100
feet of the proposed U.S. Route 1 right-of-way in existence at the time
of this section.
I. No new billboards may be constructed on Block 86, Lot 11, prior to the
removal of billboards existing as of the date of this section at that site.
J. The construction of any new billboard shall include landscaping
provided at and around the base of the structure that shall be approved
by the Township Landscape Architect.
K. Billboards shall not contain moving, flashing or intermittently
illuminated elements. Billboard illumination shall be shielded to
prevent glare and focus on sign faces only.
L. The application for any billboard shall be required to be submitted as a
minor site plan, as well as for conditional use approval.
A. A mandatory affordable housing set-aside requirement of 25% shall be
imposed on any multifamily development created through any Township
or land use board action involving a rezoning, use variance, density
variance, redevelopment plan or rehabilitation plan permitting
redevelopment, which density is at or above six dwelling units per acre
and results in the construction of five or more new units over the
number of units previously permitted. The low- and moderate-income
housing shall meet all of the applicable standards and requirements for
affordable units, including those set forth in the Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls (UHAC), N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., and § 200-237.
B. At least 50% of the affordable units shall be affordable to low-income
households and at least 13% of all rental affordable units shall be made
affordable to very-low-income households earning 30% or less of the
regional median household income by household size, which very-lowincome
units shall be included as part of the low-income requirement.
The remaining affordable units shall be made affordable to moderateincome
households. The affordable units shall be located on-site and
shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the development phased in
accordance with the affordable housing construction scheduled set
forth in N.J.A.C. 5:97-6.4(d).
C. Subdivision and site plan approval shall be denied by the board unless
the developer complies with the requirements to provide low- and
moderate-income housing pursuant to the provisions of this section. A
property shall not be permitted to be subdivided so as to avoid meeting
this requirement. The board may impose any reasonable conditions to
ensure such compliance.
§ 200-243.1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-243.2
1:1080
§ 200-243.3. Prohibition against residential development in
common open space. [Added 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-19]
Development of residential dwelling units in common open space approved
as part of a development application containing residential dwelling units is
prohibited.
D. The mandatory affordable housing set-aside requirement shall not give
any developer the right to any such rezoning, variance, or other relief
as set forth above or establish any obligation on the part of the
Township to grant such rezoning, variance or other relief.
§ 200-243.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-243.3
1:1081

ARTICLE XXXII
Administrative Procedures
§ 200-244. Establishment of Planning Board. [Amended 5-18-1996
by Ord. No. 96-10]
The provisions of Chapter 4, Administration of Government, § 4-65, shall
apply.
§ 200-245. Powers of Planning Board.
The Planning Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be
necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this Part 4. In
the issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony,
the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953
(N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply. It shall also have the following powers
and duties:
A. To make and adopt and from time to time amend a Master Plan for the
physical development of the municipality, considering any areas outside
its boundaries which in the Board's judgment bear essential relation to
the planning of the municipality.
B. At the request of the developer, the Planning Board shall grant an
informal review of a concept plan for a development for which the
developer intends to prepare and submit an application for
development. The developer shall not be required to submit any fees for
such an informal review. The developer shall not be bound by any
concept plan for which review is requested and the Planning Board
shall not be bound by any such review.
C. To administer the provisions of Part 1, Site Plan Review, and Part 2,
Subdivision, of this chapter, and other development control ordinances
of the municipality in accordance with the provisions of said ordinances
and the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
D. To approve conditional use applications in accordance with the
provisions of this Part 4, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
E. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulations.
F. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuing planning
process.
G. To annually prepare or review, when authorized by the Township
Council, a program of municipal capital improvement projects
projected over a term of six years, and amendments thereto, and
recommend same to the Township Council.
H. To consider and make report to the Township Council within 35 days
after referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted to it
§ 200-244 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-245
1:1083
§ 200-246. Citizens Advisory Committee.
The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a Citizens Advisory
Committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties, but
such person or persons shall have no power to vote or take other action
required by the Board. Such person or persons shall serve at the pleasure
of the Mayor.
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26(a) or 40:55D-26(b)
and also pass upon other matters specifically referred to the Planning
Board by the Township Council pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-26(a) or 40:55D-26(b). [Amended 8-13-1984 by Ord. No.
84-24]
I. Whenever the proposed development requires approval pursuant to
this chapter of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use, but not a
variance pursuant to § 4-68F(1)(d) of Chapter 4, Administration of
Government, the Planning Board shall have the power to grant to the
same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Board of
Adjustment: [Amended 8-13-1984 by Ord. No. 84-24]
(1) Variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
(2) Direction for issuance of a permit for a building or structure in the
bed of a mapped street or public drainageway, flood control basin
or public area reserved on the Official Map.
(3) Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for issuance of a permit
for a building or structure not related to a street.
(a) Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection,
notice of the hearing on the application for development shall
include reference to the request for a variance or a direction
for issuance of a permit as the case may be.
(b) The developer may elect to submit a separate application
requesting approval of the variance or direction of the issuance
of a permit and a subsequent application for any required
approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The
separate approval of the variance or direction of the issuance
of a permit shall be conditioned upon grant of all required
subsequent approvals by the Planning Board. No such
subsequent approval shall be granted unless the approval can
be granted without substantial detriment to the public good
and without substantial impairment of the intent and purpose
of the zone plan and this Part 4.
J. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the Township Council for the aid and assistance of the
Township Council or other agencies or officers.
§ 200-245 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-247
1:1084
§ 200-247. Environmental Commission.
Whenever the Environmental Commission has prepared and submitted to
the Planning Board an index of the natural resources of the municipality,
the Planning Board shall make available to the Environmental Commission
an informational copy of every application for development to the Planning
Board. Failure of the Planning Board to make such informational copy
available to the Environmental Commission shall not invalidate any hearing
or proceeding.
§ 200-248. Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Amended 5-5-1980 by
Ord. No. 80-13; 5-5-1980 by Ord. No. 80-14; 2-8-1982 by Ord. No.
82-09; 8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 82-35; 10-25-1982 by Ord. No. 82-48;
8-13-1984 by Ord. No. 84-24; 5-18-1996 by Ord. No. 96-10;
8-14-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-10]
The provisions of Chapter 4, Administration of Government, § 4-68, shall
apply. Additionally, as a part of an application to said Board for bulk
variances ("c" type) and for use and non-use variances ("d" type) relief
within the jurisdiction of said Board pursuant to § 4-68 referenced herein,
all applicants shall complete and file with their application the following
Zoning Board of Adjustment checklist.259
§ 200-249. Administrative procedures applicable to both the
Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. Meetings of municipal agencies.
(1) Regular meetings. Every municipal agency shall hold regular
meetings at the times and places fixed by its rules. Regular
meetings shall be scheduled not less than once a month and shall
be held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of applications for
development to process.
(2) Special meetings. Special meetings may be provided for at the call
of the Chair or on the request of any two members, and such shall
be held on notice to the members and the public in accordance with
legal requirements.
(3) Open to public. All regular and special meetings shall be open to
the public, and notice thereof shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law, P.L. 1975, c. 231.260
An executive session for the purpose of discussing and studying any
matters to come before the agency shall not be deemed a regular or
special meeting within the meaning of the Municipal Land Use Law.
(4) Action at meetings; quorum. No action shall be taken at any
meeting without a quorum being present. All actions shall be taken
259. Editor's Note: Said checklist is included at the end of this chapter.
260. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 200-247 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-249
1:1085
by a majority vote of the members of the municipal agency present
at the meeting, except as otherwise provided in this Part 4 and
except also that adjournment for lack of a quorum may be by
majority vote of those present. Failure of a motion to receive the
number of votes required to approve an application for
development pursuant to the exceptional vote requirements of
§ 200-245I(2) of this Part 4 or § 4-68 of Chapter 4, Administration
of Government, shall be deemed an action denying the application.
A member of a municipal agency who was absent for one or more
of the meetings at which a hearing was held shall be eligible
to vote on the matter upon which the hearing was conducted,
notwithstanding the member's absence from one or more of the
meetings; provided, however, that such Board member has
available to said member the transcript or recording of all of the
hearing from which said member was absent and certifies, in
writing, to the Board that said member has read such transcript
or listened to such recording. [Amended 8-13-1984 by Ord. No.
84-24]
(5) Minutes. Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept
and shall include the names of the persons appearing and
addressing the municipal agency and the persons appearing by
attorney, the action taken by the agency, the findings, if any, made
by it and the reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be
made available for public inspection during normal business hours
at the office of the administrative officer. Any interested party shall
have the right to compel production of the minutes for use as
evidence in any legal proceedings concerning the subject matter of
such minutes and shall be charged a fee for reproduction of the
minutes as provided by Chapter 82, Fees, of this Code.
B. Fees for applications or for the rendering of any services by the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment or any member of their
administrative staffs shall be as provided by Chapter 82, Fees, of this
Code.
C. Hearings.
(1) Application by corporation or partnership. A corporation or
partnership applying to the Planning Board or the Board of
Adjustment or to the governing body for permission to subdivide a
parcel of land into six or more lots or applying for a variance to
construct a multiple dwelling of 25 or more family units or for
approval of a site to be used for commercial purposes shall list the
names and addresses of all stockholders or individual partners
owning at least 10% of its stock of any class or at least 10% of the
interest in the partnership, as the case may be.
(2) Disclosure of 10% ownership interest of corporation or partnership
which is 10% owner of applying corporation or partnership. If a
corporation or partnership owns 10% or more of the stock of a
§ 200-249 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-249
1:1086
corporation or 10% or greater interest in a partnership, subject
to disclosure pursuant to Subsection A that corporation or
partnership shall list the names and addresses of its stockholders
holding 10% or more of its stock or of 10% or greater interest in
the partnership, as the case may be, and this requirement shall be
followed by every corporate stockholder or partner in a partnership
until the names and addresses of the noncorporate stockholders
and individual partners exceeding the 10% ownership criterion
established in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1 et seq. have been listed.
[Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
(3) Disapproval of application. The Planning Board, Board of
Adjustment or governing body shall not approve the application of
any corporation or partnership which does not comply with
Subsection C(1) and (2) of this section.
(4) Penalty. Any corporation or partnership which conceals the names
of the stockholders owning 10% or more of its stock or of the
individual partners owning a 10% or greater interest in the
partnership, as the case may be, shall be subject to a fine of $1,000
to $10,000, which shall be recovered in the name of the
municipality in any court of record in the State in a summary
manner pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1
et seq.).
(5) Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
make rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies,
which rules shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. or of this Part 4.
(6) Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as the
presiding officer may designate shall have the power to administer
oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses
and the production of relevant evidence, including witnesses and
documents presented by the parties and the provisions of the
County and Municipal Investigations Law, c. 38, P.L. 1953 (N.J.S.A,
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
(7) Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application
for development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the
presiding officer and the right of cross-examination shall be
permitted to all interested parties through their attorneys, if
represented, or directly, if not represented, subject to the
discretion of the presiding officer and to reasonable limitations as
to time and number of witnesses.
(8) Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence.
§ 200-249 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-249
1:1087
(9) Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of
the proceedings by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic
means. In all applications for use variance, if the Board does not
provide, by regulation, a stenographer, it shall be the obligation of
the applicant to provide a stenographer for the purpose of
recording the hearing. The Board shall furnish a transcript or
duplicate recording in lieu thereof on request to any interested
party at his or her expense. A deposit representing an estimate of
the cost of said transcript shall be paid prior to its preparation.
[Amended 5-24-1982 by Ord. No. 82-22261]
D. Notice requirements for hearing. Whenever a hearing is required on an
application for development pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. or
pursuant to the determination of the municipal agency in question, the
applicant shall give notice thereof as follows:
(1) Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper
of the municipality at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
(2) Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on
the current tax duplicate located in the state and within 200 feet in
all directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing,
provided that this requirement shall be deemed satisfied by notice
to the condominium association, in the case of any unit owner
whose unit has a unit above or below it, or horizontal property
regime, in the case of any co-owner whose apartment has an
apartment above or below it. Notice shall be given by serving a
copy thereof on the property owner as shown on the current tax
duplicate, or on the agent in charge of the property, or mailing a
copy thereof by certified mail to the property owner at the property
owner's address as shown on the current tax duplicate.
(3) Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any
partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon
its President, a Vice President, Secretary or other person
authorized by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of
the corporation. Notice to a condominium association, horizontal
property regime, community trust or homeowners' association
because of its ownership of common elements or areas located
within 200 feet of the property which is the subject of the hearing
may be made in the same manner as to a corporation without
further notice to unit owners, co-owners or homeowners on
account of such common elements or areas.
(4) Notice of hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall
be given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of such
municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the notice
261. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 200-249 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-249
1:1088
required to be given pursuant to Subsection D(2) above to the
owners of lands in such adjoining municipality which are located
within 200 feet of the subject premises.
(5) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
County Planning Board of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to an existing county road or
proposed road shown on the Official County Map or on the County
Master Plan, adjoining other county land or situated within 200
feet of a municipal boundary.
(6) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
(7) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning in the
Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Municipal Clerk pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10b.
(8) All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given at
least 10 days prior to the date fixed for hearing, and the applicant
shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the board holding the
hearing on the application for development.
(9) Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
deemed to be complete upon mailing. All notices required to be
given pursuant to the terms of this Part 4 shall state the name, time
and place of hearing, the nature of the matters to be considered,
including a description of any waivers that may be requested by the
applicant in accordance with Part 1, Site Plan Review, Part 2,
Subdivision, and Part 3 Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures, of
this chapter, and identification of the property proposed for
development by street address, if any, or by reference to lot and
block number as shown on the current tax duplicate in the
Municipal Tax Assessor's office and the location and times at which
any maps and documents for which approval is sought or available
as required by law. [Amended 8-9-1982 by Ord. No. 82-37]
(10) Notice pursuant to Subsections D(3), (4), (5) and (6) above shall not
be deemed to be required unless public notice pursuant to
Subsections D(1) and (2) above is required.
E. List of property owners furnished. The Zoning Officer of the
municipality shall within seven days after receipt of a request therefor
and upon receipt of payment of a fee as prescribed in Chapter 82, Fees,
make and certify a list from the current tax duplicate of names and
addresses of owners to whom the applicant is required to give notice
§ 200-249 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-249
1:1089
pursuant to Subsection D(1) above. The applicant shall be entitled to
rely upon the information contained in such list, and failure to give
notice to any owner not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing or
proceeding.
F. Decisions. [Amended 8-13-1984 by Ord. No. 84-24]
(1) The municipal agency shall include findings of fact and conclusions
based thereon in each decision on any application for development
and shall reduce the decision to writing. The municipal agency
shall provide the findings and conclusions through:
(a) A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period
provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. for action by the
municipal agency on the applications for development.262
(b) A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held not later
than 45 days after the date of the meeting at which the
municipal agency voted to grant or deny approval. Only the
members of the municipal agency who voted for the action
taken may vote on the memorializing resolution, and the vote
of a majority of such members present at the meeting at which
the resolution is presented for adoption shall be sufficient to
adopt the resolution. An action pursuant to Subsection A
(resulting from the failure of a motion to approve an
application) shall be memorialized by resolution as provided
above, with those members voting against the motion for
approval being the members eligible to vote on the
memorializing resolution. The vote on any such resolution shall
be deemed to be a memorialization of the action of the
municipal agency and not to be an action of the municipal
agency; however, the date of the adoption of the resolution
shall constitute the date of the decision for purposes of the
mailings, filings and publications required by Subsection F(2)
below and Subsection G of this section. If the municipal agency
fails to adopt a resolution or memorializing resolution as
hereinabove specified, any interested party may apply to the
Superior Court in a summary manner for an order compelling
the municipal agency to reduce its findings and conclusions to
writing within a stated time, and the cost of the application,
including attorney's fees, shall be assessed against the
municipality.
(2) A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days
of the date of decision to the applicant or, if represented, then to his
or her attorney, without separate charge. A copy of the decision
shall also be mailed to all persons who have requested it and who
have paid the fee prescribed by the Board for such service. A copy
262. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 200-249 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-249
1:1090
§ 200-250. Enforcement. [Amended 8-23-1982 by Ord. No. 82-39]
of the decision shall also be filed in the office of the Municipal
Clerk, who shall make a copy of such filed decision available to
any interested party upon payment of a fee calculated in the some
manner as those established for copies of other public documents
in the municipality.
G. Publication of decision. A brief notice of every final decision shall be
published in the official newspaper of the municipality. Such publication
shall be arranged by the secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, without separate charge to
the applicant. Such notice shall be sent to the official newspaper for
publication within 10 days of the date of any such decision.
H. Payment of taxes. Every application for development submitted to the
Planning Board or to the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be
accompanied by proof that no taxes or assessments for local
improvements are due or delinquent on the property which is the
subject of such application; or, if it is shown that taxes or assessments
are delinquent on said property, any approvals or other relief granted
by either Board shall be conditioned upon either the prompt payment of
such taxes or assessments or the making of adequate provision for the
payment thereof in such manner that the municipality will be
adequately protected.
I. Appeals from decisions of a municipal agency on applications for
development. The Township Council shall not hear any appeals from the
decision of a municipal agency. Any interested party desiring to appeal
such decision shall file directly for review by any court of competent
jurisdiction according to law and pursuant to the rules of court. [Added
8-13-1984 by Ord. No. 84-24263]
A. This Part 4 shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning Officer of
the Township of West Windsor or any proper officer of the Township. All
zoning and land use permits as required by this Part 4 shall be issued by
the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer may from time to time
promulgate such rules and regulations as said Zoning Officer may deem
necessary for the proper administration of this Part 4. A copy of such
rules and regulations shall be kept on file in the office of the Township
Clerk, Construction Official and Zoning Officer.264
B. The Zoning Officer shall cause any property, building or structure to be
inspected or examined and to order, in writing, compliance with the
terms of this Part 4. For purposes of such inspection, the Zoning Officer
263. Editor's Note: Original Subsections 22-10.5.11 through 22-10.5.18, which immediately
followed this subsection, were deleted by Ord. No. 84-24.
264. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 200-249 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-250
1:1091
§ 200-251. Building and land use permits. [Amended 8-23-1982 by
Ord. No. 82-39]
No building in any district shall be erected, reconstructed, restored,
structurally altered, except for ordinary repairs as defined by the State of
New Jersey, Department of Community Affairs, or used without a building
permit, and no vacant land shall be used in any manner not involving the
construction of a building without a land use permit. A building permit or
a land use permit shall be duly issued upon application to the appropriate
official and upon payment of the required fee, unless the premises are
exempt from taxation. The amount of such fee shall be as set forth in the
Chapter 82, Fees, of this Code. No building permit or land use permit shall
be issued unless the proposed construction or use is in full conformity
with all provisions of this Part 4 and all other applicable regulations. Any
such permit issued in violation of the provisions of this Part 4 shall be
null and void and of no effect, without the necessity for any proceedings
for revocation or nullification thereof, and any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to any such permit shall be unlawful.
shall have the right to enter any building or premises during reasonable
hours, subject to due process of law.
C. The Mayor may appoint an Assistant Zoning Officer to serve at the
discretion of the Mayor and to have such authority as is delegated to
the Assistant Zoning Officer by the Mayor. [Added 1-25-1982 by Ord.
No. 82-3265]
A. Building and land use permit application procedure.
(1) Every application for a building permit shall comply with such
administrative rules regarding their issuance as may be enforced
and available from the Construction Official and shall contain the
following information, accompanied by a plot plan drawn to scale
and signed by the person responsible for such drawing, which is
acceptable to the Construction Official. If no such plot plan is
available or acceptable, a survey, prepared by a licensed engineer
or land surveyor, is required. In the case of accessory buildings, the
Construction Official may waive such of the requirements set forth
in Subsection A(1)(a) through (e) below as said Official may deem
to be superfluous.
(a) The actual shape, dimensions, radii, angles and area of the lot
on which the building is proposed to be erected or of the lot on
which it is situated if an existing building.
(b) The exact size and locations on the lot of the proposed building
or buildings or alteration of an existing building and of other
existing buildings on the same lot.
265. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 200-250 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-251
1:1092
(c) The dimensions of all yards in relation to the subject building
and the distances between such building and any other
existing buildings on the same lot.
(d) The existing and intended use of all buildings, existing or
proposed, the use of land and the number of dwelling units the
building is designed to accommodate.
(e) Such topographic or other information with regard to the
building, the lot or neighboring lots as may be necessary to
determine that the proposed construction will conform to the
provisions of this Part 4, including but not limited to finished
basement floor elevation, existing groundwater elevation,
highest seasonally high groundwater elevation, the method of
determining both the existing groundwater elevation and the
highest seasonally high groundwater elevation and by whom
these determinations were made. [Amended 4-20-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-12]
(f) As a condition precedent to the application for a building
permit for a new building, a proposed grading plan shall be
submitted to the Township Engineer for review and approval.
This plan shall include the proposed building footprint, first
floor elevation and proposed ground elevations at the following
locations: all lot corners, all building corners and at vehicle
entrance to the garage. The plan shall also show the proposed
finished basement floor elevation, the existing groundwater
elevation, the highest seasonally high groundwater elevation,
the methods of determining both the existing groundwater
elevation and the highest seasonally high groundwater
elevation and by whom these determinations were made.
Proposed contours at one-foot intervals shall be shown and
shall include proposed grading over the septic system area, if
applicable. [Added 4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12]
(g) A foundation location survey prepared by a land surveyor
licensed in the State of New Jersey showing the as-built
location of the building foundation shall be submitted to the
Construction Official prior to backfill inspection of the
foundation wall. The proposed foundation location as shown on
the original plot plan shall also be shown on the foundation
location survey. [Added 4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12]
(2) Every application for a land use permit shall be accompanied by a
plot plan drawn to scale and signed by the person responsible for
such drawing, showing the manner in which the land is proposed to
be used and any proposed fencing, screening and landscaping. The
Zoning Officer may waive this requirement if the Zoning Officer
deems it superfluous.
§ 200-251 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-251
1:1093
§ 200-252. Certificate of occupancy.
Upon the completion, in compliance with all the provisions of this Part 4,
of any building or alteration, provided that the approved building permit as
described herein shall have been issued, the owner or the owner's agent
shall apply to the Construction Official, in writing, for the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy pursuant to the provisions of this section.
B. Access prerequisite to building permit. No building permit shall be
issued for the construction or alteration of any building upon a lot
without access to a street or highway except upon application to and
approval by the Board of Adjustment.
C. Site plan review prior to building permit. No building permit shall be
issued for any building that is subject to site plan review and approval,
except in conformity with the requirements of said approval.
D. Conditional use approval prior to building permit. No building permit
shall be issued for a building that is to be used for any conditional use in
any district where such use is subject to approval by the Planning Board
unless and until such approval has been duly granted by said Board.
E. Variance requirements prior to building permit. No building permit
shall be issued for a building that is permitted subject to a variance
granted by the Board of Adjustment except in accordance with all
conditions which may have been prescribed by the Board.
F. Copies and fee. The building permit application and all supporting
documentation shall be made in such number of copies as may be
required by the Construction Official and shall be accompanied by the
required fee. The amount of such fee shall be as set forth in Chapter 82,
Fees, of this Code. On the issuance of a building permit, the
Construction Official shall return one copy of all filed documents to the
applicant.
G. Construction official time to act. The Construction Official shall within
20 days after the filing of a complete and properly prepared application
as determined by the Construction Official either issue or deny a
building permit. If a building permit is denied, the Construction Official
shall state, in writing, to the applicant the reasons for such denial.
H. Zoning approval prior to building permit. No building permit shall be
issued for any structure until prior zoning approvals have been granted
by the appropriate federal, state, county or municipal agency or
agencies in accordance with the provisions of this Part 4 and until all
review and inspection fees and all local taxes and assessments on the
property have been paid. [Added 11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-27]
A. Unlawful occupancy. The following shall be unlawful until a certificate
of occupancy shall have been applied for and issued by the Construction
Official:
§ 200-251 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-252
1:1094
(1) Occupancy and use of a building erected, reconstructed, restored,
altered or moved or any change in use of an existing building.
(2) Occupancy, use or any change in use of vacant land, other than
agriculture.
(3) Any change in use of a nonconforming use.
(4) Occupancy and use of any enlargement to an existing structure.
B. Conditional use approval prior to certificate of occupancy. No
certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any conditional use of a
building or of land requiring conditional use approval by the Planning
Board or for any land or site requiring site plan approval has been
granted or in connection with which a variance has been granted by the
Board of Adjustment and shall contain a detailed statement of any
condition to which the same is subject.
C. Certificate of occupancy application procedure. Application for a
certificate of occupancy for a new building or for an existing building
which has been altered shall be made on forms furnished by the
Construction Official after erection of such building or part thereof has
been completed in conformity with the provisions of this Part 4 and all
other applicable regulations. In the case of a new building, such
application shall be accompanied by an accurate plot plan, acceptable
to the Construction Official, or by a survey prepared by a licensed land
surveyor or engineer showing the location of all buildings as built. Such
certificate shall be issued within 10 days after receipt of the properly
completed application, but only provided that the application states
that all requirements of all other applicable codes or ordinances in
effect are complied with.
(1) As a condition precedent to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for a new building, pursuant to the State Uniform
Construction Code, an as-built lot grading plan prepared by a land
surveyor licensed in the State of New Jersey shall be submitted to
the Construction Official and the Township Engineer bearing a
certification that the lot grading complies with the proposed lot
grading plan as approved or as amended and approved by the
Township Engineer. [Added 4-20-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12]
(2) The as-built plan shall be prepared with the contours at one-foot
intervals and shall include the building footprint, finished first floor
elevation and ground elevations at all lot corners, all building
corners, vehicle entrance to the garage, drainage swale inverts
between adjacent interrupted landscape berms, top of curb
adjacent to property corners, edge of Township-owned sidewalk
adjacent to property corners and at the center of the driveway, inlet
grate elevations (private and Township-owned) and all high points
on the lot. The invert and surrounding ground elevation shall be
shown for sanitary sewer clean-outs and for sump pump discharge
§ 200-252 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-252
1:1095
§ 200-253. Zoning permit. [Amended 10-25-1982 by Ord. No. 82-48;
11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-27]
All requests for zoning permits shall be made to the Zoning Officer, in
writing, specifying the lot or building involved and the proposed use and
such other information as may be required. No zoning permit will be issued
until all taxes and assessments for local improvements on the property for
which zoning relief is sought have been paid in full.
§ 200-254. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-7-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-15]
Violation of any provision or requirement of this Part 4 or violation of
any plan, application, permit or certificate approved under the provisions
of this Part 4, including conditions of approval imposed by the board of
jurisdiction, shall be considered an offense punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3. The approval
conditions to which this section applies shall include all conditions, whether
or not they are enforceable or were intended to be enforceable by deed
restrictions, easements, or other mechanisms and whether or not such
restrictions and easements were recorded or other mechanisms were
implemented. More specifically, the applicant and its successors in title
line cleanouts. The plan shall also show the location of the septic
system, lateral inverts, D-box outlet inverts and septic tank lid
elevation, if applicable. All proposed ground elevations shown on
the approved grading plan shall be included on the as-built plan.
D. Issuance of certificate of occupancy. If the proposed use is in conformity
with the provisions of this Part 4 and of all other applicable codes and
ordinances, a certificate of occupancy for the use of vacant land or for a
change of use of a nonconforming use shall be issued by the
Construction Official within 10 days after receipt of a properly
completed application. If the certificate of occupancy is denied, the
Construction Official shall state the reasons, in writing, to the
applicant.
E. Fee. Every application for a certificate of occupancy, a temporary
certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance shall be
accompanied by the required fee. The amount of such fee shall be as set
forth in Chapter 82, Fees, of this Code.
F. Effect of certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be
deemed to authorize and is required for both initial occupancy and the
continued occupancy and use of the building or land to which it applies.
G. Record of certificate of occupancy. A record of all certificates of
occupancy shall be kept in the office of the Construction Official and
copies shall be furnished on request to any agency of the Township or to
any persons having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or
land affected.
§ 200-252 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-254
1:1096
shall comply with conservation area restrictions set forth in the approval
and application materials, whether or not they are intended to be
incorporated in deed restrictions and whether or not such deed restrictions
were recorded. In the event that any penalty provided herein is in excess
of that allowed by any other applicable code or ordinance, the penalty
provisions of such other code or ordinance shall apply. The following
guidelines shall prevail in determining responsibility for violations and
extent of penalties:
§ 200-255. Amendments.
A. The owner, general agent or contractor of a building, premises or part
thereof where such a violation has been committed or does exist shall
be guilty of such an offense.
B. Any agent, contractor, architect, engineer, builder, corporation or other
person who commits, takes part or assists in such violation shall be
guilty of such an offense.
C. Each and every day that any such violation continues, after a ten-day
period from the date of notification that such violation exists, shall
constitute a separate offense. Such notice shall be written by the
Construction Official and shall be served by certified or registered mail
or by personal service.
D. The imposition of penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
Township or any person from instituting appropriate legal action or
proceeding to prevent an unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use; or to
restrain, correct or abate a violation; or to prevent the illegal occupancy
of a building, land or premises.
A. This Part 4 or any part thereof may be amended, supplemented or
repealed from time to time by the Township Council on its own motion
or upon recommendation by the Planning Board. Every proposed
amendment shall be referred by the Township Council to the Planning
Board for a report, which shall be rendered within 35 days of such
referral. Such amendments shall be governed by the procedural
provisions regarding necessary public meeting and notices, quorum,
voting and other stipulations as established in § 200-249 of this article.
B. Report of the Planning Board on amendments. In making such report on
a proposed amendment, the Planning Board shall make inquiry and
determination concerning the items specified below:
(1) Zoning text amendment. Concerning a proposed amendment to or
change in the text of this Part 4:
(a) Whether such change is consistent with the aims and
principles embodied in this Part 4 as to the particular districts
concerned.
§ 200-254 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-255
1:1097
§ 200-256. Pending applications.
All applications for development filed prior to the effective date of this Part
4 may be continued, but any appeals arising out of decisions made on any
such application shall be governed by the provisions of § 200-249.
(b) Which areas, land uses, buildings and establishments in the
Township will be directly affected by such change and in what
way they will be affected.
(c) The indirect implications of such change in its effect on other
regulations.
(d) Whether such proposed amendment is consistent with the aims
of the Master Plan of the Township.
(2) Zoning Map amendment. Concerning a proposed amendment
involving a change in the Zoning Map:
(a) Whether the uses permitted by the proposed change would be
appropriate in the area concerned.
(b) Whether adequate public school facilities and other public
facilities and services, including roads, exist or can be
reasonably expected to be created to serve the needs of any
additional dwellings or such other uses likely to be constructed
as a result of such change.
(c) Whether the proposed change is in accord with any existing or
proposed plans in the vicinity.
(d) The effect of the proposed amendment upon the growth of the
Township as envisaged by the Master Plan.
§ 200-255 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-256
1:1098
Part 5
Princeton [JAunddcteidon3 -R2e3d-2e0ve0l9opBmy eOnrtd P. lNaon. R2e0g0u9l-a0t4ory Provisions 266]
ARTICLE XXXIII
Redevelopment Goals and Policies
§ 200-257. Goals and policies established.
The first phase of redevelopment planning occurred during the beginning of
2007 during which three public workshops were conducted. The following
goals for redevelopment are the result of the public process. These goals
were subsequently endorsed by the Township Council. Policies are set forth
with the intent of implementing these goals.
A. Goal 1.
(1) Goal: The Redevelopment Plan will be tax positive or tax neutral
consistent with the desires of the residents of West Windsor.
(2) Policies.
(a) Policy 1: The Redevelopment Plan proposes a balance of uses
that can pay for desired traffic and public improvements.
(b) Policy 2: The implementation of the Redevelopment Plan will
be evaluated to assure that the development in the
Redevelopment Area will generate sufficient tax revenues to
pay for the municipal and school services it requires and also
provide or pay for the public improvements required to
implement redevelopment plan policies. State and federal
financial assistance will be sought for public improvements
such as roads and bikeways necessary to serve regional and
state needs, but no development in the redevelopment area
may proceed unless infrastructure sufficient to service it is
installed. Necessary roadway infrastructure is set forth in the
table entitled "Required Roadway and Bikeway Infrastructure
for Redevelopment Area Districts," Maps N through U,267 and
Goal 4, Policy 2. Where infrastructure constructed by a
developer has greater capacity than is needed to service the
development, the developer will be entitled to subsequent fair
share payments from other developers inside or outside the
district utilizing that capacity. Such payments can be made at
the Township's option through its off-tract fund. As per the
Master Plan, bicycle and pedestrian facilities are considered to
be an integral part of the roadway structure and as such are an
important part of the capital improvement program. The cost
266. Editor's Note: This Ordinance Also Redesignated Former Part 5, Flood Damage And
Prevention, As Part 6.
267. Editor's Note: Maps N through U are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 200-257 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-257
1:1099
of such facilities should be included in the Off-Tract Road
Assessment Program.
(c) Policy 3: A fiscal impact report is required to articulate future
demand on municipal services generated by redevelopment,
including school costs, and any other financial impacts on the
municipality. The fiscal report must show details of the
projection of property tax revenues that will accrue to the
municipality, county and school district according to an
agreed-upon redevelopment phasing plan. The report must
show that at all times there will not be a negative economic
impact on the municipality due to the proposed redevelopment.
(d) Policy 4: A fiscal impact report is required for each
development to articulate future demand on municipal services
generated by redevelopment of the property that is the subject
of such development, including school costs and any other
fiscal impacts on the municipality. The fiscal impact report
must show details on the projection of property tax revenues
that will accrue at the municipality, county, and school district
according to an agreed-upon redevelopment phasing plan, if
any. The report must show that at all times there will not be a
negative impact on the municipality due to the proposed
redevelopment and that the development will advance Goal 1,
except that a development that has a fiscally negative impact
may proceed if the developer can demonstrate that the overall
Redevelopment Plan will have a positive fiscal impact and that
the developer's project is essential to accomplish the
Redevelopment Plan's goals. The fiscal impact report must be a
component of the redeveloper's agreement required for each
project.
(e) Policy 5: The Township and Planning Board will work closely
with the West Windsor-Plainsboro Regional School District in
assessing the impact of increased student enrollment from the
redevelopment area.
(f) Policy 6: A financing report will be provided to define, review
and analyze the financing mechanisms for achieving the
economic goals of the redevelopment plan. This policy shall not
apply to the RP-1 District. [Amended 3-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-5]
B. Goal 2.
(1) Goal: The Redevelopment Plan will be scaled to be consistent with
the desires of the residents of West Windsor, including the number
and diversity of housing units.
(2) Policies.
§ 200-257 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-257
1:1100
(a) 1: Residential development should be sited in the
Redevelopment Area in accordance with the following
guidelines:
[1] Dwelling units should be buffered from the railroad and
traffic generated by rail commuters to the greatest extent
possible.
[2] Context-sensitive road design and traffic calming
techniques should be employed to soften the impact of
regional through traffic in residential areas of the
Redevelopment Area.
[3] Residential units should be placed in close proximity to
retail services, civic uses and open space amenities.
[4] Except as provided for in Policy 1[5], all residential
development in the Redevelopment Area should occur in
mixed-use structures.
[5] Market-rate housing units and affordable housing units
are to be integrated together in any housing areas. The
only exceptions to this policy would be for municipally
sponsored projects such as Project Freedom, mixed-use
developments where the number of affordable units is de
minimis, and small all-affordable developments not greater
than 25 units in District 10. Clusters of rental affordable
units within buildings are acceptable, provided that no
more than 35% of the units in the building are affordable.
[Amended 9-19-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-16]
(b) 2: Flats will be marketed as for-sale units, except that
affordable rental units may be provided for municipally
sponsored projects such as Project Freedom or in a project
where the number of such units is de minimis, or in a project
where the market rate units and affordable units are
integrated and some or all of the affordable units may be rental
units. [Amended 9-19-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-16]
C. Goal 3. [Amended 3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-05; 3-18-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-10]
(1) Goal: As a general matter, a 20% affordable housing set-aside
should be imposed upon the residential component of mixed use
developments in which residential units are permitted, and
affordable housing units are to be visually and geographically
integrated with all market-rate housing consistent with
longstanding Township policy.
(2) Policies.
§ 200-257 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-257
1:1101
(a) 1: Development within the Redevelopment Area will
accommodate all of its affordable housing obligations within
the Redevelopment Area, dispersed throughout market-rate
housing and be architecturally indistinguishable from marketrate
housing.
(b) 2: The affordable housing obligation will be integrated with
market residential units when market units are otherwise
permitted in the district.
D. Goal 4.
(1) Goal: The Redevelopment Plan will remediate the traffic congestion
within, around and through the redevelopment area, will
incorporate Vaughn Drive as a principal collector serving both local
and through traffic, will utilize traffic calming on roadways where
potential conflicts with bicyclists and/or pedestrians exist, will
include sidewalks and bicycle lanes, and will encourage public
transit.
(2) Policies.
(a) 1: Traffic improvements planned for the Redevelopment Area
will provide traffic benefits compared to existing traffic
conditions and traffic projected for development permitted by
right under current zoning and background traffic conditions
in the absence of redevelopment infrastructure proposals.
Traffic improvements planned for the Redevelopment Area will
provide an improved level of service for non-peak-hour and
weekend traffic but projected background traffic growth from
regional sources will cause failing peak-hour level of service at
certain intersections. Planned traffic improvements will,
however, improve traffic distribution and relieve current
congestion in the Station Core Area. Assessment of the
Redevelopment Plan traffic impacts should focus on
improvement in traffic circulation over existing conditions and
the potential full build-out of development achievable under
current zoning.
(b) 2: Street, roadway and bikeway infrastructure.
[1] Street, roadway infrastructure and associated bikeway
infrastructure will be planned and constructed in an
orderly sequence that is tied to both the staging of land
development within the Redevelopment Area and the
availability of funding as discussed in Policy 6. The table
entitled "Required Roadway and Bikeway Infrastructure
for Redevelopment Area Districts," the map entitled
"Conceptual Bicycle/Pedestrian Plan," and seven maps
entitled "Roadway and Bikeway Staging" illustrate the
roadway and bikeway segments and intersection
improvements that will be required in conjunction with
§ 200-257 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-257
1:1102
development in each of the Redevelopment Districts.
Separate bike lanes shall not be required in the RP-1
District, except for Vaughn Drive and the road connnecting
Vaughn Drive and the farmers' market. With respect to
such roads, the bike lanes may be provided off-road. The
streets in the RP-1 District, other than such roads, will
utilize a shared space concept oriented toward pedestrians
that will result in slow automobile speeds, therefore
accommodating bicycle traffic, and will necessitate slower
speeds for bicycles. A comprehensive bicycle and
pedestrian/bicycle-friendly circulation system, consistent
with the shared space concept, that safely accommodates
road users shall be provided between all uses, along roads,
and through the open space.268 [Amended 3-7-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011-5]
[a] Reconstruction and extension of Vaughn Drive to
Washington Road will be required to support
development within Districts 1, 4 and 6. It is unclear
at this time what the floodplain, flood hazard area,
DRRC buffer, and wetlands restrictions are along the
proposed alignment of Vaughn Drive from the existing
Vaughn Drive to the Dinky, and consultation with
NJDEP will be necessary to resolve that. North of the
Dinky, it is the objective of the Plan that the proposed
alignment of Vaughn Drive will be outside the
floodplain, flood hazard area, DRRC buffer, and
wetlands zone.
[b] Realignment and reconstruction of Washington Road
west of the railroad will be required to support
development within Districts 1, 2, 3, and 10. The
realignment is consistent with that proposed by New
Jersey Department of Transportation for the Penns
Neck EIS and Vaughn Drive improvements and
provides additional developable acreage for the
District 3 properties.
[c] Local streets within District 1 are required primarily
to support development of that district. Selected
street segments are also needed if construction
proceeds in Districts 2, 3, 4, and/or the northern
portion of District 6.
[d] Extension of the Promenade (street segment M) and
construction of drop-off and pick-up facilities in the
core station area are required in conjunction with
development of District 4.
268. Editor's Note: These maps and tables are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 200-257 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-257
1:1103
[e] Streets within District 6 include the completion of the
Promenade from the Dinky southward to meet Vaughn
Drive; construction of a new roadway roughly
paralleling the railroad tracks and intersecting
Alexander Road in the vicinity of Old Bear Brook Road
(it is an objective to close Old Bear Brook Road on the
south side of Alexander Road to vehicular traffic, while
maintaining pedestrian and bicycle access to the Old
Bear Brook Road neighborhood); the connection
(segment G) linking Old Bear Brook Extension to
Vaughn Drive; and various NJ TRANSIT station core
facilities, including the Bus Rapid Transit (BRT)
platforms and loop, pick-up and drop-off areas, and
station/parking access drives. These facilities are
needed in conjunction with development in Districts 4
and 6.
[f] Improvements to Route 571 between the railroad and
Clarksville Road are being planned and designed by
Mercer County with funding by the Delaware Valley
Regional Planning Commission. These improvements
are needed in conjunction with redevelopment of the
"Main Street" properties along this section of Route
571.
[g] The Sarnoff Connector and driveway to Sarnoff are
required in conjunction with development of the
Sarnoff property, as designated in the General
Development Plan for Sarnoff.
[2] The above description and table and maps provide a
general framework for provision of roadway
infrastructure. The sequence by which specific properties
will be developed will emerge as redevelopment proceeds,
and therefore there will of necessity be flexibility in the
sequencing of roadway construction. Subelements of each
district will require less than the full implementation of
roadways for that district as described herein, and the
Township will work with the respective property
developers to achieve the optimal timing and sequencing
of improvements.
[3] The Township will periodically reevaluate the location,
design and timing of street and roadway infrastructure to
ensure consistency with the pattern of development that is
actually occurring.
(c) 3: Redevelopment-related traffic congestion can be mitigated
by innovative congestion management strategies such as a
Township-wide van or shuttle service subsidized by
Redevelopment Area funding. The yearly cost of subsidizing
§ 200-257 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-257
1:1104
van or shuttle service should be evaluated for its financial
feasibility.
(d) 4: Continuous sidewalk/path and bicycle connections should be
provided throughout the Redevelopment Area and to adjacent
neighborhoods and open space.
[1] Bicycle lanes as part of the street structure shall be
installed for all roads designated as arterials or collectors,
according to the definitions in the Township Master Plan's
Circulation Element. Based on these definitions, roads or
streets shall be designated as collectors or arterials if they
regularly carry traffic that serves other than local
residents; for example, commuters going to or from
parking garages shall be designed or customers of retail
merchants. Bike lanes in a configuration that places the
bike lanes between the sidewalk and parked or moving
cars and includes a two-foot marked buffer space between
the bike lanes and the cars shall be provided. Separate
bike lanes shall not be required in the RP-1 District except
along Vaughn Drive and the road connecting Vaughn Drive
to the farmers' market. Bike lanes on these two roads may
be provided off-road. [Amended 3-7-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-5]
[2] The Conceptual Bicycle/Pedestrian Plan outlines the
required pedestrian and bicycle facilities, which shall be
constructed concurrently with the associated or adjacent
roadway.
[3] A nonautomobile connection, wide enough to serve twoway
bicycle and pedestrian traffic, between the east and
west sides of the railroad is essential to creating a sense of
place in Princeton Junction.
[4] Continuous and wide sidewalks and pedestrian ways shall
be provided on both sides of all streets and roadways of
the Redevelopment Area, including Route 571, to ensure
that pedestrian circulation and mobility are enhanced
throughout the area, meeting the standards of the NJDOT
Smart Transportation Guidebook and the Americans with
Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines. Multiuse trails
can substitute for a sidewalk on one side of the street, but
not both.
[5] Multiuse trails shall be constructed according to the
Conceptual Bicycle/Pedestrian Plan. Per the Township
Master Plan guidelines, they are appropriate "along roads
with more than two travel lanes," in "locations with
relatively few driveway and roadway intersections" and
"along railroad tracks, in parks, along river or stream
§ 200-257 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-257
1:1105
banks, and similar areas," but they do not substitute for
bike lanes, due to the higher risk of collisions at driveway
and roadway intersections, among other reasons.
[6] Consistent with Policy 5 of this Goal 4 and Goal 5,
pedestrian and bicycle connectivity to adjacent
neighborhoods shall be constructed such that bicyclists
and pedestrians have safe access to and from the
Redevelopment Area.269
[a] Access to the Penn's Neck neighborhood shall be
improved by constructing a multiuse path from the
Penn's Neck neighborhood along the Dinky tracks to
meet the multiuse path along Vaughn Drive, as shown
on the Conceptual Bicycle/Pedestrian Plan. Pedestrian
crossings from the Main Street promenade area to
this path must be designed to enable safe access to
the open space.
[b] Pedestrian and bicycle access to the neighborhoods
bordering Bear Brook Road shall be maintained in the
event a cul-de-sac is constructed on Old Bear Brook
Road near Alexander Road, so that bicyclists and
pedestrians have direct access from Old Bear Brook
Road to Alexander Road.
(e) 5: As site plans are developed for the Redevelopment Area,
specific consideration should be given to the provision of safe
and efficient crossing of streets for both pedestrians and
bicycles, accounting for the presence of sidewalks and trails
and bike lanes and recognizing the need for access for the
physically disabled. The site plans shall also show how the
Redevelopment Area will be safely linked to each of the
adjacent neighborhoods.
(f) 6: The Redevelopment Area should be planned to serve as a
major Central Jersey transportation hub incorporating all
modes of travel: commuter rail, Dinky, Bus Rapid Transit, local
bus and shuttles, taxis, Kiss and Ride, and short-term parking;
provided, however, that any plans to serve as a major Central
Jersey transportation hub shall not be implemented without
the prior commitment of state and/or federal resources to pay
for the improvements needed to accomplish this objective.
West Windsor encourages New Jersey Transit to provide
platform improvements and other station amenities consistent
with its status as a major transportation hub.
269. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(2)(d)[6], regarding bicycle and pedestrian facilities,
was repealed 3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-5. This ordinance also provided for the
redesignation of former Subsection D(2)(d)[7] as Subsection D(2)(d)[6].
§ 200-257 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-257
1:1106
[1] State and federal financial assistance and cooperation are
essential to fulfill Princeton Junction's public transit hub
requirements. The Princeton Junction train station,
especially with future bus rapid transit service, is expected
to be an important element in New Jersey's mass transit
network, whose ridership is expected to substantially
increase. Additional pedestrian crossings of the railroad
are needed to facilitate station access for rail commuters
from planned commuter parking areas and to improve
neighborhood and station area pedestrian circulation and
connectivity. State and federal financial assistance will be
essential for creating better station access, including an
additional east-west pedestrian crossing of the tracks and
increased capacity platform.
[2] Sufficient area should be devoted to multimodal Station
Core Area activities such as right-of-way for the BRT and
area for convenient drop-off and pickup and short-term
waiting areas for taxis, buses, shuttles and automobiles.
Core Area circulation and activities will be subject to
further analysis and refinement as parking is expanded
and detailed plans are developed for specific portions of
the Redevelopment Area.
(g) 7: Funding.
[1] Funding of new roadways and bikeways and roadway and
bikeway improvements will be from a variety of sources,
including state and federal funding through New Jersey
Department of Transportation (NJDOT), NJ TRANSIT,
Mercer County, and Delaware Valley Regional Planning
Commission (DVRPC), the Township's off-tract roadway
assessment program, and on-site improvements required
of Redevelopment Area developers. A framework of
responsibilities for funding roadway improvements is
illustrated in the map entitled "Funding of Roadway
Infrastructure."270
[a] NJDOT has identified Vaughn Drive and Washington
Road west of the rail line as a major project through
its Penns Neck EIS and has in the past allocated
funding to the project. The Redevelopment Plan
continues to indicate Vaughn Drive as a state-funded
project, although the original proposal has been
modified to produce an alignment that is more
compatible with the land development plan, and to
eliminate the costly grade separations proposed at
Washington Road. Further adjustments may be
needed to respond to traffic service, design, and
270. Editor's Note: See Map U, included at the end of this chapter.
§ 200-257 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-257
1:1107
environmental factors. These components of the Plan
will be subject to more detailed analysis early in the
next phase of planning and engineering.
[b] Mercer County and DVRPC are planning and
designing improvements to Route 571 between the
railroad and Clarksville Road.
[c] Both Washington Road and Alexander Road are
periodically closed by flooding along Little Bear
Brook. A program shall be established, and funding,
including federal and state local assistance, should be
sought to improve the Washington Road and
Alexander Road crossings over Little Bear Brook.
[d] Improvements to the station core area (pick-up and
drop-off areas and related station facilities), and
implementation of the BRT and related platforms and
routes, could be funded and implemented by NJ
TRANSIT, the developers of properties owned by NJ
TRANSIT, and/or other state and federal sources.
[e] On-site improvements will be required to be
implemented by Redevelopment Area developers.
These will include the system of streets needed to
serve the respective project areas, as well as related
streets and intersections needed to access the
regional road system. Within the Redevelopment Area,
bicycle and pedestrian facilities, including sidewalks
and crosswalks, should be considered part of the
standard street infrastructure for funding and
implementation purposes. Outside the Redevelopment
Area, the Township's Circulation Plan and Capital
Improvement Program should be evaluated to ensure
that appropriate connectivity to existing
neighborhoods is provided.
[f] Sarnoff will be required to construct the Sarnoff
Connector as a provision of the General Development
Plan (GDP) for that property.
[g] West Windsor Township's Off-Tract Roadway
Assessment Program is an established mechanism for
collecting developers' pro rata share of costs for offtract
roadway improvements. Funds have already
been collected from prior developments in the
Township for improvements within the Redevelopment
Area, and the future developers of properties within
the Redevelopment Area will be subject to the
requirements of the program as well.
§ 200-257 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-257
1:1108
[2] Consistent with Goal 1, the variety of available funding
sources will ensure that traffic improvements will be paid
for without imposing a financial burden on Township
residents.
(h) 8: Mayors in neighboring municipalities and other appropriate
public officials should be encouraged to work to provide more
shuttle service to the train station, including service in
conjunction with satellite parking areas.
(i) 9: Pedestrian access to Berrien City and other adjacent
neighborhoods shall be improved by narrowing the Scott
Avenue roadway and effecting other necessary improvements
to achieve continuous sidewalks and lighting on both sides of
Scott Avenue between Wallace Road and Alexander Road. In
addition, the pedestrian crossing at Scott Avenue and Wallace
Road shall be relocated to the west side of Scott Avenue,
crossing Wallace Road on the west side of the Kiss and Ride
driveway, and continuous sidewalk connections shall be
provided between this crossing and Scott Avenue. Sidewalks
shall be provided on both sides of Wallace Road between
Alexander Road and Route 571. Traffic calming on Wallace
Road shall be further improved by the addition of bicycle lanes
and a marked two-foot buffer, and a prominent mid-block
crossing from the station area across Wallace Road. Any new
design of the Kiss and Ride on the east side of the tracks should
minimize potential conflicts between pedestrians, bicyclists
and motorists by the extensive use of traffic-calming
techniques.
E. Goal 5.
(1) Goal: The Redevelopment Plan will at least preserve, if not
strengthen, the neighborhoods in and around the Redevelopment
Area.
(2) Policies.
(a) 1: Retain the West Windsor Wallace Road commuter parking lot
directly across from the Berrien City neighborhood as surface
parking.
(b) 2: The size, scale and aesthetic design of development on the
east side of the railroad shall be consonant with the
surrounding neighborhoods and shall be kept to 2 1/2 stories.
Three stories may be permitted for the properties bordering
the Acme Woods, where there is a sufficient dense buffer.
(c) 3: A smooth transition should be created between the existing
neighborhoods and new development. This shall include buffer
zones such as green areas, bike and pedestrian paths and a
§ 200-257 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-257
1:1109
gradual increase in building height and mass between
established neighborhoods and the redevelopment area.
(d) 4: Preservation of green spaces and park lands and the
greenbelt corridors will be emphasized to mitigate the
negative effects of traffic, density, noise and air pollution and to
enhance aquifer recharge, wildlife habitat, and runoff and
floodwater storage. Traffic will be minimized to the extent
feasible through better distribution using higher order, arterial
and collector roads.
(e) 5: To protect the Old Bear Brook Road neighborhood south of
Alexander Road and the future Maneely development, close
Old Bear Brook Road to through traffic by constructing a culde-
sac at the north end of the roadway adjacent to Alexander
Road. Also, provide mountable curbing and appropriate raised
pavement to permit emergency vehicle access from Alexander
Road to Old Bear Brook Road.
(f) 6: In order to provide more efficient and timely emergency
services on the west side of the rail line, add an emergency
services substation at an appropriate location in the
Redevelopment Area.
F. Goal 6.
(1) Goal: The Redevelopment Plan will provide more parking for West
Windsor residents. Adequate replacement parking shall be
provided during construction to ensure that the parking demands
are being fully and continuously served.
(2) Policies.
(a) 1: Provide additional commuter parking spaces for West
Windsor residents as determined in consultation with the
Parking Authority and New Jersey Transit.
(b) 2: Provide for more convenient short-term parking and Kiss
and Ride parking on both the east and west sides of the station.
G. Goal 7.
(1) Goal: The Redevelopment Plan should facilitate the location of
parking garages serviced by the Dinky and the BRT.
(2) Policies.
(a) 1: Parking structures will be constructed only after
consultation with the West Windsor Parking Authority.
H. Goal 8.
(1) Goal: The Redevelopment Plan will maximize preservation of open
space, protect environmentally sensitive land, and minimize
§ 200-257 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-257
1:1110
impervious cover consistent with compact town center
development and smart growth principles for transit villages as set
forth in New Jersey Transit's Planning for Transit-Friendly Land
Use.
(2) Policies.
(a) 1: Preserve the Millstone River Corridor and the Little Bear
Brook Corridor, as shown on the Land Use Map.
(b) 2: Isolated wetlands required for parking or circulation should
be mitigated by the creation of new wetlands at a rate of two
acres for every one acre filled within the Redevelopment Area
as governed by New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection regulations or as otherwise specified in a New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection wetlands
permit. The mitigation may be within or outside of the
Redevelopment Area.
(c) 3: All or the majority of Block 6, Lot 48, should be acquired for
open space, public parkland, stormwater management and
wetland restoration and mitigation.
(d) 4: The amount of preserved open space would vary in each
section of the Redevelopment Area, but the goal should be that
overall approximately one-half of the Redevelopment Area,
including constrained and developable land, should be
maintained as open space. The Township's public policy is to
preserve as much developable land as possible.
(e) 5: To the extent practicable, adopt innovative and progressive
stormwater best management practices that embrace
ecosystem-based, natural and sustainable principles versus
artificial and high-maintenance means of treating stormwater
quality at the conceptual design phase (e.g., rain gardens and
bioretention swales and basins). A stormwater management
plan in accordance with the Redevelopment Area watershed
configurations shall be designed and shall include a regional
detention facility, preferably in District 5 and with a costsharing
arrangement and compensation to the owner of the
land on which the facility is located.
(f) 6: Adopt landscape and stormwater maintenance specifications
that employ integrated pest management practices.
(g) 7: Specify only indigenous plant species within the
Redevelopment Area; completely avoid exotic and invasive
plant species.
(h) 8: Open space acquisition should be accomplished by a
combination of redevelopment area financing, state green acre
grants, county grants and matching funds, federal grants,
§ 200-257 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-257
1:1111
private donations of land, private donations of cash, open
space tax funds and other resources.
(i) 9: The impact of road and parking construction on the
greenbelt should be limited to the maximum extent
practicable. Greenbelt impacts should be mitigated by
preservation of District 5 and a continuous open space corridor
through District 10 and along the Millstone River as shown on
the Land Use Map.
(j) 10: Preserve the Sarnoff Woods through implementation of a
program transferring development rights, including those
relating to office and affordable housing, through use of a TDR
or other scheme for transferring development from the area to
District 6 and use of some or all of the other mechanisms
available, including land acquisition, land swaps, the possible
transferring of development rights to District 3, and
reconfiguration of the Sarnoff General Development Plan to
shift development toward Route One. A TDR program with
District 10 as the sending zone and the northerly portion of
District 3 as the receiving zone or another program achieving
similar results should be explored.
(k) 11: Information about and the regulatory impact of threatened
and endangered species shall be provided and addressed at the
site plan stage.
(l) 12: Certain environmental conditions within the
Redevelopment Area (e.g., freshwater wetlands and associated
buffers, open waters, the one-hundred-year floodplain, and
contaminated sites) may constrain critical elements of the
proposed Plan. As portions of the Plan are further defined,
more detailed environmental analysis will be required, perhaps
necessitating adjustments to both the conceptual building
configurations and to the circulation system as currently
illustrated in the Plan.
I. Goal 9.
(1) Goal: The Redevelopment Plan will strive to remediate
contaminated sites within the designated area through the use of
private capital, and/or state or federal government funding.
(2) Policy: Remediate contaminated sites consistent with future land
use goals through the use of private capital, state and federal
funds. Those brownfield sites are located in Districts 3, 6, 7, and 9.
J. Goal 10.
(1) Goal: The size, scale and aesthetic design of the Redevelopment
Area will be sensitive to adjacent neighborhoods.
§ 200-257 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-257
1:1112
(2) Policies.
(a) 1: The height of buildings in the Redevelopment Area should be
limited to four stories in District 1, with retail on the first floor;
four stories in District 2 and 4; four stories in District 3 as part
of a density transfer program to eliminate existing
development in District 5; 2 1/2 stories in District 7, except
that three stories are permitted for properties abutting the
Acme Woods; and three stories in District 10.
(b) 2: Parking structures would be limited to four stories and five
levels. Increases in capacity beyond what is shown on the
Conceptual Land Use Plan should be accomplished by
increasing the structures' footprints. Rooftop elements shall be
exempt from height restrictions.
(c) 3: Commuter parking on Wallace Road shall remain as surface
parking.
(d) 4: Structured parking would feature liner buildings or
aesthetic treatment where structures front on public streets.
(e) 5: All parking structures shall be designed with documented
attention to both passive (sight lines, open and defensible
space, open stairways, avoiding interior wing walls and
corners, etc.) and active (code blue type call boxes, video
systems, etc.) security measures.
K. Goal 11.
(1) Goal: The Redevelopment Plan will create iconic and active public
spaces for the West Windsor community and a pedestrian-oriented
street life. The most prominent one will be the Main Street
promenade. No streets will cross through the promenade, leaving a
continuous open space and four local roads that end in a T
intersection on the square. The promenade shall be created
between bordering streets, creating a town square, and traffic shall
be routed one-way around this continuous open space.
(2) Policies.
(a) 1: The Redevelopment Area will provide for a central public
gathering space a promenade which features public art,
gardens and structures for public events. The central public
gathering space, the specific features and structures, as well
as responsibility for financing and constructing those features
and structures, shall be fully defined with particularity prior to
the issuance of any permits for construction (other than
permits for parking garages) in Districts 1 and 3.
(b) Provide for the farmers' market, including utilities, storage, a
plaza with a porous surface, provided that such surface meets
§ 200-257 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-257
1:1113
the needs of the farmers' market, and a building to
accommodate the sale of produce, to be constructed by the
redeveloper. Private restrooms within a commercial building
on the Promenade shall be made available for use by the
general public subject to reasonable restrictions on such public
use, which restrictions shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Township Council, which approval shall not
be unreasonably withheld. The specific accommodations for
the farmers' market, as well as the timing of construction of
those accommodations, shall be fully defined in a redeveloper's
agreement. A portable stage will be used for public events
in lieu of a permanent structure, which would not be used
much of the time and would not animate the space. [Amended
3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-5]
(c) 3: Provide a layout of buildings, open spaces and parking lot
edges that encourage pedestrian and bicycle circulation with
sidewalk and pathway interconnections. To facilitate bicycle
usage by cyclists of all levels of experience and age, a roadway
configuration that places bike lanes between the sidewalk and
parked or moving cars and includes a two-foot marked buffer
space between the bike lanes and the cars and provides
connectivity to adjacent neighborhoods shall be used. Separate
bike lanes shall not be required in the RP-1 District except
along Vaughn Drive and the road connecting Vaughn Drive to
the farmers' market. Bike lanes on these two roads may be
provided off-road. [Amended 3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-5]
(d) 4: Provide for focal points such as small parks or squares and
other open spaces, as appropriate, such that a sense of place is
enhanced and strengthened.
(e) 5: Encourage a mix of residences, stores and shops, personal
service establishments, offices, workplaces and civic uses that
are interwoven within a traditional mixed-use village
neighborhood, all in close proximity.
(f) 6: Encourage a mix of uses that provides for predominately
retail stores, restaurants and personal service uses on the first
floor or street level with office and residential uses located on
upper floors.
(g) 7: Prohibit the development of new single-story, single-use
structures except for liner buildings used to continue the street
wall. This policy shall not apply to the RP-1 District. [Amended
3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-5]
(h) 8: Promote the design and arrangement of buildings in a
manner that advances "green building" concepts to achieve
sustainability.
§ 200-257 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-257
1:1114
(i) 9: Provide unobstructed access from sidewalks to buildings
used by the general public.
(j) 10: Provide safe and easy passage from the public realm into
individual buildings.
(k) 11: Provide interest for the pedestrian at the ground level of
buildings by limiting unembellished solid walls.
(l) 12: Provide interest for the pedestrian at the ground level of
buildings through detailing at close view.
(m) 13: Allow sufficient room for pedestrian passage and additional
use of sidewalk such as cafe tables.
(n) 14: Create shaded sidewalks and vertical landscape
throughout the redevelopment area. Street trees and wellintegrated
landscape improvements shall be provided
throughout the Redevelopment Area.
(o) 15: Streets and sidewalks must be lined with buildings rather
than parking lots or parking structures.
(p) 16: Parking must be located behind buildings.
(q) 17: Parking garages must contribute to pedestrian life through
ground level use, scale and detail.
(r) 18: Use a traditional town center grid of streets and alleys for
maximum pedestrian choice and activity. If the traditional
street grid is broken because of development requirements,
pedestrian connections shall be established. These connections
shall be a continuation of the existing grid and allow for service
access.
(s) 19: Visually extend the pedestrian's realm and provide interest
along the sidewalk, as well as allowing people inside
opportunity to observe the passing street scene.
(t) 20: Establish a continuous street wall defining the public space
of the street, with variety provided in building width and
height.
(u) 21: Corner buildings shall relate to the activities of the
intersection and encourage activity through their design.
(v) 22: Provide a safe and appealing nighttime environment for the
Redevelopment Area.
(w) 23: Create pedestrian interest by using public art, sidewalk
patterns, signs, lighting fixtures and street furniture that
create a distinctive appearance for the Redevelopment Area.
§ 200-257 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-257
1:1115
(x) 24: In District 9, consider constructing an iconic powergenerating
windmill that is designed and scaled in such a way
as to pay homage to West Windsor's agricultural past while
symbolizing the future's green energy.
(y) 25: Standalone structures intended as public amenities in
iconic and active public spaces will be contracted individually
and separately with public or private entities unless a detailed
financial analysis demonstrates that tax-increment financing
will be more advantageous to West Windsor taxpayers than
other private or public sector options for constructing such
structures.
(z) 26: In addition, for the village area along Route 571 all
development should reflect traditional village planning and
design principles and should:
[1] Promote the creation of a district with architectural facade
design and building scale typical for a mixed-use village
neighborhood.
[2] Promote the transition of existing development into a new
district that exhibits the design features of a traditional
mixed-use village neighborhood promoting pedestrian
circulation, social gathering and interaction amongst
commercial establishments supporting and servicing the
residents of the community.
[3] Limit automotive service and financial institution uses to
those presently existing.
[4] Create an improvement district to facilitate circulation,
road, streetscape and open space improvements.
[5] Promote cross access and shared access to reduce the
number of driveways along Route 571.
(aa) 27: The Acme Center with a grocery store may be retained. If
the owner wishes to retain the current building, the sidewalk in
front of the buildings shall be widened and the sidewalk
linkage to the current Route 571 sidewalk shall be enhanced,
in order to facilitate better pedestrian movement and create a
continuous "Main Street" from 571 to Alexander Road.
Enhanced landscaping and/or a kiosk at the corner of the
entrance on Route 571 is encouraged. Liner buildings may be
constructed to create a more active street life. The liner
buildings shall not go across the entire frontage, so as to
minimize or obstruct views of buildings in the rear from Route
571.
(bb) 28: The Parking Authority should consider creating a public
open space by making a pocket park at the train station pond.
§ 200-257 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-257
1:1116
(cc) 29: Architectural elevations and renderings shall be provided
with all site plan applications.
L. Goal 12.
(1) Goal: The Township will strive to incorporate input from all key
stakeholders during implementation of the Redevelopment Plan,
including any amendments to it and development applications filed
pursuant thereto.
(2) Policies.
(a) 1: The general public, especially key stakeholders such as
residents and property owners, both within and outside the
Redevelopment Area, is encouraged to contribute ideas and
amendments during the Redevelopment Plan implementation
phases at public meetings and through written correspondence
to the governing body and Planning Board.
(b) 2: All concept, preliminary, final, and amended plans will be
posted on the developer's website with a link from the
Township's.
M. Goal 13.
(1) Goal: The Township will strive to mitigate the effects of the
Redevelopment Plan on the West Windsor-Plainsboro Regional
School system.
(2) Policies.
(a) 1: All residential units to be constructed shall have an average
of no more than two bedrooms, with no other available space
within a unit to be used as sleeping quarters. Bedrooms
include any room above the main living or kitchen area
whether they have a closet or a door or not. Square footage
that can be used as a bedroom will be treated as a bedroom
and subject to the two-bedroom limitation. The bedroom mix
for affordable units will be as per the COAH rules. [Amended
3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-5]
(b) 2: The Township will meet regularly with school district
officials to review the ongoing impact of redevelopment on
school capacity and related issues as well as provide advice
with respect to the assumptions used to assess the impact of
redevelopment on the school system.
N. Goal 14.
(1) Goal: The Redevelopment Plan will incorporate economic,
environmental, and social sustainability urban planning principles
as outlined in the LEED-ND (Leadership in Environmental and
Energy Design — Neighborhood Design) standards, or such future
§ 200-257 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-257
1:1117
standards as are adopted in their stead, for conservation of West
Windsor's natural resources.
(2) Policies.
(a) 1: LEED-ND policy objectives.
[1] The US Green Building Council's Leadership in Energy
and Environmental Design (LEED) for Neighborhood
Development (ND) Rating System integrates the principles
of smart growth, urbanism and green building into a
nationally recognized system for neighborhood design.
The rating system encourages smart growth and new
urbanist best practices, promoting the location and design
of neighborhoods that reduce vehicle miles traveled and
communities where jobs and services are accessible by
foot or public transit. Adhering to LEED for neighborhood
development project criteria will help ensure that the
redevelopment of Princeton Junction will successfully
protect and enhance the overall health, natural
environment, and quality of life of our community.
[2] The policy objectives of LEED-ND that the redevelopment
of Princeton Junction shall support and conform to are:
[a] Reduce urban sprawl.
[i] In order to reduce the impacts of urban sprawl, or
unplanned, uncontrolled spreading of urban
development into areas outside of the
metropolitan region, and create more livable
communities, LEED for Neighborhood
Development communities are:
[A] Locations that are closer to existing town and
city centers.
[B] Areas with good transit access.
[C] Infill sites.
[D] Previously developed sites.
[E] Sites adjacent to existing development.
[ii] Typical sprawl development, low-density housing
and commercial uses located in automobiledependent
outlying area, can harm the natural
environment in a number of ways. It can consume
and fragment farmland, forests and wildlife
habitat; degrade water quality through
destruction of wetlands and increased stormwater
§ 200-257 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-257
1:1118
runoff; and pollute the air with increased
automobile travel.
[b] Encourage healthy living. LEED for Neighborhood
Development emphasizes the creation of compact,
walkable, vibrant, mixed-use neighborhoods with
good connections to nearby communities. Research
has shown that living in a mixed-use environment
within walking distance of shops and services results
in increased walking and biking, which improve
human cardiovascular and respiratory health and
reduce the risk of hypertension and obesity.
[c] Protect threatened species. Fragmentation and loss of
habitat are major threats to many imperiled species.
LEED encourages compact development patterns and
the selection of sites that are within or adjacent to
existing development to minimize habitat
fragmentation and also help preserve areas for
recreation.
[d] Increase transportation choice and decrease
automobile dependence. These two things go hand-inhand;
convenient transportation choices such as
buses, trains, car pools, bicycle lanes and sidewalks,
for example, are typically more available near
downtowns, neighborhood centers and town centers,
which are also the locations that produce shorter
automobile trips.
(b) 2: Implement LED lighting fixtures for site lighting fixtures;
consider solar electric generation for pedestrian-scale lighting
systems and/or project signs.
(c) Implement green roof planting on flat roofing of multistory
buildings or light color for roof surfaces.
(d) Development in the Redevelopment Area shall provide for
energy conservation opportunities, including designing and
constructing train station parking so as to facilitate the future
installation of plug-in hybrid electric vehicles and electric
vehicle infrastructure. The parking spaces so provided shall be
preferential so as to raise the public's awareness of such
vehicles.
(e) Solar photovoltaic systems on parking decks are encouraged.
O. Goal 15.
(1) Goal: In keeping with the Township Master Plan Circulation
Element Goals B and C, encourage alternate circulation modes and
networks (e.g., pedestrian, bicycle, and bus transit) to minimize
§ 200-257 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-257
1:1119
local auto traffic trips and to increase opportunities for recreational
bicycling and walking. The pedestrian and bikeway system should
make walking and cycling a viable alternative to driving, improve
bicyclist and pedestrian safety, and create a comfortable
environment for all bicyclist levels through such techniques as
minimizing crossing distances, providing for slow vehicular speeds,
and maximizing traffic calming.
(2) Policies.
(a) 1: The plan incorporates by reference all policies of the
Township Master Plan Circulation Element Goals B, Policies 1
through 3, and C, Policies 1 through 8.271
271. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection O(2)(b), regarding bicycle and pedestrian facilities,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-5.
§ 200-257 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-257
1:1120
ARTICLE XXXIV
Land Use Controls
§ 200-258. Standards applicable to all districts. [Amended 3-7-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-5]
The districts must be developed in accordance herewith, except that the
standards herein shall not apply to the RP-1 District, the regulations for
which include standards in lieu of those herein. All development must
be substantially consistent with the primary road configuration on the
Roads and Circulation Plan and the Promenade shown on the Conceptual
Plan. All standards set forth in the Township Land Use Code, other than
district regulations, shall continue to apply except when inconsistent with
the design standards set forth below and with the goals and policies set
forth in this Redevelopment Plan. In addition, all redevelopers in the
Redevelopment Area shall satisfy such goals and policies, except when a
modification thereof appears specifically herein, and shall comply with the
following standards. Notwithstanding any provisions of this plan to the
contrary, no design standards shall apply to commuter parking facilities
developed, financed and/or sponsored by public entities such as the West
Windsor Parking Authority and New Jersey Transit and shall be determined
cooperatively with the redevelopment entity, the West Windsor Parking
Authority, and New Jersey Transit. Section 200-243.2 of the West Windsor
Township Code shall not apply.
A. Traffic circulation and parking.
(1) On-site parking and service access shall be designed to avoid the
backing in and out of vehicles onto street rights-of-way.
(2) Sidewalk widths shall measure between 10 feet and 15 feet in the
core retail and town center area in District 1 and shall be a
minimum of five feet wide in all other areas. With respect to the
latter, the need for wider sidewalks should be reviewed at site plan.
All sidewalks should be durably paved and smoothly surfaced to
provide for the free movement of pedestrians. A minimum width of
off-road bike lanes should be eight feet.
(3) All sidewalks and pathways must be designed to provide access for
the physically disabled. Access ramps shall be conveniently placed
and sloped to provide easy connection to streets and sidewalks, in
conformance with the Americans with Disabilities Act.
(4) The applicable parking requirement may be reduced where it can
be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that such
reductions are justified by reason of proximity to public
transportation and/or documented arrangements for shared
parking supported by analyses consistent with the Urban Land
Institute's Shared Parking Analysis or such other generally
accepted standards applicable to shared parking.
§ 200-258 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-258
1:1121
(5) Per New Jersey Department of Transportation Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways design guidelines, bicycle storage lockers
shall be located near each boarding location, and bike racks shall
be located under a shelter. All facilities that provide parking to the
public shall provide parking for bicycles at the rate of one bicycle
parking space per 10 automobile parking spaces for the first 100
parking stalls and one bicycle space for every 20 automobile
parking spaces beyond that. In addition, sheltered bike storage
racks shall be provided on each block within the main street retail
area and for each separate office or retail building within the
Redevelopment Area.
B. Landscape treatments and guidelines.
(1) All plants, trees and shrubs shall be installed in accordance with a
landscape plan and schedule provided by the developer, subject to
the approval of the Planning Board.
(2) Provide aesthetic treatments considering decorative materials and/
or patterns for all nonvehicular or shared paved surfaces.
Pavements should be specifically designed to emphasize the
creation of spaces and transition between spaces or zones and to
provide visual clues to pedestrians and motorists to reinforce the
use or function of the area. More refined pavements should be
utilized to emphasize and enhance areas designed for larger
volumes of pedestrian activity such as building entrances, plazas
and terraces, nodes, drop-off and pick-up zones and crosswalks. A
palette of compatible decorative pavements and/or pavement
patterns should be developed for the entire redevelopment zone.
(3) Landscape shall be provided throughout the redevelopment area to
create spatial definition or separation, shade, visual interest,
seasonal color, visual buffering, microclimatic enhancement, and
habitat and to improve safety.
(4) Any landscaping which is not resistant to the environment, or that
dies within five years of planting, shall be replaced by the
developer.
(5) In public spaces, use passive systems such as cisterns and water
gardens that collect rainwater for irrigation to the extent feasible.
(6) Gray water shall be reused to the extent practicable.
(7) Soil moisture-sensing irrigation systems shall be used.
C. Architectural and landscape architectural guidelines. The creation of a
cohesive built environment where existing and proposed commercial
and residential development are integrated is essential to this
Redevelopment Plan. The following are architectural and streetscape
standards for all new construction and renovations within the
Redevelopment Area.
§ 200-258 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-258
1:1122
(1) New buildings within the Redevelopment Area should be
considered an integral part of the overall site design and developed
with appropriate consideration for both proposed and existing
buildings with respect to height, mass, siting, location, materials,
orientation, signs, lighting and use. New buildings should be of
materials, scale and colors to harmonize with the general look and
feel desired for the particular location in the Redevelopment Area.
(2) Buildings shall be oriented toward and close to and front on public
streets to provide form and function to the streetscape. The
streetscape should be continuous and varied through the use of
street furniture, landscaping, building articulation, building
frontage setbacks and changes in sidewalk types and textures.
Long buildings should be divided at a scale comparable to that of
other buildings on the rest of the block. Driveway intersections
with the public street should be minimized to avoid excessive
interruptions in the streetwall.
(3) Buildings shall be designed so as to be attractive from all vantage
points.
(4) Unless the redeveloper proposes a specific use that requires a
unique building, buildings should be designed utilizing base,
middle and top forms as the primary method relating buildings to
each other.
(5) The base shall be considered the first story of the facade facing a
public street, depending on the overall heights of the building. The
design of the base, as well as the quality and durability of its
materials, should be emphasized to create visual interest and
support pedestrian activity. The building's base should be
presented to the Planning Board at a larger scale of drawing and
greater detail than the remainder of the facade to ensure it meets
the building design objectives.
(6) In addition to the base, the exterior design shall include a middle
field section and a cap on the top. The middle of the building shall
be differentiated from the base by a horizontal transition line. The
transition line's specific location shall be determined primarily by
the overall height of the building and that of any adjacent buildings.
If adjacent buildings are lower than the proposed building, then the
transition line should relate to such adjacent building. A horizontal
transition line should also be established separating the middle
field from the cap or top of the buildings.
(7) The base transition line should range from one-fifth to one-quarter
of the overall height. The upper transition line, articulating the cap,
should be placed approximately one-eighth of the overall height
from the top. Transition lines may consist of a continuous, shallow
balcony, a shallow recess, an articulated trim course cornice, a
water table, fenestration or other appropriate means. The
§ 200-258 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-258
1:1123
transition should be supported by a change of window rhythm or
size and a change in material, color or texture.
(8) All materials and colors shall be approved by the Planning Board.
(9) The predominant material of all street walls on primary and
secondary streets shall be brick, precast, wood and finished
masonry block, or curtain wall. Stucco may be used as an accent.
(10) Shop fronts should have a kick plate that ranges in height from 18
inches to 42 inches running continuously beneath the required
fenestration.
(11) Masonry units may be turned at the wall opening to visually create
a thick wall and should be used in the design of balconies, loggias
and larger openings.
(12) Awnings, which add visual richness to the commercial corridor
while enhancing the quality of public walkways, are encouraged for
all storefronts. Awnings shall have fixed or retractable metal
framework, with vinyl laminated polyester base scrim awning
fabric to blend with storefront paint colors.
(13) Canopies, unlike awnings, are nonretractable. They shall be
constructed of wood or metal framing, standing-seam metal roof,
plywood and molded millwork trim. Canopies shall incorporate
signage and down lighting. Security shall be implemented so that it
cannot be seen, and security grille housing is specifically
prohibited.
(14) Continuous covered walkways shall be provided to the extent
feasible. All awnings and canopies shall be securely attached to the
building so that the lowest part of the awning or canopy is mounted
a minimum of eight feet and a maximum of 12 feet above the
sidewalk at the storefront.
(15) Large areas of glass curtain walls or strip windows of more than 15
feet in length are discouraged, as are tinted and highly reflective
glass. Window openings shall have sills and heads of masonry or
stone. These may be of precast concrete, limestone, granite, brick
soldier courses, or slabs exposed only for the length of the window.
(16) Lighting levels along paved portions of public walks shall be an
average of no less than one footcandle for commercial areas and
0.5 footcandle for residential areas. Solar and LED lighting shall be
used whenever feasible.
(17) Fixtures serving to light streets shall be at a height of no greater
than 20 feet above the adjacent roadway surface. The light center
of a fixture for a pedestrian walkway shall be mounted at a height
of 12 feet to 14 feet above the adjacent surface of the walkway. The
§ 200-258 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-258
1:1124
fixtures shall include attachments to accommodate such amenities
as banners and flower pots.
(18) Parking and other automobile facilities should be designed as an
integral part of site development with careful regard to safety,
topography, landscaping, sight lines and access.
(19) Mechanical equipment located on building roofs shall be screened
so as not to be visible from the ground level from adjacent
developments and from public streets and spaces. Mechanical
equipment at ground level shall be screened and in the rear.
(20) Luminaries shall provide adequate lighting in as energy-efficient
manner as possible (e.g., solar-powered LED to coordinate the
lighting with the time of day); implement high-efficiency lighting
technologies such as LED lighting fixtures for site lighting fixtures;
implement solar electric generation for pedestrian-scale lighting
systems and/or project signs.
(21) Provide street furnishings that serve the anticipated occupants or
users of all exterior spaces, including, but not limited to: benches,
gazebos, trash and recycling receptacles, bicycle racks, bird
houses, drinking fountains, kiosks, sculptural elements, children's
play elements, decorative fountains, bollards, decorative fences,
seat walls, and pedestrian-scale lighting. A palette of compatible
site furnishings should be developed for the entire redevelopment
zone.
(22) Community bulletin boards, such as kiosks, shall be provided at
strategic locations.
(23) Green roof planting on flat roofing of multistory buildings or
provide light color for roof surface shall be implemented, and solar
photovoltaic systems on roofs and parking decks shall be provided
to the extent practicable.
(24) Excepting the antenna itself, all parts and components of personal
communications antennas, satellite dishes, and television and radio
antennas shall be screened from view regardless of elevation, or
shall be disguised within an enclosed structure. The screening shall
be designed as part of the overall design theme of the building to
which it is associated.
(25) Dish antennas may not exceed 12 feet in diameter.
(26) Outdoor cafes, where permitted by the land use regulations, may
extend onto the public right-of-way upon issuance of a license by
the Township. Such encroachment shall convey no rights to the
licensee beyond those enumerated in the license. Outdoor cafes
shall be delineated from the public way by planters and metal
fencing with no more than two entrances to the cafe seating area. A
clear width of at least four feet shall be maintained between any
§ 200-258 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-258
1:1125
outward portion of the cafe and the closest street furniture and
equipment.
(27) Public access to commercial and governmental buildings shall be
provided at sidewalk grade. The primary floor of and access to
residential structures may be elevated.
(28) The front doors of all buildings shall be visible from the street. If
located more than 10 feet from the front building line, their
location must be reinforced with additional graphics, lighting,
marquees or canopies.
(29) Blank walls in excess of 25% or 10 continuous feet of the frontage
of the property shall not be used at the street level. Blank walls
must contain architectural relief such as expressive details, blind
windows, murals, etc.
(30) All buildings shall provide scale-defining architectural elements or
details at the first two floor levels minimum, such as windows,
spandrels, awnings, porticos, pediments, cornices, pilasters,
columns and balconies.
(31)Width of sidewalks shall be maximized within the available right-ofway.
A minimum of 48 inches of the sidewalk must be clear of any
obstruction for the entire length of the property.
(32) Surface parking cannot be between the building and the front
property line. When a continuous street wall is not practicable,
parking between the building and the side lot line must be
screened from the street by a solid fence or wall at a minimum
height of 48 inches. At least 15% of the ground area of parking lots
(including driveways) shall be devoted to landscaping along the
street right-of-way.
(33) Parking garages must have a minimum of 30% of the ground floor
sidewalk frontage along the street (excluding the ingress and
egress) designed as retail, commercial or office space. The first
floor, floor-to-ceiling height, shall be designed to accommodate
future retail, commercial or office uses. There is no minimum depth
required for retail, commercial or office uses. Interim uses could
include newsstands, flower shops, ATMs, display windows,
telephone booths, payment boxes, etc.
(34) Ground-floor retail, services, and restaurant uses shall have large
transparent windows, preferably divided-light. Such windows shall
be framed by the surrounding wall and shall be a minimum of 75%
of the total ground-level facade area adjoining the sidewalk. The
window wall facade area may be reduced if, due to a particular use
or settings, the provision of windows will present concerns for
aesthetic design or security. However, the facade design should
employ an arrangement of materials that reflects the required
§ 200-258 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-258
1:1126
window area and/or lines to be compatible with the intent of these
guidelines.
(35) The street facade of buildings may be set back a maximum of 12
feet to 15 feet from the front lot line. In general, it is preferred to
keep the street facade built to the property line, in alignment with
adjacent buildings.
(36) A minimum of one facade element shall align horizontally with
adjacent buildings. Facade elements include, but are not limited to,
rooftops, cornices, signs, storefront windows, windows above the
first floor and awnings. Awnings are encouraged. There should be a
balance between variety and harmony of building facades.
Maintain the similarity in the building width. New or larger
buildings on parcels shall incorporate architectural elements which
reflect the width of adjacent buildings. Successful methods for
achieving this include, but are not limited to, window pattern and
detail placement.
(37) Appropriate design of the corner shall include one of the following
patterns:
(a) Operating the space at ground level for people to walk around
the corner, with the building mass above redefining the corner.
(b) A recessed entry at the corner such as the familiar angled wall
with an entry door.
(c) A corner window with an important view into the building.
(38) The design for a proposed facade must consider the appearance of
the building in the evening and develop an exterior lighting plan
that includes display window lighting, building lighting, and
pedestrian-scaled lighting for both buildings and pedestrian areas
within the site. Lighting shall be warm in color, with control of glare
for the pedestrian.
(39) Building exteriors shall have vertical and/or horizontal offsets to
create visual breaks on the exterior. Long, monotonous,
uninterrupted walls or roof planes shall be avoided. Building wall
offsets, including projections such as balconies, canopies, awnings,
and signs, recesses, and changes in floor level shall be used in
order to add architectural interest and variety and to relieve the
visual effect of a simple, long wall. Similarly, roofline offsets,
dormers, or gables shall be provided in order to provide
architectural interest and variety to the massing of a building and
to relieve the effect of a single, long roof.
(40) The architectural treatment of the front facade shall be continued
in its major features around all visibly exposed sides of a building.
All sides of a building shall be architecturally designed to be
consistent with regard to style, materials, colors and details. Blank
§ 200-258 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-258
1:1127
wall or service area treatment of side and/or rear elevations visible
from public view shall be avoided.
(41) The exteriors of all buildings in the development, including any
permitted accessory buildings, shall be architecturally compatible
and be constructed of complementary materials. Design guidelines
for proposed and future modification of the building design shall be
prepared by the applicant for developments that include multiple
(three or more) buildings or tracts greater than three acres in size.
(42) All entrances to a building, except service and emergency egress
doors, shall be defined and articulated by architectural elements
such as lintels, pediments, pilasters, columns, porticoes, porches,
overhangs, railings, balustrades and other elements, where
appropriate. Any such element utilized shall be architecturally
compatible with the style, materials, colors and details of the
building as a whole, as shall the doors. The main entrance shall
face the street on which the property fronts.
(43) Corner buildings shall be designed to appear as landmark
buildings, since they have at least two front facades visibly exposed
to the street. One possible treatment to achieve this goal would
have buildings designed with additional height or architectural
embellishments, such as corner towers, to emphasize their
location.
(44) The developer shall demonstrate that the project conforms to the
Environmental Sustainability Element of the Master Plan.
(45) Freestanding newspaper and advertising dispensers shall not be
permitted in the right-of-way of primary streets and shall be
incorporated into approved buildings or pavilions.
(46) All retail and office space shall be located in mixed-use buildings.
D. Signage.
(1) The temporary display of signs, banners, flags, pennants and
similar devices, in connection with special events or activities of a
public or nonprofit nature, or upon the occasion of the opening of a
new business use, shall be permitted, provided such display shall
not exceed 14 days and shall not occur more than four times per
calendar year.
(2) Existing nonconforming signs shall be removed from these districts
within a period of 12 months after plan approval.
(3) All signs within the project area shall be part of the overall total
design scheme and in keeping with the architectural character of
the district in which the sign is located.
(4) Each type of signage shall be permitted on the same site, provided
that the standards set forth below are satisfied.
§ 200-258 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-258
1:1128
(a) Wall signage.
[1] The following types of wall signs shall be permitted:
[a] Internally lit raised letters.
[b] Backlit raised letters.
[c] Signage board with gooseneck lighting.
[d] Individual cut letters with gooseneck lighting.
[2] The maximum sign area shall be 80% of the linear tenant
frontage, with a maximum of 50 square feet.
[3] The letter height shall be:
Linear Tenant Frontage
(feet)
Letter Height
(inches)
0 to 25 10
26 to 50 12
51 to 75 14
76 and greater 18
(b) Hanging signs.
[1] One hanging sign shall be permitted per business.
[2] The maximum sign area shall be 10 square feet.
[3] The letter and logo height shall be a maximum of six
inches.
(c) Street address signage.
[1] Street address signage shall be provided on each building
or for each individual tenant.
[2] Street address numbers shall have a maximum height of
eight inches.
(d) Monument signage.
[1] One monument sign shall be permitted for buildings, but
only for buildings set back more than 50 feet from the
right-of-way.
[2] The maximum monument sign area shall be 30 square feet.
[3] The maximum monument sign height shall be six feet
above existing grade.
§ 200-258 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-258
1:1129
§ 200-259. General district regulations.
The following district regulations shall apply to the district for which they
are set forth and shall supersede the underlying district regulations of the
zoning district in place prior to the adoption of this Plan.
§ 200-260. RP-1 District. [Amended 3-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-5;
9-19-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-16; 6-11-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-17;
12-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-29]
[4] The base of the monument sign shall be landscaped with
plants that extend a minimum of two feet in all directions.
(e) Awnings and canopies.
[1] Awnings and canopies shall be architecturally compatible
with the building.
[2] Awnings and canopies shall be kept in good order.
[3] One sign on an awning or canopy shall be permitted,
provided that:
[a] The letter logo height does not exceed 50% of the
awning or canopy height.
[b] The letter and logo height is located on the vertical
flap and does not exceed eight inches.
[c] The letter and logo area does not exceed 50% of the
area of the diagonal portion of the awning or canopy.
(f) Window lettering and signs. Window lettering and signs shall
be permitted, provided that they:
[1] Are inside the window
[2] Do not exceed 15% of the window area.
[3] Pertain only to the establishment occupying the premises
where the window is located
(5) Variable message boards and other devices outside of parking
facilities and in association with Kiss and Ride areas are permitted
when the public authority having jurisdiction over same determines
that they are appropriate for managing, directing, and controlling
traffic flow.
E. Redeveloper agreements. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-9, all
agreements, leases, deeds, and other instruments to or with a
redeveloper shall contain a covenant running with the land requiring
that the owner or assignee shall construct only the uses established in
the redevelopment plan and the approved redevelopment agreement.
[Added 9-19-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-16]
§ 200-258 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-260
1:1130
A. RP-1 District Use Regulations.
(1) Purpose. The RP-1 District is envisioned as the core of the
Redevelopment Area on the west side of the rail line where a mix of
residential, retail, office and civic space can be designed as a
distinctive walkable center with a sense of place for Princeton
Junction.
(2) Principal permitted uses. In the RP-1 District, no building or
premises shall be used and no building shall be erected or altered
on a lot which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, except
for one or more of the following uses:
(a) Multifamily dwellings, townhouses, stacked townhouses, agerestricted
housing and live-work units, including affordable
housing meeting all Uniform Housing Affordability Controls
("UHAC") standards. Residential structures may occur in
mixed-use structures. Residential structures will comply with
all federal and state accessibility laws.
(b) Civic spaces and uses, including a farmer's market.
(c) One hotel.
(d) Stores and shops for the conduct of any retail business,
including specialty and gift shops and boutiques, excluding
drive-through facilities.
(e) Personal service establishments (e.g., tailor, barbershop, or
beauty salon).
(f) Offices for professional services (e.g., physicians, lawyers,
financial advisors or architects); commercial offices (e.g.,
realtors or travel agencies); governmental offices (e.g., post
office branch); and offices incidental to uses permitted in this
section.
(g) Restaurants, cafes, luncheonettes and delicatessens, excluding
curb service establishments and drive-through facilities but
not excluding walk-up services and outdoor dining.
(h) Indoor recreation facilities, including instructional studios and
fitness centers.
(i) Banks and similar financial institutions, including walk-up
automated teller machines (ATM), provided that such are
compatible with the design of the building and are
appropriately located at the side or rear of a building. Drivethrough
facilities serving such uses are not permitted.
(j) Attended laundry and retail dry-cleaning services, not
including bulk processing and, in the case of dry-cleaning
§ 200-260 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-260
1:1131
establishments, not providing for the storage of more than five
gallons of flammable or toxic cleaning fluid on the premises.
(k) Book, newspaper, periodical and stationery stores and copy
centers.
(l) Parcel package shipping stores or mailing centers.
(m) Artisan studios, craftsman workshops, and art galleries.
(n) Museums and other cultural and civic facilities of a similar
nature.
(o) Parks and plazas.
(p) Buildings and uses for municipal purposes owned or operated
by West Windsor Township or not-for-profits designated by the
Township.
(3) Permitted accessory uses.
(a) Recreational and open space facilities, including, but not
limited to, pools, walkways, courtyards and plazas.
(b) Off-street parking and loading, including parking structures
attached to buildings with principal permitted uses,
appropriately screened from public view.
(c) Signs.
(d) Street furnishings, planters, street lights, and exterior, gardentype
shade structures.
(e) Sidewalk cafes and outdoor dining facilities associated with
permitted restaurants, cafes, luncheonettes, and
delicatessens.
(f) Fences and walls, which shall complement the architectural
style, type and design of the building and the overall project
design.
(g) Decks, patios and terraces (including rooftop facilities), which
shall complement the architectural style, type and design of
the building and the overall project design.
(h) Community bulletin or message boards, including electronic
signs with changeable type only for the purpose of conveying
information about community events. However, animated type
signs shall not be permitted.
(i) Public service facilities.
(j) Accessory uses customarily incidental to permitted principal
uses, including structured parking, management and
§ 200-260 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-260
1:1132
maintenance offices, fitness and other resident amenities,
storm water management facilities and structures.
(k) Open-air structures such as gazebos, pavilions, children's play
areas and pet parks.
(l) Kiosks, which may have restrooms.
(4) Conditional uses. In the RP-1 District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses: Child-care centers meeting the
standards set forth in § 200-241, except that (i) they shall not be
permitted in freestanding buildings, (ii) the minimum standards
applicable to a freestanding child-care center in § 200-241A(1), (3)
and (4) shall not be applicable and (iii) the provisions related to an
outdoor play area center in § 200-241A(8) and (9) shall not be
applicable, if one is not provided as permitted by the New Jersey
Department of Human Services.
B. RP-1 District intensity, bulk and other regulations. The following shall
be the standards for the RP-1 District:
(1) Minimum tract area: The entirety of the District, which shall be
conceptually planned in a comprehensive integrated manner
showing the proposed development for the entire District.
Individual components of the District may be shown conceptually to
allow for the District to be developed in phases.
(2) Number of dwelling units: The redeveloper may construct up to
800 dwelling units as of right, at least 95 of which shall be agerestricted.
16.5% of the dwelling units constructed shall be set
aside as affordable units complying with all UHAC regulations. At
least 37% of the affordable units shall be made available to lowincome
households and at least 13% shall be made available to
very-low-income households as defined by the New Jersey Fair
Housing Act.272 The remaining affordable units shall be made
available to moderate-income households. The affordable units
within each residential component of the development shall be
dispersed throughout such component.
(3) Amount of indoor nonresidential square footage: At least 37,000
square feet of indoor nonresidential space shall be constructed by
the redeveloper. Nonresidential uses may be located on the first
floor of multiuse buildings, except that freestanding one- or twostory
nonresidential structures are permitted to be located within
the promenade as kiosks or fronting the promenade in a corner
location as a nonresidential building. Kiosks and commercial uses
within a hotel shall not be counted towards the minimum indoor
nonresidential square footage requirement.
272. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-307.
§ 200-260 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-260
1:1133
(4) Required outdoor civic space and uses: Consistent with Exhibit E of
the Settlement and Redeveloper's Agreement, civic uses shall
include a minimum of 50,000 square feet contained in the
promenade and shall be provided, owned and maintained by the
redeveloper at its cost in perpetuity. It may be used for a farmer's
market and other public events sponsored by civic organizations
which shall be according to a schedule of availability and rules of
usage established by the redeveloper in cooperation with the
Township. The promenade shall include a sheltered public
gathering space permanently affixed and constructed primarily of
glass or other transparent material subject to the approval of the
Township. The promenade shall also include a plaza, utilities, and
shall be located at a place where the streets could be closed for
vehicular traffic at appropriate locations. If necessary, the
redeveloper shall provide public use easements allowing the public
to use and enjoy the promenade. Public access to restrooms shall
be provided during normal business hours and scheduled public
events.
(5) A hotel may be constructed and shall be fronting the promenade.
(6) Maximum improvement coverage: 95%.
(7) Maximum building height: Four stories with the exception of:
(a) Mixed-use buildings with nonresidential uses on the ground
floor which can be up to five stories, provided that the fifth
floor facade is stepped back a minimum of six feet from the
fourth floor facade below.
(b) One hotel may be up to five stories plus open or partially
covered rooftop terraces and outdoor dining facilities.
(c) Parking structures attached to buildings with principal
permitted uses may be up to six levels.
(d) Architectural enhancements and building elements and
appurtenances such as parapets, chimneys, spires, cupolas,
belfries, corner towers or flagpoles, designed for ornamental
purposes, as well as functional elements such as elevator
housing, roof-mounted HVAC equipment, and roof-access
stairwells, are not subject to any specific height limitation but
shall not exceed the height of the rooftop they project from by
more than 15 feet. Section 200-229 F of Chapter 200 of the
Township's Code relating to height exceptions shall not apply.
Consistent with the definition from the International Building
Code (Section 505.2), mezzanines shall not constitute a story
or half story and shall be considered a portion of the story
below.
(8) Parking requirements: 1.4375 off-street parking spaces per
apartment unit are to be provided within the District. RSIS
§ 200-260 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-260
1:1134
standards shall apply for townhouses. Nonresidential uses may
rely on shared parking and, if available, commuter parking spaces
in off-hours and on weekends without the provision of dedicated
parking except for employees at a ratio of 1.0 space per 1,000
square feet of nonresidential square footage (as described in
Subection C) excluding hotels. Parking serving hotel guests and
employees shall be provided at the rate of 0.6 spaces per room,
the required number of spaces for residential uses (excluding
townhouses) and nonresidential uses may be reduced if a shared
parking analysis demonstrates to the Planning Board's satisfaction
that a lower number of spaces will be sufficient, except that the
required number of spaces may be reduced if a shared parking
analysis demonstrates that a lower number of spaces will be
sufficient. The applicable parking requirement may be reduced
where it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Planning
Board that such reductions are justified by reason of proximity to
public transportation and/or documented arrangements for shared
parking supported by analyses consistent with the Urban Land
Institute's Shared Parking Analysis or other generally accepted
standards applicable to shared parking.
(9) Other standards:
(a) No development shall proceed in the District without a
redeveloper's agreement with the Township.
(b) There shall be no FAR (floor area ratio) or MIC (maximum
improvement coverage) requirements for individual lots, such
requirements applying only district-wide regardless of
subdivisions created to separate buildings, uses, ownership or
financing within the overall RP-1 District. Setback and building
distance standards are not applied in order to maximize
flexibility of the design and to achieve the goals of the RP-1
District as a compact, walkable center with an active public
space and street life.
(c) Procedures for snow storage and removal shall be identified.
C. RP-1 District design standards. The RP-1 District is intended to promote
redevelopment to achieve the goals of the District as a compact,
walkable center with active street life and a promenade as the primary
public space. The creation of a cohesive built environment where
existing and proposed commercial and residential development are
integrated is essential to this district. These design standards are
intended to maximize flexibility of the design to achieve the goals of the
district. All standards set forth in the Township Land Use Code, other
than District regulations, shall continue to apply except when
inconsistent with the design standards set forth below.
(1) Promenade public space (which is shown conceptually in Exhibit E
of the Settlement and Redeveloper's Agreement).
§ 200-260 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-260
1:1135
(a) The promenade shall be designed to include passive areas and
active public gathering space that can host a farmer's market
and other public events.
(b) If applicable, the farmer's market shall include stall areas, an
open-air pavilion structure, a plaza and utilities such as
electric and water. It shall be located on the promenade at a
place where the streets could be closed to vehicular traffic at
appropriate locations.
(c) The promenade shall utilize shared space principles that
combine movement and other civic functions of streets and
public space. This includes aesthetic treatments considering
decorative materials and/or patterns for all vehicular,
pedestrian and shared paved surfaces. Pavements should be
specifically designed to emphasize the creation of spaces and
transition between spaces or zones and to provide visual clues
to pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists to reinforce the use
and function of the area as a low speed pedestrian-oriented
public space through which motor vehicles travel and park.
Bollards shall be used in place of curbs to provide visual clues
for defining separation of pedestrian circulation from vehicular
travel lanes and on-street parking. More refined pavements
should be utilized to emphasize and enhance areas designed
for larger volumes of pedestrian activity such as building
entrances, plazas and terraces, nodes, drop-off and pick-up
zones and crosswalks. A palette of compatible decorative
pavements and/or pavement patterns should be developed for
the entire promenade.
(2) Circulation and parking.
(a) Streets shall include on-street parallel or angled parking in
order to promote pedestrian street activity, lower vehicular
speeds, and provide convenient access to retail uses and the
promenade.
(b) Off-street parking and service access shall be designed to avoid
the backing in and out of streets.
(c) Sidewalk widths shall measure between 10 feet and 15 feet in
the core retail and promenade area in the RP-1 District and
shall be a minimum of five feet wide in all other areas (except
where vehicle parking overhang of a sidewalk area can occur
wherein the width of the sidewalk area is to be a minimum of
six feet). All sidewalks should be durably paved and smoothly
surfaced to provide for the free movement of pedestrians. All
sidewalks and pathways must be designed to provide access
for the physically disabled. Access ramps shall be conveniently
placed and sloped to provide easy connection to streets and
§ 200-260 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-260
1:1136
sidewalks, in conformance with the applicable accessibility
standards.
(d) The minimum width for off-road bike lanes is eight feet.
(e) Surface parking cannot be located between the building and
the front property line. Where surface parking may be located
along a street frontage, such must be screened from the street
by a solid fence or wall at a minimum height of 48 inches.
(f) Structured parking may be contained within, under or
attached to buildings. Parking structures or podium-type
parking under buildings may not front toward the promenade
public space. Where parking structures front on public streets,
such may feature liner buildings which are shallow commercial
buildings on the facades of parking structures or ground floor
space along the sidewalk designed as retail, commercial or
office space.
(g) All facilities that provide parking to the public for
nonresidential uses shall provide parking for bicycles at a rate
of one bicycle space per 10 automobile parking spaces for the
first 100 parking stalls and one bicycle space for every 20
automobile parking spaces beyond that.
(h) A minimum of two spaces will be provided for parking for
shared car services.
(i) Loading for nonresidential uses fronting on the promenade
may be accommodated by collective provision for loading
facilities that allow for sharing of such facilities among two or
more uses and may be located in either on-street loading zones
or off-street loading areas, which may be located within a
building or a parking structure. A hotel shall provide an offstreet
loading area with a minimum of one berth.
(3) Landscape architectural treatments and guidelines.
(a) All plants, trees, shrubs, pedestrian pavements and
streetscape elements shall be installed in accordance with a
landscape plan and schedule provided by the redeveloper,
subject to the approval of the Planning Board.
(b) Landscape architectural treatments shall be provided
throughout the redevelopment area to create spatial definition
or separation, shade, visual interest, seasonal color, visual
buffering, microclimatic enhancement, and habitat and to
improve safety.
(c) Indigenous plant species shall be primarily specified within the
District and invasive exotic species shall be avoided. Any
landscaping that is not resistant to the environment, or that
§ 200-260 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-260
1:1137
dies, shall be replaced by the redeveloper in accordance with
the maintenance guarantee provisions of the municipal land
use law.
(d) In landscaped spaces, passive systems such as cisterns and
water gardens that collect rainwater for irrigation or recharge
are encouraged.
(e) Soil moisture-sensing irrigation systems shall be used.
(4) Building orientation, massing and facade composition.
(a) New buildings within the District should be considered an
integral part of the overall site design and developed with
appropriate consideration for both proposed and existing
buildings with respect to height, mass, siting, location,
materials, orientation, signs, lighting and use.
(b) Buildings shall front on the promenade and public streets to
provide form and function to the streetscape. The streetscape
should be continuous and varied through the use of street
furniture, landscaping, building articulation, building frontage
setbacks and changes in sidewalk types and textures. Driveway
intersections with the public street should be minimized to
avoid excessive interruptions in the streetwall.
(c) Buildings shall be designed to present an articulated facade
from all vantage points. Parking structures shall not front on
the promenade. Parking structures or that portion of a building
containing a parking structure that is not fronting on the
promenade may have an exterior clad in a vine-covered trellis,
graphic panels, solar panels, a window-like facade treatment,
liner buildings or ground floor space along the sidewalk
designed as retail, commercial, residential or office space.
(d) The architectural treatment of the front facade shall be
continued in its major features around all visibly exposed sides
of a building with the exception of parking structures or that
portion of a building containing a parking structure. All sides of
a building shall be architecturally designed to be consistent
with regard to style, materials, colors and details. Blank wall or
service area treatment of side and/or rear elevations visible
from public view shall be avoided.
(e) Unless the redeveloper proposes a specific use that requires a
unique building, such as a hotel, buildings should be designed
utilizing base, middle and top forms as the primary method
relating buildings to each other.
(f) The base shall be considered the first story of the facade facing
a public street, depending on the overall heights of the
building. The design of the base, as well as the quality and
§ 200-260 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-260
1:1138
durability of its materials, should be emphasized to create
visual interest and support pedestrian activity. The building's
base should be presented to the Planning Board at a larger
scale of drawing and greater detail than the remainder of the
facade to ensure it meets the building design objectives.
(g) In addition to the base, the exterior design of mixed-use
residential buildings shall include a middle field section and a
cap on the top. The middle of the building shall be
differentiated from the base by a horizontal transition line. A
horizontal transition line should also be established separating
the middle field from the cap or top of the buildings.
(h) The base transition line should generally be defined at the
water table, sill of the ground floor windows or top of the
ground floor. The upper transition line articulating the cap
should generally be defined by a cornice, projecting overhang
or other appropriate means that defines the cap of the
building.
(i) Building exteriors shall have vertical and/or horizontal offsets
to create visual breaks on the exterior. Long, monotonous,
uninterrupted walls or roof planes shall be avoided. Building
wall offsets, including projections such as balconies, canopies,
awnings, and signs, recesses, and changes in floor level shall
be used in order to add architectural interest and variety and
to relieve the visual effect of a simple, long wall. Similarly,
roofline offsets, dormers, or gables shall be provided in order
to provide architectural interest and variety to the massing of a
building and to relieve the effect of a single, long roof.
(j) For townhouses or stacked townhouses, buildings may contain
a maximum of 12 townhouse dwellings or stacked townhouse
modules (24 stacked townhomes) in a single row and shall not
require any facade, height or roofline offsets. The base of
townhouses or stacked townhouses should generally be
defined at the water table, sill of the ground floor windows or
top of the ground floor and the cap should generally be defined
by a cornice or overhanging eave line. Townhouses or stacked
townhouses shall have a front entry that faces a street,
courtyard, mews or other open space, with garages accessed
from the rear (via a driveway), and are not required to have
private outdoor space at the ground level.
(k) In general, it is preferred to keep the street facade parallel to
the property line in alignment with adjacent buildings.
(l) Blank walls must contain architectural relief such as
expressive details, blind windows, murals, etc.
(m) All buildings shall provide scale-defining architectural
elements or details at the first two floor levels minimum, such
§ 200-260 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-260
1:1139
as windows, spandrels, awnings, porticos, pediments, cornices,
pilasters, columns and balconies.
(n) Windows for residential buildings shall be primarily vertically
proportioned. Tinted and highly reflective glass are
discouraged.
(o) Ground-floor retail, services, and restaurant uses shall have
large transparent windows. Such windows shall be framed by
the surrounding wall and shall be a minimum of 75% of the
total ground-level facade area adjoining the sidewalk. The
window wall facade area may be reduced if, due to a particular
use or settings, the provision of windows will present concerns
for aesthetic design or security. However, the facade design
should employ an arrangement of materials that reflects the
required window area and/or lines to be compatible with the
intent of these guidelines.
(p) The predominant material of all street walls on primary and
secondary streets shall be brick, precast, cement-board siding,
wood and finished masonry block, or curtain wall. Stucco may
be used as an accent. All materials, colors and elevations shall
be approved by the Planning Board.
(q) Shop fronts may have a kick plate that ranges in height from 18
inches to 42 inches running continuously beneath the required
fenestration.
(r) Public access to commercial and governmental buildings shall
be provided at sidewalk grade. The primary floor of and access
to residential structures may be elevated.
(s) The front doors of all buildings shall be visible from the street
unless fronting on a courtyard, mews or other open space. If
located more than 10 feet from the front building line, their
location must be reinforced with additional graphics, signage,
lighting, marquees or canopies.
(t) All entrances to a building, except service and emergency
egress doors, shall be defined and articulated by architectural
elements such as lintels, pediments, pilasters, columns,
porticoes, porches, overhangs, railings, balustrades and other
elements, where appropriate. Any such element utilized,
including doors, shall be architecturally compatible with the
style, materials, colors and details of the building as a whole.
The main entrance shall face the street on which the property
fronts.
(u) Awnings, which add visual richness to the commercial corridor
while enhancing the quality of public walkways, are
encouraged for all storefronts. Awnings shall have fixed or
retractable metal framework.
§ 200-260 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-260
1:1140
(v) Canopies, unlike awnings, are nonretractable. They shall be
constructed of wood or metal framing, standing-seam metal
roof or glass roof as solid canopies or semi-open trellises.
Canopies may incorporate signage and down lighting. Security
shall be implemented so that it cannot be seen, and security
grille housing is specifically prohibited.
(w) All awnings and canopies shall be securely attached to the
building so that the lowest part of the awning or canopy is
mounted a minimum of eight feet above the sidewalk at the
storefront. Awnings and canopies may project over a sidewalk
and/or in the public right-of-way.
(x) Buildings directly fronting the promenade shall be designed to
appear as landmark buildings. One possible treatment to
achieve this goal would have buildings designed with
additional height or architectural embellishments, such as
corner towers, to emphasize their location.
(y) Appropriate design of the corner of mixed-use buildings
directly fronting the promenade shall include one of the
following patterns:
[1] Opening the space at ground level for people to walk
across the corner, with the building mass above redefining
the corner.
[2] A recessed entry at the corner such as the familiar angled
wall with an entry door.
[3] A corner window with an important view into the building.
[4] Balconies or bay windows that wrap the corner.
[5] A tower element.
(z) Multistory buildings with flat roofs shall provide light color
roof surfaces. Green roof plantings and solar photovoltaic
systems on roofs and parking decks shall be permitted.
(aa) Excepting the antenna itself, all parts and components of
personal communications antennas, satellite dishes, and
television and radio antennas shall be screened from view
regardless of elevation, or shall be disguised within an
enclosed structure. The screening shall be designed as part of
the overall design theme of the building to which it is
associated.
(bb) Dish antennas may not exceed 12 feet in diameter.
(cc) Mechanical equipment located on building roofs shall be
screened so as not to be visible from the ground level from
adjacent developments and from public streets and spaces.
§ 200-260 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-260
1:1141
Mechanical equipment at ground level shall be screened and in
the rear.
(5) Lighting.
(a) Lighting levels along paved portions of public walks shall be an
average of no less than one footcandle for commercial areas
and 0.5 footcandle for residential areas.
(b) Fixtures serving to light streets shall be at a height of no
greater than 20 feet above the adjacent roadway surface. The
light center of a fixture for a pedestrian walkway shall be
mounted at a height of 12 feet to 14 feet above the adjacent
surface of the walkway. The fixtures shall include attachments
to accommodate such amenities as banners and flower pots.
(c) The design for a proposed facade must consider the
appearance of the building in the evening and develop an
exterior lighting plan that includes display window lighting,
building lighting, and pedestrian-scaled lighting for both
buildings and pedestrian areas within the site. Lighting shall
be warm in color, with control of glare for the pedestrian.
(6) Streetscape.
(a) A palette of compatible site furnishings should be developed
for the entire District. Street furnishings may include elements
such as benches, gazebos, trash and recycling receptacles,
bicycle racks, bird houses, drinking fountains, kiosks,
sculptural elements, decorative fountains, bollards, decorative
fences, seat walls, and pedestrian-scale lighting.
(b) Community bulletin boards, such as kiosks, may be provided at
strategic locations, including on the promenade.
(c) Freestanding newspaper and advertising dispensers shall not
be permitted in the right-of-way of primary streets and shall be
incorporated into approved buildings or pavilions.
(d) Outdoor cafes may extend onto the public right-of-way upon
issuance of a license by the Township. Such encroachment
shall convey no rights to the licensee beyond those enumerated
in the license. Outdoor cafes shall be delineated from the
public way by planters and/or metal fencing with no more than
two entrances to the cafe seating area. A clear width of at least
four feet shall be maintained between any outward portion of
the cafe and the closest street furniture and equipment.
(7) Signage. In lieu of § 200-258D, the following shall apply:
(a) The temporary display of signs, banners, flags, pennants and
similar devices in connection with special events or activities of
a public or nonprofit nature shall be permitted, provided such
§ 200-260 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-260
1:1142
display shall not exceed 14 days and shall not occur more than
12 times per calendar year.
(b) The temporary display of signs, banners, flags, pennants and
similar devices, in connection with the opening of a new
business use or reopening of an existing business use shall be
permitted provided such display shall not exceed three months
for nonresidential uses and 15 months for hotel and residential
uses.
(c) Existing nonconforming signs shall be removed from this
District within a period of 12 months after building permit
issuance.
(d) All signs within the project area shall be part of the overall
total design scheme and in keeping with the architectural
character of the District in which the sign is located.
(e) Each type of signage shall be permitted on the same site,
provided that the standards set forth below are satisfied.
[1] Wall signage.
[a] The following types of wall signs shall be permitted:
[i] Internally lit raised letters.
[ii] Backlit raised letters.
[iii] Signage board with gooseneck lighting.
[iv] Individual cut letters with gooseneck lighting.
[b] The maximum sign area shall be 80% of the linear
tenant frontage, with a maximum of 50 square feet.
[2] Hanging signs.
[a] One hanging sign shall be permitted per business with
the exception of residential and hotel buildings which
can have one per building entry and one for each
exterior building corner.
[b] The maximum sign area shall be 10 square feet with
the exception of blade signs for residential and hotel
buildings which maximum sign area shall be 50 square
feet.
[c] The letter and logo height shall be a maximum of 12
inches with the exception of blade signs which
maximum height shall be 18 inches.
[d] Hanging signs may project over a sidewalk and/or in
the public right-of-way.
§ 200-260 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-260
1:1143
[3] Street address signage.
[a] Street address signage shall be provided on each
building or for each individual tenant.
[b] Street address numbers shall have a maximum height
of eight inches.
[4] Kiosk signage.
[a] Freestanding signs designed as Parisian-style kiosks
shall be permitted in order to identify the promenade
and individual uses located in the District to passersby
on major roads at the edges of the District as well as
within or leading to the promenade.
[b] The maximum kiosk sign area shall be 30 square feet,
as measured on each face.
[c] The maximum kiosk sign height shall be 16 feet above
finished grade.
[d] Kiosk signs may be located in a paved sidewalk area
including within the public right-of-way of streets.
[e] The base of the kiosk sign shall be landscaped with
plants that extend a minimum of two feet in all
directions unless such kiosk is located within a paved
sidewalk area.
[5] Awnings and canopies.
[a] Awnings and canopies shall be architecturally
compatible with the building.
[b] Awnings and canopies shall be kept in good order.
[c] One sign on an awning or canopy shall be permitted,
provided that:
[i] The letter logo height does not exceed 50% of the
main area of the awning or canopy.
[ii] The letter and logo area may be located on the
valance of the awning or face of the canopy and
shall not exceed 12 inches in height.
[iii] The letter and logo area may be located above the
canopy and shall not exceed 12 inches in height.
[6] Window lettering and signs. Window lettering and signs
shall be permitted, provided that they:
[a] Are inside the window.
§ 200-260 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-260
1:1144
§ 200-261. RP-2 District.
[b] Do not exceed 15% of the window area.
[c] Pertain only to the establishment occupying the
premises where the window is located.
(f) Temporary construction and sales signage.
[1] Signage shall be removed within three years of the
issuance of a sign permit or one year of the time of the
final certificate of occupancy, whichever comes first. One
sign per each road frontage shall be permitted. However,
construction signs which contain noncommercial
messages, such as signs identifying individual lots or
construction ingress and/or egress, shall be permitted.
[2] Temporary contractor signage. Only one sign shall be
permitted identifying lenders, architects, engineers or
contractors doing work on the site. Such sign shall be a
maximum of four square feet per entity, but not to exceed
25 square feet. This sign shall be removed when work
ceases or is abandoned or when a certificate of occupancy
for the project is issued, whichever occurs sooner.
(g) Billboards are prohibited.
A. RP-2 District use regulations.
(1) Purpose. The RP-2 District, an area of privately owned land
between Station Drive and the rail line, is envisioned as a place for
public or private structured parking with retail and professional
office service on the first floor.
(2) Principal permitted uses. In an RP-2 District, no building or
premises shall be used and no building shall be erected or altered
on a lot which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, except
for one or more of the following uses:
(a) Public parking.
(b) Stores and shops for the conduct of any retail business,
including specialty and gift shops and boutiques, excluding
drive-through facilities.
(c) Personal service establishments (e.g., tailor, barbershop or
beauty salon).
(d) Offices for professional services (e.g., physicians, lawyers,
financial advisors or architects); small commercial offices (e.g.,
realtors or travel agencies); small governmental offices (e.g.,
post office branch); and offices incidental to uses permitted in
this section.
§ 200-260 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-261
1:1145
(e) Restaurants, cafes, luncheonettes and delicatessens, excluding
curb service establishments and drive-through facilities but
not excluding walk-up services and outdoor dining.
(f) Indoor recreation facilities, including instructional studios and
fitness centers.
(g) Banks and similar financial institutions, including walk-up
automated teller machines (ATM), provided that such are
compatible with the design of the building. Drive-through
facilities serving such uses are not permitted.
(h) Attended laundry and retail dry-cleaning services, not
including bulk processing and, in the case of dry-cleaning
establishments, not providing for the storage of more than five
gallons of flammable or toxic cleaning fluid on the premises.
(i) Book, newspaper, periodical and stationery stores and copy
centers.
(j) Parcel package shipping stores or mailing centers.
(k) Parks and plazas.
(l) Buildings and uses for municipal purposes owned or operated
by West Windsor Township or not-for-profits designated by the
Township.
(3) Permitted accessory uses.
(a) Recreational and/or open space facilities, including, but not
limited to, walkways, courtyards and plazas.
(b) Off-street parking and loading located to the rear of principal
buildings or appropriately screened from public view.
(c) Signs.
(d) Street furnishings, planters, street lights, and exterior, garden
type, shade structures (gazebos).
(e) Sidewalk cafes associated with permitted restaurants.
(f) Fences and walls, which shall complement the architectural
style, type and design of the building and the overall project
design.
(g) Decks, patios and terraces, which shall complement the
architectural style, type and design of the building and the
overall project design.
(h) Community bulletin or message boards, including electronic
signs with changeable type only for the purpose of conveying
§ 200-261 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-261
1:1146
§ 200-262. RP-3 District.
information about community events. However, animated-type
signs shall not be permitted.
(i) Public service facilities.
(j) Accessory uses customarily incidental to permitted principal
uses, including structured parking for residential dwelling
units.
B. RP-2 District intensity, bulk and other regulations. The following shall
be the standards for the RP-2 District:
(1) Minimum tract area: the entirety of the district, which shall be
planned and developed in a comprehensive manner as a single
integrated entity with one development application showing the
proposed development for the entire district.
(2) Maximum FAR: 0.14 for retail and office uses and 5.0 for structured
parking.
(3) Maximum improvement coverage: 0.80 for retail and office uses
and 0.95 for parking.
(4) Minimum and maximum building height: The minimum building
height shall be two stories, and the maximum building height shall
be four stories, with five levels for parking structures.
(5) Off-street parking: one space for every 750 square feet of retail and
office floor area.
(6) Principal permitted uses in Subsection A(2)(b) through (j) and (l)
shall be permitted only on the first floor of structured parking.
(7) No development shall proceed in the district without a
redeveloper's agreement with the Township or redevelopment
entity.
A. RP-3 District use regulations.
(1) Purpose: District RP-3 is intended to be a retail and office
development serving as a visual connection and facilitating
pedestrian and bicycle linkage between the retail developments in
Districts 7 and 1. It will serve as a receiving area for development
rights, shifted from District 5 in order to facilitate the demolition of
the existing building in that district and that district's conversion to
a public park. [Amended 3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-10]
(2) Principal permitted uses. In an RP-3 District, no building or
premises shall be used and no building shall be erected or altered
on a lot which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, except
for one or more of the following uses:
§ 200-261 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-262
1:1147
(a) Stores and shops for the conduct of any retail business,
including specialty and gift shops and boutiques, excluding
drive-through facilities.
(b) Personal service establishments (e.g., tailor, barbershop or
beauty salon).
(c) Offices for professional services (e.g., physicians, lawyers,
financial advisors or architects); small offices (e.g., realtors or
travel agencies); small governmental offices (e.g., post office
branch); and offices incidental to uses permitted in this
section.
(d) Restaurants, cafes, luncheonettes and delicatessens, excluding
curb service establishments and drive-through facilities but
not excluding walk-up services and outdoor dining.
(e) Indoor recreation facilities, including instructional studios and
fitness centers.
(f) Banks and similar financial institutions, including walk-up
automated teller machines (ATM), provided that such are
compatible with the design of the building. Drive-through
facilities serving such uses are not permitted.
(g) Attended laundry and retail dry-cleaning services, not
including bulk processing and, in the case of dry-cleaning
establishments, not providing for the storage of more than five
gallons of flammable or toxic cleaning fluid on the premises.
(h) Book, newspaper, periodical and stationery stores and copy
centers.
(i) Parcel package shipping stores or mailing centers.
(j) Museums, art galleries and other cultural and civic facilities of
a similar nature.
(k) Parks and plazas.
(l) Buildings and uses for municipal purposes owned or operated
by West Windsor Township or not-for-profits designated by the
Township.
(m) Affordable housing meeting all COAH standards, provided that
it shall be located on the upper floor of mixed-use buildings.
(3) Permitted accessory uses.
(a) Recreational and/or open space facilities, including, but not
limited to, walkways, courtyards and plazas.
§ 200-262 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-262
1:1148
(b) Off-street parking and loading located to the rear of principal
buildings, including attached parking structures, or
appropriately screened from public view.
(c) Signs.
(d) Street furnishings, planters, street lights, and exterior, gardentype,
shade structures (gazebos).
(e) Sidewalk cafes associated with permitted restaurants.
(f) Fences and walls, which shall complement the architectural
style, type and design of the building and the overall project
design.
(g) Decks, patios and terraces, which shall complement the
architectural style, type and design of the building and the
overall project design.
(h) Community bulletin or message boards, including electronic
signs with changeable type only for the purpose of conveying
information about community events. However, animated-type
signs shall not be permitted.
(i) Public service facilities.
(j) Accessory uses customarily incidental to permitted principal
uses, including structured parking for residential dwelling
units.
B. RP-3 District intensity, bulk and other regulations. The following shall
be the standards for the RP-3 District:
(1) Yards.
(a) Rear yard: 10 feet.
(b) Front yard: 15 feet. The front yard shall be treated as the yard
fronting on the promenade and the minor street along the
border with District 1.
(c) Side yard: 0 feet.
(2) Maximum FAR: 0.15 for individual lots and 0.40 if the entire district
is assembled and all development rights from District 5 that can be
accommodated in District 3, including by the use of structured
parking, are secured.
(3) Maximum improvement coverage: 60% for buildings up to three
stories and 90% for four-story buildings.
(4) Minimum and maximum building height: The minimum building
height shall be three stories, with a fourth permitted using
development rights from District 5. Parking garages attached to
§ 200-262 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-262
1:1149
§ 200-263. RP-4 District.
buildings with principal permitted uses may be up to four stories
and five levels.
(5) Off-street parking: one space for every 700 square feet of retail and
office floor area.
(6) Other standards:
(a) The promenade in District 1 shall be extended to Washington
Road, although the roads framing it need not be.
(b) 273An area at least eight feet nine inches wide gradually graded
for a bicycle and pedestrian path over the rail line shall be
provided.
(c) No development shall proceed in the district without a
redeveloper's agreement with the Township or redevelopment
entity.
A. RP-4 District use regulations.
(1) Purpose. The RP-4 District, which is owned entirely by New Jersey
Transit, is intended as a location for commuter parking with
supplementary retail uses to maintain an active street life.
(2) Principal permitted uses. In an RP-4 District, no building or
premises shall be used and no building shall be erected or altered
on a lot which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, except
for one or more of the following uses:
(a) Commuter parking and station transportation facilities.
(b) Stores and shops for the conduct of any retail business,
including specialty and gift shops and boutiques, excluding
drive-through facilities.
(c) Personal service establishments (e.g., tailor, barbershop or
beauty salon).
(d) Restaurants, cafes, luncheonettes and delicatessens, excluding
curb service establishments and drive-through facilities but
not excluding walk-up services and outdoor dining.
(e) Indoor recreation facilities, including instructional studios and
fitness centers.
(f) Banks and similar financial institutions including walk-up
automated teller machines (ATM), provided that such are
273. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(6)(b), regarding growth share, was repealed
3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-10. This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection
B(6)(c) and (d) as Subsection B(6)(b) and (c), respectively.
§ 200-262 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-263
1:1150
compatible with the design of the building. Drive-through
facilities serving such uses are not permitted.
(g) Attended laundry and retail dry-cleaning services, not
including bulk processing and, in the case of dry-cleaning
establishments, not providing for the storage of more than five
gallons of flammable or toxic cleaning fluid on the premises.
(h) Book, newspaper, periodical and stationery stores and copy
centers.
(i) Parcel package shipping stores or mailing centers.
(j) Museums, art galleries and other cultural and civic facilities of
a similar nature.
(k) Parks and plazas.
(l) Buildings and uses for municipal purposes owned or operated
by West Windsor Township or not-for-profits designated by the
Township.
(3) Permitted accessory uses.
(a) Recreational and/or open space facilities, including, but not
limited to, walkways, courtyards and plazas.
(b) Off-street parking and loading located to the rear of principal
buildings or appropriately screened from public view.
(c) Signs.
(d) Street furnishings, planters, street lights, and exterior, gardentype,
shade structures (gazebos).
(e) Sidewalk cafes associated with permitted restaurants.
(f) Fences and walls, which shall complement the architectural
style, type and design of the building and the overall project
design.
(g) Decks, patios and terraces, which shall complement the
architectural style, type and design of the building and the
overall project design.
(h) Community bulletin or message boards, including electronic
signs with changeable type only for the purpose of conveying
information about community events. However, animated-type
signs shall not be permitted.
(i) Public service facilities.
(j) Accessory uses customarily incidental to permitted principal
uses, including structured parking for residential dwelling
units.
§ 200-263 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-263
1:1151
§ 200-264. RP-5 District. [Amended 11-13-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-29]
(4) Conditional uses. In an RP-1 District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses: child-care centers meeting the
standards set forth in § 200-241, except that they shall not be
permitted in freestanding buildings.
B. RP-4 District intensity, bulk and other regulations. The following shall
be the standards for the RP-4 District:
(1) Minimum tract area: the entirety of the district, which shall be
planned and developed in a comprehensive manner as a single
integrated entity with one development application showing the
proposed development for the entire district.
(2) Floor area ratio: 0.10 for retail uses and 5.0 for parking garages.
(3) Maximum retail square footage: 24,000 square feet.
(4) Maximum improvement coverage: 90%.
(5) Minimum and maximum building height: The minimum building
height shall be two stories and the maximum building height shall
be three stories, except that parking garages may be three stories
with four levels if the retail building is two stories and four stories
with five levels if the retail building is three stories.
(6) On-street parking and shared parking with commuter parking
spaces shall be treated as satisfying the parking requirement in
this district.
(7) Other standards:
(a) There shall be no FAR or MIC requirements for individual lots,
such requirements applying only district-wide. Setback and
building distance standards are not applied in order to
maximize flexibility of the design and to achieve the goals of
the district as part of a compact, walkable center with an active
public space and street life.
(b) No development other than public parking shall be permitted
unless the public entity that currently owns the land within the
district reaches an agreement with COAH exempting such
other nonresidential development, which is permitted in order
to finance the public parking, from growth share and any other
affordable housing requirements.
(c) No development shall proceed in the district without a
redeveloper's agreement with the Township or redevelopment
entity.
A. RP-5 District use regulations.
§ 200-263 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-264
1:1152
(1) Purpose. District RP-5 is intended to facilitate the planned
development of uses that are harmonious with and complement the
civic, retail, and residential uses in the RP-1 District and reinforce
the character of District RP-1 as a pedestrian-oriented walkable
community with a vibrant street life and active civic space. As an
alternative to a stand-alone development of the RP-5 District, the
development intensity, represented by the floor area of the existing
building, including a bonus increase in floor area as an inducement,
may be utilized as part of a planned, noncontiguous cluster
development that links the RP-3 District and the RP-5 District. This
scenario would require all development to occur within the RP-3
District while reserving the entirety of the RP-5 District for public
parkland, wetlands mitigation, and stormwater management.
(2) Principal permitted uses. In an RP-5 District, no building or
premises shall be used and no buildings shall be erected or altered
on a lot which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, except
for the following uses:
(a) A planned commercial development containing one or more of
the following uses:
[1] Public park uses, wetlands mitigation, and stormwater
management facilities serving a broader area.
[2] Health and fitness centers.
[3] General, corporate, research, professional, and medical
and dental offices and commercial offices (e.g., realtors or
travel agencies).
[4] Research, testing and analytical and product development
laboratories and pilot plan facilities not involving the
manufacturing, sale, processing, warehousing,
distribution or fabrication of material, products or goods,
except as incidental to the permitted principal uses.
[5] Data processing and computer centers.
[6] Indoor recreation facilities, which may include
instructional studios and fitness centers.
[7] Banks and similar financial institutions, including walk-up
automated teller machines (ATM), provided that such are
compatible with the design of the building and are
appropriately located at the side or rear of a building.
[8] Museums, art galleries and other cultural and civic
facilities of a similar nature.
[9] Buildings and uses for municipal purposes owned or
operated by West Windsor Township or not-for-profits
approved by the Township.
§ 200-264 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-264
1:1153
[10] Fast food operations, including drive-throughs, provided
that it fronts on the road separating districts RP-1 and -5.
(b) Manufacture of specialty epoxies, film adhesives and other
electronic materials for the semiconductor and electronics
industry and of voting machines, software development, RFID,
safety and security monitoring systems, integrated electronic
system and solution for different applications, subject to the
following conditions:
[1] Such manufacturing shall be undertaken only within the
existing building, the footprint of which (as of the effective
date of this section) may be expanded by not more than
25%. The bulk standards therefor shall be the same as
those for the RO-1 District, except that the building may
be expanded to be coterminous with the existing limits of
the southerly facade without the need for a front or side
yard variance. The existing setbacks from Washington
Road and the southerly property line may not be reduced.
If the existing building is expanded pursuant to this
section, it shall remain a one-story expansion.
[2] The Township may use a portion of the site for stormwater
management and wetlands mitigation, subject to an
agreement between the property owner and Township as
to the details of the stormwater management and wetlands
program to be put in place. The portion of the property
expected to be so used is identified on the map attached
hereto, "Environmental Constraints Map of Block 6 Lot
48," as Area D.274 Area D is an approximation and shall be
subject to a detailed engineering assessment. Nothing
herein shall prohibit the property owner from using all or a
portion of Area D.
[3] Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68, the existing use/structure
as of the date of the adoption of this section may be
continued indefinitely in the absence of any changes to the
building, site, intensification of use or abandonment of the
uses in existence at the time of adoption of this section.
The property owner shall have no obligation to allow the
Township to use a portion of the site for stormwater
management and wetlands mitigation unless and until the
property owner files an application with the West Windsor
Planning Board, seeking approval of a planned
development pursuant to § 200-264A(2)(a) or to expand
the existing building in accordance with
§ 200-264A(2)(b)[1]. The property owner may sublease a
portion of its property for any of the uses permitted by
§ 200-264A without incurring an obligation to allow the
274. Editor's Note: Said map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 200-264 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-264
1:1154
Township to use a portion of the site for stormwater
management and wetlands mitigation. [Amended
3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-10]
(3) Permitted accessory uses.
(a) The same as in the RP-1 District, except for the accessory uses
permitted by § 200-260A(1), but only as part of a planned
commercial development permitted by § 200-264A(2)(a).
(4) Conditional uses.
(a) Child-care centers meeting the standards set forth in
§ 200-241, except that they shall not be permitted in
freestanding buildings. They shall only be permitted as part of
a planned commercial development permitted by
§ 200-264A(2)(a).
B. RP-5 District intensity, bulk and other regulations. The following shall
be the standards for the RP-5 District except when the existing use/
structure is continued or an expansion of the existing building is
proposed pursuant to § 200-264A(2)(b):
(1) Minimum tract area and comprehensive plan: The minimum tract
area shall be the entirety of the District, which shall be planned and
developed in a comprehensive manner as a single integrated entity.
To demonstrate that the district has been planned in a
comprehensive manner, the first development application for the
RP-5 District shall include an overall site plan for the development
of the entire district, except that, if the developer intends to
develop the district in phases, an overall concept plan may be
submitted in addition to the first phase site plan as an alternative to
a site plan for the entire district. The concept plan shall clearly
show that the site plan for the initial phase fits within the overall
district development scheme from a standpoint of infrastructure
and other site elements. There shall also be a demonstration that
the initial site plan can be developed independently of the
remaining phases. All land in the district to be dedicated to the
Township for public parkland purposes, stormwater management,
and wetlands mitigation by fee simple conveyance or easement
shall be shown on the site plan or concept plan, as the case may be.
(2) Open space development and dedication: The portion of the site not
proposed to be developed with the principal permitted uses set
forth in § 200-264A(2)(a)[2] through [10], accessory uses therefor,
and the conditional use set forth in § 200-264A(4)(a) shall either be
developed for park purposes open to the general public, wetlands
mitigation, and regional stormwater management as the Planning
Board shall choose or, in the alternative, may be dedicated to the
Township in lieu of such development. As a condition of approval of
an application for the planned commercial development permitted
§ 200-264 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-264
1:1155
by § 200-264A(2)(a) or the clustering of development on
noncontiguous parcels pursuant to § 200-264B(10), such site area
shall be restricted to public park, wetlands mitigation, and
stormwater management purposes through an easement running
to the Township and permitting public access to parkland, in the
case of private ownership, or through a fee simple dedication to the
Township. If the restriction to public open space is by easement,
the development application shall show complete plans for how
the public open space is to be developed after consultation with
the Township. The execution and recording of the easement or
the deed conveying fee simple title, as the case may be, shall be
a condition of approval of the development application, and such
recording shall be effected prior to the issuance of any construction
permits for the planned commercial development or, in the case
of a noncontiguous cluster development, upon approval of the
development application therefor. There shall be no minimum open
space requirement other than that which results from the
application of the maximum improvement coverage requirement to
the portion of the site proposed to be developed. The area that
is not to be devoted to open space shall be governed by the bulk
regulations set forth in this subsection.
(3) Maximum building height: three stories, but not to exceed 45 feet.
(4) Maximum improvement coverage: 95% of the area of the site that is
not environmentally constrained and that may be developed
consistent with applicable regulatory controls.
(5) Setback and building distance standards: Except as is set forth in
§ 200-264B(7), such standards shall not be applied in order to
maximize flexibility in the design and to achieve the goals of the
district as complementary to the development in the RP-1 District.
(6) Parking requirements:
(a) Uses permitted in this § 200-264 except as otherwise provided
below shall comply with the parking requirements specified
under § 200-27.
(b) Health clubs and indoor recreational facilities shall provide a
minimum of one parking space for each 250 square feet of
gross floor area and a maximum not to exceed one parking
space for each 150 square feet of gross floor area.
(7) Drive-through requirements for fast food operations:
(a) Drive-up windows shall provide at least 160 feet of stacking
space for each facility, as measured from the window or unit to
the entry point into the drive-up lane.
(b) Each drive-through entrance/exit shall be at least 50 feet from
an intersection of public rights-of-ways, measured at the
§ 200-264 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-264
1:1156
closest intersection curbs and at least 25 feet from any internal
intersection.
(c) Each entrance to an aisle and the direction of traffic flow shall
be clearly designated by signage and pavement markings.
(d) Each drive-through aisle shall be separated from the
circulation routes necessary for ingress or egress to and from
the property.
(e) Any pedestrian areas located in the vicinity of a drive-through
facility shall be clearly delineated by raised sidewalk areas,
painted crosswalks, distinct paving materials, or any
combination thereof.
(f) Two internally illuminated menu boards not to exceed 12
square feet in area may be provided.
(8) Section 200-238 shall not apply.
(9) Redeveloper's agreement: No development pursuant to
§ 200-264A(2)(a) or B(10) shall proceed in the district without a
redeveloper's agreement with the Township or redevelopment
entity.
(10) Noncontiguous cluster: As an alternative to a planned commercial
development of the RP-5 District permitted by § 200-264A(2)(a), the
development intensity, represented by the floor area of the existing
buildings, including a bonus increase in floor area as an
inducement, may be utilized within a planned, noncontiguous
cluster development that links the RP-3 District and the RP-5
District, subject to the following regulations:
(a) Clustered floor area bonus: The additional floor area that may
be clustered in the RP-3 District, in addition to that which is
already permitted as-of-right, is 104,326 square feet. The
amount of developable or constrained land in the RP-5 District,
due to any regulatory controls, shall have no bearing on the
amount of floor area that may be transferred from the RP-5
District to the RP-3 District.
(b) Comprehensive plan: A planned development that includes
both the RP-3 and RP-5 Districts requires the approval of a site
plan showing the clustered development in the RP-3 District
and proposed uses as per § 200-264B(10)(c) in the RP-5
District.
(c) Development in the RP-5 District: The site plan for the
noncontiguous cluster development shall show the demolition
and removal of all improvements in the RP-5 District in
existence at the time of the application and shall propose the
dedication by fee simple conveyance of the entirety of the
§ 200-264 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-264
1:1157
§ 200-265. RP-6 District.
District to the Township. The plan shall show all of the land
in the RP-5 District converted to uses permitted by
§ 200-264A(2)(a)[1]. Required civic space and uses shall be
negotiated as part of the redeveloper's agreement with the
developer responsible for the demolition, removal of existing
structures, and any necessary remediation and development in
accordance with the approved site plan and shall be installed
at such time as the land is converted to a principal permitted
use.
(d) Principal permitted uses, accessory uses, and other regulations
in the RP-3 District: Principal permitted and accessory uses
and all other development controls for the portion of the
noncontiguous cluster in the RP-3 District shall be as are set
forth in the RP-3 District regulations.
(e) Dedication of the RP-5 District shall be made to the Township
upon approval of the site plan by the board of jurisdiction and
may be accepted at the Township's option with such conditions
as the Township may require. A Phase I investigation shall be
done prior to and submitted as part of the site plan application
to the board of jurisdiction, and such board shall require any
remediation necessary. Such remediation shall be done prior to
acceptance of dedication by the Township. A Phase II
investigation shall also be undertaken if so indicated by the
Phase I report.
A. RP-6 District use regulations.
(1) Purpose. The intent of District RP-6 is to accommodate existing
office development in the Vaughn Drive and Alexander Road area,
to provide for office development to be used as a means of
facilitating the development of public parking structures for
commuters, to provide for retail and restaurant uses along Main
Street and Vaughn Drive in order to create a more active street life,
to accommodate a future BRT, to serve as the location for a hotel
conference center and to serve as a receiving area for transfer of
development rights from the Sarnoff Woods portion of District
RP-10.
(2) Permitted uses. In an RP-6 District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered on a lot which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used, except for one or more
of the following uses:
(a) All uses permitted in the ROM-2 District, except that limited
manufacture, conversion of existing residential structures, and
home occupations shall not be permitted.
§ 200-264 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-265
1:1158
(b) Commercial and public commuter parking.
(c) Transportation facilities, including a BRT station and attendant
improvements.
(d) A hotel conference center with at least 100 rooms.
(e) Stores and shops for the conduct of any retail business,
including specialty and gift shops and boutiques, excluding
drive-through facilities.
(f) Personal service establishments (e.g., tailor, barbershop or
beauty salon).
(g) Offices for professional services (e.g., physicians, lawyers,
financial advisors or architects); small commercial offices (e.g.,
realtors or travel agencies); small governmental offices (e.g.,
post office branch); and offices incidental to uses permitted in
this section.
(h) Restaurants, cafes, luncheonettes and delicatessens, excluding
curb service establishments and drive-through facilities but
not excluding walk-up services and outdoor dining.
(i) Indoor recreation facilities, including instructional studios and
fitness centers.
(j) Banks and similar financial institutions, including walk-up
automated teller machines (ATM), provided that such are
compatible with the design of the building. Drive-through
facilities serving such uses are not permitted.
(k) Attended laundry and retail dry-cleaning services, not
including bulk processing and, in the case of dry-cleaning
establishments, not providing for the storage of more than five
gallons of flammable or toxic cleaning fluid on the premises.
(l) Book, newspaper, periodical and stationery stores and copy
centers.
(m) Parcel package shipping stores or mailing centers.
(n) Museums, art galleries and other cultural and civic facilities of
a similar nature.
(o) Parks and plazas.
(p) Buildings and uses owned or operated by West Windsor
Township or not-for-profits designated by the Township for
municipal purposes.
(q) Township public safety facilities.
(3) Permitted accessory uses.
§ 200-265 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-265
1:1159
(a) Recreational and/or open space facilities, including, but not
limited to, walkways, courtyards and plazas.
(b) Off-street parking and loading, including parking structures
attached to buildings with principal permitted uses, located to
the rear of principal buildings or appropriately screened from
public view.
(c) Signs.
(d) Street furnishings, planters, street lights, and exterior, gardentype,
shade structures (gazebos).
(e) Sidewalk cafes associated with permitted restaurants.
(f) Fences and walls, which shall complement the architectural
style, type and design of the building and the overall project
design.
(g) Decks, patios and terraces, which shall complement the
architectural style, type and design of the building and the
overall project design.
(h) Community bulletin or message boards, including electronic
signs with changeable type only for the purpose of conveying
information about community events. However, animated-type
signs shall not be permitted.
(i) Public service facilities.
(j) Accessory uses customarily incidental to permitted principal
uses, including structured parking for residential dwelling
units.
B. RP-6 District intensity, bulk and other regulations. The following shall
be the standards for the RP-6 District:
(1) Minimum tract area: The ROM-2 bulk standards shall continue to
apply to all privately owned properties fronting on Alexander Road
and Vaughn Drive. The requirement that buildings be oriented to
and front along the street set forth in the architectural and
landscape architectural guideline in Subsection C(2) of § 200-258,
Standards applicable to all districts, shall not apply to such area.
(2) For all other areas within the RP-6 District, the following standards
shall apply:
(a) All land under common ownership shall be planned and
developed in a comprehensive manner as a single integrated
entity, with one development application showing the proposed
development for the entire district.
(3) Maximum FAR: 0.21, except that the FAR may be increased up to
0.35 to accommodate 130,000 square feet of office space approved
§ 200-265 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-265
1:1160
§ 200-266. RP-7 District.
for development in the Sarnoff Woods portion of District 10. The
FAR can be further increased an additional 0.05 to accommodate
200,000 square feet of hotel/conference space approved for such
area. The bonus FAR of 0.40 shall apply only to the publicly owned
land in the RP-6 District.
(4) Maximum improvement coverage: 0.90, except that areas with
environmental constraints shall be excluded from the MIC
calculation.
(5) Maximum building height: up to three stories, with up to two
additional stories using approved development rights transferred
from District 10. Parking garages may be up to four stories and five
levels.
(6) Off-street parking: as per § 200-29.
(7) Other standards:
(a) A cul-de-sac shall be located at the current connection of Old
Bear Brook Road with Alexander Road with mountable curbing
and appropriate raised pavement so as to permit emergency
access from Alexander Road to Old Bear Brook Road.
(b) Buildings on publicly owned land shall be oriented toward and
close to and front on Vaughn Drive and Main Street.
(c) No development on publicly owned land other than public
parking shall be permitted unless the public entity that
currently owns the land within the district reaches an
agreement with COAH exempting such other nonresidential
development, which is permitted in order to finance the public
parking, from growth share and any other affordable housing
requirements.
(d) No development shall proceed in the district without a
redeveloper's agreement with the Township or redevelopment
entity.
A. RP-7 District use regulations.
(1) Purpose. The RP-7 District is intended to create a "Main Street" on
the eastern side of the rail line through small-scale, lot-by-lot
incremental development so as to transform the existing more strip
commercial form of development into a village form with buildings
close to the street and bicycle access. The object is to achieve a
desirable mix of commercial, office, civic and residential land uses
within a vibrant, pedestrian-friendly, village environment with an
emphasis on uses that service local needs. The village is intended
to encourage pedestrian flow throughout the area by generally
§ 200-265 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-266
1:1161
permitting stores and shops and personal service establishments
on the ground floor of buildings and promoting the use of upper
floors for offices and residential dwelling units. The mechanisms to
do this include sharing off-street parking and stormwater detention
opportunities; having well-landscaped and appropriate building
setbacks from surrounding roads; providing off-street parking that
is well screened from public view; controlling means of vehicular
access and coordinating internal pedestrian and vehicular traffic
flows relating to existing and proposed development patterns; and
ensuring design compatibility with existing development that
considers building height, materials, colors, landscaping and
signage.
(2) Permitted principal uses. In the RP-7 District, no building or
premises shall be used and no building shall be erected or altered
on a lot which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, except
for one or more of the following areas:
(a) Stores and shops for the conduct of any retail business,
including specialty and gift shops and boutiques, excluding
drive-through facilities.
(b) Personal service establishments (e.g., tailor, barbershop or
beauty salon).
(c) Offices for professional services (e.g., physicians, lawyers,
financial advisors or architects); small commercial offices (e.g.,
realtors or travel agencies); small governmental offices (e.g.,
post office branch); and offices incidental to uses permitted in
this section.
(d) Restaurants, cafes, luncheonettes and delicatessens, excluding
curb service establishments and drive-through facilities but
not excluding walk-up services and outdoor dining.
(e) Indoor recreation facilities, including instructional studios and
fitness centers.
(f) Repair and servicing, indoors only, of any article for sale which
is permitted in this district, except that automotive service
stations in existence as of the date of adoption of this Part 5
shall be permitted.
(g) Banks and similar financial institutions existing in the district
or for which development applications have been approved as
of the date of adoption of this Part 5, either on their sites at the
time of adoption of this Part 5 or on other sites in the district.
Banks may include walk-up automated teller machines (ATM),
provided that such are compatible with the design of the
building and are appropriately located at the side or rear of a
building. Drive-through facilities serving such uses shall be
permitted, provided that the scale of the drive-through
§ 200-266 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-266
1:1162
windows and lanes is compatible with the design of the
building and site design. A maximum of three drive-through
lanes shall be permitted (inclusive of lanes for ATMs).
(h) Attended laundry and retail dry-cleaning services, not
including bulk processing and, in the case of dry-cleaning
establishments, not providing for the storage of more than five
gallons of flammable or toxic cleaning fluid on the premises.
(i) Book, newspaper, periodical and stationery stores and copy
centers.
(j) Parcel package shipping stores or mailing centers.
(k) Museums, art galleries and other cultural and civic facilities of
a similar nature.
(l) Parks and plazas.
(m) Buildings and uses for municipal purposes owned or operated
by West Windsor Township or not-for-profits designated by the
Township.
(n) Apartments over retail and live-work dwelling units, including
affordable housing meeting all COAH standards.
(3) Permitted accessory uses.
(a) Recreational and/or open space facilities, including, but not
limited to, walkways, courtyards and plazas.
(b) Off-street parking and loading located to the rear of principal
buildings or appropriately screened from public view.
(c) Signs.
(d) Street furnishings, planters, street lights, and exterior, gardentype,
shade structures (gazebos).
(e) Sidewalk cafes associated with permitted restaurants.
(f) Fences and walls, which shall complement the architectural
style, type and design of the building and the overall project
design.
(g) Decks, patios and terraces, which shall complement the
architectural style, type and design of the building and the
overall project design.
(h) Community bulletin or message boards, including electronic
signs with changeable type only for the purpose of conveying
information about community events. However, animated-type
signs shall not be permitted.
(i) Public service facilities.
§ 200-266 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-266
1:1163
(j) Accessory uses customarily incidental to permitted principal
uses, including structured parking for residential dwelling
units.
B. RP-7 District intensity, bulk and other regulations.
(1) Maximum FAR: 0.25.
(2) Maximum improvement coverage: 80%.
(3) Yards.
(a) Build-to line: 15 feet from curb.
(b) Side yard (each side): minimum of zero feet, if attached to an
adjacent building, or a minimum of five feet if not attached to
an adjacent building; maximum of 20 feet.
(4) The majority of the building must be at the build-to line, but at least
15% of the facade shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet therefrom
to create one or more alcoves enclosed on three sides. Outdoor
dining and arcades are permitted within such alcove areas.
(5) Building overhangs, including canopies and balconies, can project
up to five feet over the build-to line.
(6) Minimum and maximum building height: The minimum and
maximum building height shall be 2 1/2 stories, except that the
maximum building height shall be three stories for properties
abutting the Acme Woods.
(7) First-floor use. Retail or personal service uses or small commercial
offices are required on the first floor. Office or apartments are
permitted only on the top floor.
(8) Parking standards.
(a) In lieu of the standards set forth in § 200-27B, the following offstreet
parking standards shall apply: one space for every 350
square feet of nonresidential use and one space per apartment
or the residential part of the live-work unit.
(b) Off-street parking lots shall be accessed by means of common
driveways to the extent practicable. Cross-access easements
for adjacent lots with interconnected parking lots shall be
required. Shared parking facilities are encouraged where
possible.
(9) Affordable housing. At least 20% of the residential units shall be
low- and moderate-income housing meeting all of the applicable
standards and requirements for affordable units including those set
forth in the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC),
N.J.A.C. 5:26.1 et seq. At least 37% of the affordable units shall be
made available to low-income households and at least 13% shall be
§ 200-266 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-266
1:1164
made available to very-low-income households as defined by the
New Jersey Fair Housing Act.275 The remaining affordable units
shall be made available to moderate-income households. The
affordable units shall be located on-site and shall be reasonably
dispersed throughout the development phased in accordance with
the affordable housing construction schedule set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:97-6.4(d). The nonresidential development fee authorized by the
Statewide Non-Residential Development Fee Act276 shall apply to
the nonresidential portion of mixed use developments containing
residential components. [Amended 3-18-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-10]
(10) The multiuse trail through the Crawford/Acme Woods shown on the
Conceptual Plan shall be constructed by any developer developing
the land upon which the path is located as part of a development
approval in order to facilitate access to Berrien City and Circle
Drive from Sherbrook Estates and The Gables.
(11) Architectural and site design standards. In addition to the
standards applicable to all districts277 and the goals and policies,278
the following shall apply:
(a) The front facade of principal structures constructed on vacant
lots or on lots on which the existing structures have been or
will be demolished shall be 15 feet from the right-of-way,
except that this provision shall not apply to the extent front
yard space is used for a gateway feature or outdoor restaurant
seating or to accommodate sight distance at intersections.
There shall be setbacks and indents in the facade to the extent
necessary to satisfy the architectural and landscape
architectural guidelines.279
(b) For buildings constructed on vacant lots or on lots on which the
existing structures have been or will be demolished, the side
yard setbacks for each side shall be as follows: minimum of
zero feet, if attached to an adjacent building, or a minimum of
five feet if not attached to an adjacent building; maximum of 20
feet.
(c) Architectural detail, style, color, proportion and massing shall
reflect the features of a traditional village center. Buildings
shall reflect a continuity of treatment through the district,
obtained by maintaining the building scale or by subtly
graduating changes; by maintaining base courses; by
maintaining cornice lines in buildings of the same height; by
275. Editor’s Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
276. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 et seq.
277. Editor's Note: See § 200-258.
278. Editor's Note: See Art. XXXIII.
279. Editor's Note: See § 200-258C.
§ 200-266 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-266
1:1165
§ 200-267. RP-8 District.
extending horizontal lines of fenestration (windows); and by
reflecting architectural styles and details, design themes,
building materials and colors used in surrounding buildings.
To the extent possible, upper-story windows shall be vertically
aligned with the location of windows and doors on the ground
level. However, a variety of building setbacks, roof lines, color
schemes, elevations and heights shall be developed, relative
to adjacent structures, to avoid a repetitious and monotonous
streetscape.
(d) Signage and lighting shall be designed in a manner
complementary to the building's architecture and in keeping
with the goal of achieving a traditional village center.
(e) Pitched roofs (6/12 to 12/12) are recommended. Both gable
and hipped roofs shall provide overhanging eaves on all sides
that extend a minimum of one foot beyond the building wall.
Generally, flat and mansard-type roofs should be avoided;
however, such roof treatments may be allowed if the
architectural detail, style, proportion and massing is
complementary of adjacent structures and consistent with a
small-scale village character. Buildings may have flat roofs,
provided that all visibly exposed walls have an articulated
cornice that projects horizontally from the vertical building
wall plane and presents a two-story facade.
(f) The building facade shall be along a minimum of 2/3 of the
length of street frontage to create a defining wall along the
streetscape. Covered archways (minimum eight feet wide and
maximum 50 feet wide) connecting buildings, enabling
pedestrian circulation, shall be permitted to achieve the
defining wall. The building facade length may be reduced if,
due to particular site constraints, compliance with the
requirements set forth herein is impracticable.
(g) There shall be shared parking and cross-easements to the
maximum extent practicable. Shared driveways shall be
provided for access to Princeton-Hightstown Road unless the
applicant demonstrates that such is not practicable.
(h) Connections and appropriate improvements, as determined by
Township officials, shall be made to Carlton Place to provide
safe and efficient access.
(12)No development shall proceed in the district without a
redeveloper's agreement with the Township or redevelopment
entity.
A. RP-8 District use regulations.
§ 200-266 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-267
1:1166
§ 200-268. RP-9 District.
(1) Purpose. The intent of the RP-8 District is to recognize and
continue the existing uses, including the rail station, associated
surface parking, Kiss and Ride and power station, but to improve
traffic circulation, including at the Kiss and Ride, improve
pedestrian and bicycle circulation and safety by the installation of
sidewalks and crossings along Wallace Road between Princeton-
Hightstown Road and Circle Drive, mitigate the visual impacts of
surface parking and the power station, and create public open
space associated with the existing pond.
(2) Permitted uses. In an RP-8 District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered on a lot which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used, except for one or more
of the following uses:
(a) Transportation-related facilities.
(b) Public and commercial surface parking, including both
structured and surface parking, except that no structured
parking shall be permitted south of Circle Drive.
(c) Mechanisms intended to screen or enhance the visual
attraction of the power station.
(d) A public park.
B. RP-8 District intensity, bulk and other regulations. The following shall
be the standards for the RP-8 District:
(1) No standards shall apply. The design of the Kiss and Ride facility
shall be determined cooperatively with the Township, the West
Windsor Parking Authority, and New Jersey Transit. No
development shall proceed in the District without a redeveloper's
agreement with the Township or redevelopment entity.
A. RP-9 District use regulations .
(1) Purpose. The intent of the RP-9 District is to convert the existing
Regional School Board bus depot into an area that will better serve
the public, consisting of a public park mirroring the PNC corner
park, with land set aside for Wallace Road improvements and
pedestrian and bicycle access to a crossing of the rail line at the
Princeton-Hightstown Road bridge.
(2) Permitted uses. In an RP-9 District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered on a lot which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used, except for one or more
of the following uses:
(a) Public park uses.
§ 200-267 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-268
1:1167
§ 200-269. RP-10 District.
(b) Mechanisms intended to screen or enhance the visual
attraction of the power station.
B. RP-9 District intensity, bulk and other regulations. No development
shall proceed in the district without a redeveloper's agreement with the
Township or redevelopment entity.
A. RP-10 District use regulations.
(1) Purpose. The RP-10 District is intended to both recognize the
existing R&D zoning and the general development plan that was
approved as part of the broader R&D District while at the same
time encouraging a transfer of development potential from District
10 to District 6 in order to preserve the Sarnoff Woods.
(2) Permitted uses. In an RP-10 District, no building or premises shall
be used and no building shall be erected or altered on a lot which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used, except for one or more
of the following uses:
(a) All uses permitted in the R&D District.
(b) Affordable housing meeting all COAH standards.
(3) Conditional uses. In an RP-10 District, the following uses may be
permitted as conditional uses.
(a) All conditional uses permitted in the R&D District.
B. RP-10 District intensity, bulk and other regulations. The following shall
be the standards for the RP-10 District:
(1) The bulk and area regulations set forth for the R&D District shall
apply.
(2) Other standards:
(a) Square footage from approved but unbuilt development within
the RP-10 District shown on the Conceptual Plan may be
transferred to any property in District 6, provided that a
redeveloper's agreement is entered into between the RP-10
District owner, the owner of land to which the development
rights are being transferred, and the Township with respect
thereto. Such redeveloper's agreement shall specify the
development transfer mechanism to be used.
(b) 280Any all-affordable development in the district shall be no
greater than 25 units.
280. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(2)(b), regarding growth share, was repealed
3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-10. This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection
B(2)(c) and (d) as Subsection B(2)(b) and (c), respectively.
§ 200-268 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-269
1:1168
§ 200-269.1. RP-11 District. [Added 3-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-10]
(c) No development shall proceed in the district without a
redeveloper's agreement with the Township or redevelopment
entity.
A. RP-11 District use regulations.
(1) Purpose. The goal of the RP-11 District is to develop the property in
the RP-11 District with an attractive, high-quality, 100%
municipally sponsored affordable housing project which shall help
meet the Township's goal of providing for a wide range of housing
densities and housing types to meet the varied income level needs
of the community.
(2) Description of the RP-11 District. The RP-11 District shall
constitute Block 10, Lot 108.01, as identified in the Township of
West Windsor's municipal tax records.
(3) Principal permitted uses. In an RP-11 District, no building or
premises shall be used, and no building shall be erected or altered,
on a lot which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, except
for one or more of the following uses:
(a) Multifamily dwellings, which shall consist entirely of affordable
housing meeting all of the standards and requirements of the
New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing and the Uniform
Housing Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., as it
may from time to time be amended.
(4) Permitted accessory uses.
(a) Recreational and/or open space facilities, including, but not
limited to, walkways, courtyards, plazas, and clubhouses.
(b) Off-street parking and loading.
(c) Signs.
(d) Street furnishings, planters, streetlights, and exterior, gardentype
shade structures such as gazebos and pavilions.
(e) Fences and walls, which shall complement the architectural
style, type and design of the building and the overall project
design.
(f) Decks, patios and terraces, which shall complement the
architectural style, type and design of the building and the
overall project design.
(g) Community bulletin or message boards, including electronic
signs with changeable type only for the purpose of conveying
information about community events. However, animated-type
§ 200-269 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-269.1
1:1169
signs and other signs prohibited by § 200-32C, except for
Subsections C(3), (8), and (11) thereof, shall not be permitted.
(5) Prohibited uses. Any use or structure other than those uses or
structures permitted by this section shall be prohibited.
B. RP-11 District intensity, bulk, and other regulations. The following
standards shall apply to the RP-11 District:
(1) Minimum lot size: 10 acres.
(2) Minimum yards:
(a) Front yard: 40 feet.
(b) Side yard: 15 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 50 feet.
(3) Number of dwelling units: The developer may construct up to 72
dwelling units as of right. All of the dwelling units to be constructed
on site shall be reserved for affordable households, pursuant to the
standards and requirements as set forth by the New Jersey Council
on Affordable Housing and the Uniform Housing Affordability
Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., as it may from time to time be
amended.
(4) Maximum building height: two stories, but not to exceed 40 feet.
(5) Building spacing: A minimum of 30 feet shall be provided between
buildings.
(6) Maximum improvement coverage: 35%.
(7) Off-street parking: The parking and loading standards for the RP-11
District shall conform with those standards as established in
§ 200-29 of the Township's Land Use Code, as well as § 200-258A,
which deals with traffic circulation and parking in the Township's
Redevelopment Plan Districts.
(8) Signage. Signage requirements for the RP-11 District shall be
consistent with § 230-258D of the Township's Land Use Code,
which governs signs in the Redevelopment Area. However, the
RP-11 District shall also permit direction signs. Directional signs
shall be permitted to have a height of four feet and a width of four
feet.
(9) Landscaping. Landscaping shall be in conformance with the
landscape treatments and guidelines as established in § 200-258B
of the Township's Land Use Code.
(10) Architectural and landscape architectural guidelines. Architectural
and landscape architectural designs shall be in conformance with
§ 200-269.1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-269.1
1:1170
§ 200-269.2. RP-11-Overlay District. [Added 2-27-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-06]
those guidelines relating to residential uses as established in
§ 200-258C of the Township's Land Use Code.
A. RP-11-Overlay District use regulations.
(1) Purpose. The goal of the RP-11-Overlay District is to provide an
overlay zone to permit multifamily housing as a development
alternative to those uses that are permitted by the District's ROM-2
zoning designation.
(2) Description of the RP-11-Overlay District. The RP-11-Overlay
District shall constitute Block 10, Lots 2 and 33, as identified in the
Township of West Windsor's municipal tax records.
(3) Principal permitted uses. In an RP-11-Overlay District, no building
or premises shall be used, and no building shall be erected or
altered, on a lot which is arranged, intended or designed to be
used, except for one or more of the following uses:
(a) Multifamily dwellings and townhouses, provided that 25% of
such units are affordable housing meeting all of the standards
and requirements of the New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing and the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls,
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., as it may from time to time be
amended.
(b) Auto service center and plumbing and heating supply uses.
(c) Those uses permitted in the ROM-2 District, as set forth in
§ 200-211A.
(4) Permitted conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be
permitted in the RP-11-Overlay District:
(a) Those conditional uses permitted in the ROM-2 District, as set
forth in § 200-211B.
(5) Permitted accessory uses.
(a) Recreational and/or open space facilities, including, but not
limited to, walkways, courtyards, and plazas.
(b) Off-street parking and loading.
(c) Signs.
(d) Street furnishings, planters, streetlights, and exterior, gardentype
shade structures such as gazebos and pavilions.
§ 200-269.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-269.2
1:1171
(e) Fences and walls, which shall complement the architectural
style, type and design of the building and the overall project
design.
(f) Decks, patios and terraces, which shall complement the
architectural style, type and design of the building and the
overall project design.
(g) Community bulletin or message boards, including electronic
signs with changeable type only for the purpose of conveying
information about community events. However, animated-type
signs and other signs prohibited by § 200-32C, except for
Subsections C(3), (8), and (11) thereof, shall not be permitted.
(6) Prohibited uses. Any use or structure other than those uses or
structures permitted by this section shall be prohibited.
B. RP-11-Overlay District intensity, bulk, and other regulations. The
following standards shall apply to the RP-11-Overlay District:
(1) Minimum Lot Size: 2.75 acres.
(2) Minimum yards:
(a) Front yard: 40 feet.
(b) Side yard: 15 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 20 feet.
(3) Maximum density: A maximum density of 7.5 units per acre shall be
permitted.
(4) Maximum building height: three stories, but not to exceed 40 feet.
(5) Building spacing: A minimum of 30 feet of distance shall be
provided between buildings.
(6) Maximum improvement coverage: 65%.
(7) Off-street parking: The parking and loading standards for the
RP-11-Overlay District shall conform with those standards as
established in § 200-29 of the Township's Land Use Code, as well as
§ 200-258A, which deals with traffic circulation and parking in the
Township's Redevelopment Plan Districts.
(8) Signage. Signage requirements for the RP-11-Overlay District shall
be consistent with § 230-258D of the Township's Land Use Code,
which governs signs.
(9) Landscaping. Landscaping shall be in conformance with the
landscape treatments and guidelines as established in § 200-258B
of the Township's Land Use Code.
§ 200-269.2 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-269.2
1:1172
§ 200-269.3. RP-12 District. [Added 4-1-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-07r]
(10) Architectural and landscape architectural guidelines. Architectural
and landscape architectural designs shall be in conformance with
those guidelines relating to residential uses as established in
§ 200-258C of the Township's Land Use Code.
A. RP-12 District use regulations.
(1) Purpose. The goal of the RP-12 District is to develop the property in
the RP-12 District with attractive, multifamily housing, to include
20% affordable housing.
(2) Comprehensive development. The District shall be
comprehensively developed in accordance with one development
application for the entire district.
(3) Permitted principal uses. In the RP-12 District, no building or
premises shall be used and no building shall be erected or altered
on a lot which is arranged, intended or designed to be used, except
for the following use:
(a) Multifamily dwellings, provided that 20% of such units are
affordable housing meeting all of the applicable standards and
requirements for affordable units, including those set forth in
the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC), N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1 et seq., and § 200-237. At least 50% of the affordable
units shall be affordable to low-income households, and at least
13% of all rental affordable units shall be affordable to verylow-
income households earning 30% or less of the regional
median household income by household size, which very-lowincome
units shall be included as part of the low-income
requirement. The remaining affordable units shall be made
affordable to moderate-income households. The affordable
units shall be dispersed throughout the building or buildings.
Affordable housing shall be architecturally indistinguishable
from market-rate housing. Ordinance 2019-03 shall not apply.
(4) Permitted accessory uses.
(a) Recreational and open space facilities, including, but not
limited to, walkways, courtyards and plazas.
(b) Off-street parking and loading associated with multifamily
dwellings and townhouses.
(c) Signs.
(d) Street furnishings, planters, streetlights, and exterior, gardentype
shade structures such as gazebos and pavilions.
§ 200-269.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-269.3
1:1173
(e) Fences and walls, which shall complement the architectural
style, type and design of the building and the overall project
design.
(f) Decks, patios and terraces, which shall complement the
architectural style, type and design of the building and the
overall project design.
(g) Stand-alone on-grade garages, trash enclosures, stand-alone
storage facilities for apartment tenants, and office and
maintenance areas for onsite rental business operations.
(h) Accessory uses customarily incidental to permitted principal
uses.
B. RP-12 District intensity, bulk and other regulations.
(1) Maximum improvement coverage: 80%.
(2) Minimum yards.
(a) Front yard: 10 feet.
(b) Side yard: five feet.
(c) Rear yard: five feet.
(3) Number of dwelling units: The developer may construct up to 180
dwelling units.
(4) Maximum building height:
(a) The maximum building height shall be four stories above
garage, but no greater than 80 feet.
(5) Building spacing: A minimum of 30 feet shall be provided between
buildings if there is more than one building.
(6) Parking standards.
(a) In lieu of the standards set forth in § 200-27B, the following offstreet
parking standards shall apply: a minimum of 1.0 spaces
per dwelling.
(b) Off-street parking lots shall be accessed by means of common
driveways to the extent practicable. Cross-access easements
with adjacent lots shall be required. Shared parking facilities
are encouraged where possible.
(7) Sidewalks.
(a) In lieu of the standards set forth in § 200-258A sidewalk widths
shall be a minimum of four feet wide, except where sidewalk
borders head-in parking stalls, the sidewalk shall be a
minimum of six feet wide.
§ 200-269.3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-269.3
1:1174
(b) All internal sidewalks and pathways shall be designed to
provide access for the physically disabled. Access ramps shall
be conveniently placed and sloped to provide easy connection
to streets and sidewalks, in conformance with the Americans
with Disabilities Act. This requirement does not apply to
connections to Block 5, Lot 20. A minimum of one accessible
route shall be provided to the RP-12 development from the
public street and sidewalk, through Block 5, Lot 20.
(8) Landscaping.
(a) All § 200-91P standards shall apply except that:
[1] In lieu of the standards set forth in § 200-91P(4), the
following shall apply: Stormwater management facilities
shall be designed in accordance with the guidelines set
forth in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual.
[2] Section 200-91P(5), Open space shall not apply.
[3] Section 200-91P(6)(c), Filtered buffer shall not apply to
locations where internal drives and parking adjoin the
building or buildings.
[4] Section 200-91P(6)(d)(4) is amended to allow a solid fence
or wall serving as a sound barrier 10 feet high. Such a
fence or wall is only required along a portion of the
property line between the building or buildings and the
railroad tracks. Any fence or fences constructed along the
railroad (Block 5, Lot 14) serving as a sound barrier shall
not be considered a structure.
[5] Section 200-91P(7)(a), (b), (c), (d), (e), and (f) shall not
apply.
[6] Existing trees over five inches DBH that are within 10 feet
of property lines shall be located and preserved to the
extent possible. All other existing trees will be cleared and
are not required to be relocated.
(9) Architectural and site design standards. In lieu of the standards set
forth in § 200-258C, the following shall apply:
(a) Architectural detail, style, color, proportion and massing shall
reflect the features of a traditional village center. The building
or buildings shall reflect a continuity of treatment through the
district, obtained by maintaining the building scale or by subtly
graduating changes; by maintaining base courses; by
maintaining cornice lines in buildings, if more than one, of the
same height; by extending horizontal lines of fenestration; and
by reflecting architectural styles and details, design themes,
§ 200-269.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-269.3
1:1175
building materials and colors used in surrounding buildings.
To the extent possible, upper-story windows shall be vertically
aligned with the location of windows and doors on the ground
level. A variety of building setbacks, roof lines, color schemes,
elevations and heights shall be developed, relative to adjacent
structures, to avoid a repetitious and monotonous streetscape.
(b) Any sound barrier along the railroad right-of-way may not be
higher than 10 feet.
(c) Signage and lighting shall be designed in a manner
complementary to the building's architecture and in keeping
with the goal of achieving a traditional village center.
(d) Pitched roofs (6/12 to 12/12) are required. Both gable and
hipped roofs shall provide overhanging eaves on all sides that
extend a minimum of one foot beyond the building wall.
(10) Signage.
(a) Street address signage. In lieu of the standards set forth in
§ 200-258D(4)(c) the following shall apply:
[1] Street address signage shall be provided on the building
or, if more than one building, each building.
[2] Street address numbers shall have a maximum height of
24 inches.
(b) Monument signage. In lieu of the standards set forth in
§ 200-258D(4)(d), the following shall apply:
[1] Two monument signs shall be permitted for the RP-12
District. One of the two signs shall be an identification sign
along Cranbury Road at the entrance to the Ellsworth
Center.
[2] The maximum monument sign area for each sign shall be
40 square feet.
[3] The maximum monument sign height for each sign shall be
six feet above existing grade.
(11) Internal streets.
(a) Geometry of streets shall be sufficient for Township emergency
vehicles and private waste removal.
(b) Street names shall not duplicate or nearly duplicate the names
of existing streets in the municipality or contiguous
communities. The continuation of an existing street shall have
the same name.
§ 200-269.3 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-269.3
1:1176
(c) Endings of proposed street names shall reflect street
classification for a cul-de-sac: lane, court, place, or circle.
(12) Other standards.
(a) No development shall proceed in the district without a
redeveloper's agreement with the Township or redevelopment
entity.
(b) Section 200-20, Common open space shall not apply.
(c) The standards set forth in § 200-23 requiring an environmental
appraisal of the property are not applicable.
(d) Interconnection with Block 5, Lot 20 for storage or other
complimentary service uses is allowed.
(e) In lieu of the standards set forth in § 200-25B(2), steps shall be
taken to minimize indoor noise levels. Building code
requirements shall be met.
(f) In lieu of the standards set forth in § 200-25C(2), steps shall be
taken to minimize vibration levels.
(13) Pedestrian and bicycle circulation.
(a) A comprehensive bicycle and pedestrian circulation plan shall
be provided. Consideration shall be given to linking pedestrian
and bicycle circulation features to adjoining open space
amenities, as determined to be appropriate and feasible.
(b) Pedestrian crossing in streets and alleys shall include special
ground texture treatment such as brick, stone, cobblestones
and other suitable material. The treatment of any crosswalk
shall be designed with materials that indicate the different
traffic characteristics of intersecting streets.
(c) There shall be a dedicated interior space or an enclosed room
for storage of bicycles. Such a space may be located within a
parking garage.
§ 200-269.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-269.3
1:1177

Part 6
[Adopted 4-23-19F8lo4oBd yDOarmda. gNeo A. n84d- P12re (vCehn.t iXoInX Of The Revised
General Ordinances)]
ARTICLE XXXV
General Provisions
§ 200-270. Title.
This Part 6 shall be known as the "Flood Damage and Prevention Ordinance
of the Township of West Windsor."
§ 200-271. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq. and
40:55D-1 et seq. delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to
adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of its citizenry.
§ 200-272. Findings of fact.
§ 200-273. Statement of purpose. [Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-15]
It is the purpose of this Part 6 to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Township of West Windsor are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and
velocities and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. To protect human life and health.
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects.
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions.
§ 200-270 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-273
1:1179
§ 200-274. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this Part 6 includes methods and
provisions for:
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines and streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard.
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas.
G. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard.
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters.
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage.
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 200-273 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-274
1:1180
ARTICLE XXXVI
Terminology
§ 200-275. Definitions. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-07]
Certain words and phrases used in this Part 6 are defined as noted in
§ 200-4 of this chapter.
§ 200-275 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-275
1:1181

ARTICLE XXXVII
Application of Standards
§ 200-276. Lands to which this chapter applies.
This Part 6 shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of West Windsor.
§ 200-277. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
[Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15; 8-29-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-18]
§ 200-277.1. Penalties for noncompliance. [Added 7-18-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-15]
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Penalty, § 1-3, General penalty. The failure of
a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this Part 6 shall
be considered a violation of this chapter.
§ 200-278. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This Part 6 is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of West Windsor,
Mercer County, Community No. 340256, are identified and defined on
the following documents prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report entitled the “Flood Insurance
Study, Mercer County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)” dated July 20,
2016.
(2) “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Mercer County, New Jersey
(All Jurisdictions)” as shown on Index 34021CIND0A and panels
34021C0133F, 34021C0134F, 34021C0141F, 34021C0142F,
34021C0143F, 34021C0144F, 34021C0153F, 34021C0154F,
34021C0161F, 34021C0162F, 34021C0163F, 34021C0164F,
34021C0232F, and 34021C0251F, whose effective dates are July
20, 2016, including the Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM)
version.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study maps and advisory documents
are on file at the West Windsor Township Municipal Building, located at
271 Clarksville Road, West Windsor, New Jersey.
§ 200-276 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-279
1:1183
§ 200-279. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this Part 6, all provisions shall be:
§ 200-280. Warning and disclaimer of liability. [Amended 7-18-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-15]
The degree of flood protection required by this Part 6 is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This Part 6 does not imply that land outside the area of special flood hazards
or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This Part 6 shall not create liability on the part of the Township
of West Windsor, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Part
6 or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
A. Considered as minimum requirements.
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body.
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
§ 200-279 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-280
1:1184
ARTICLE XXXVIII
Administration
§ 200-281. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within an area of special flood hazard established in § 200-277.
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the local administrator and may include, but not be limited to, plans
in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location dimensions and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of material and drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
§ 200-282. Elevation certificates, other certifications, or other
evidence of compliance. [Added 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15281]
A new or substantially improved structure or other development without the
elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
§ 200-283. Designation of local administrator. [Amended 4-6-1987
by Ord. No. 87-7; 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15]
The Zoning Officer or the Zoning Officer's designee is hereby appointed
local administrator and will administer and implement this Part 6 by
granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its
provisions and by prosecuting violations in accordance with § 200-277.1.
The local administrator shall consult with the Township Engineer and
Construction Code Official on matters requiring engineering or construction
expertise or judgment.
A. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures.
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed.
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 200-289B.
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
281. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former §§ 200-282, Permitted uses; 200-283,
Permitted uses by special permission; and 200-284, Base flood elevation and floodway data
not provided, added 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 87-7, and renumbered former §§ 200-285
through 200-290 as §§ 200-283 through 200-288, respectively.
§ 200-281 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-284
1:1185
§ 200-284. Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Permit review.
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this Part 6 have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions of § 200-288 are met.
[Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15]
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data have not been provided in accordance with §
200-277, Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard, the
local administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, in
order to administer § 200-287, Specific standards, Subsection A,
Residential construction, and Subsection B, Nonresidential
construction. [Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15]
C. Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures and whether or not the structure
contains a basement. [Amended 6-11-1984 by Ord. No. 84-16]
(2) For all new substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level).
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 200-281C.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this Part 6.
D. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection Dam Safety and Flood Control Section
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration. [Amended
7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15]
§ 200-284 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-284
1:1186
§ 200-285. Appeals and variance procedure.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Interpretations shall be made,
where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of
special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in § 200-287.
[Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15]
F. Substantial damage review. [Added 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15]
(1) After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to
structures due to flood and nonflood causes.
(2) Record and maintain the flood and nonflood damage of
substantially damaged structures and provide a letter of
substantial damage determination to the owner and the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood
Control Section.
(3) Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of §
200-287, Specific standards, Subsection A, Residential
construction, and Subsection B, Nonresidential construction.
A. Appeal Board.
(1) The Planning Board as established by the Township of West
Windsor shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances
from the requirements of this Part 6.
(2) The Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirements, decision or
determination made by the local administrator in the enforcement
or administration of this Part 6.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board, or any
taxpayer, may appeal, in writing, to the Township Council. This
appeal may be undertaken within 10 days after the date of such
decision. The Township Council shall fix and notify the appellant of
a time and place for public hearing on the appeal, and the appellant
shall cause notice of such hearing to be published in a newspaper
at least 10 days prior to the hearing. All parties in interest shall be
afforded an opportunity to be heard thereat. After such hearing, the
Township Council shall affirm or reverse the action of the Planning
Board, stating its findings and reasons for its action, and a written
copy of such action shall be given to the appellant.
§ 200-284 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-285
1:1187
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this Part 6 and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage.
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community.
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
(f) The availability of alternate locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development.
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area.
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site.
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection A(4)(a) through
(4)(k) above and the purposes of this chapter, the Planning Board
may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. [Amended
7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15]
B. Conditions for variances.
§ 200-285 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-285
1:1188
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2)
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the base flood level, provided
that items A(4)(a) through (4)(k) above have been fully considered.
As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the
technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
[Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15]
(2) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of historic structures upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is
the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure. [Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-15]
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense; or create nuisances, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public as identified in Subsection
A(4); or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 200-285 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-285
1:1189

ARTICLE XXXIX
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 200-286. General standards. [Amended 4-6-1987 by Ord. No. 87-7;
7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15]
In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever are more restrictive, is required:
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction to be placed or substantially improved and
substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(4) For all new construction and substantial improvements the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
§ 200-286 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-286
1:1191
§ 200-287. Specific standards. [Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-15]
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 200-277, Basis for establishing the areas of
special flood hazard, or in § 200-284B, Use of other base flood and floodway
data, the following standards are required:
(1) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(2) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage.
(3) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings. For all new construction and substantial
improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are
subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and
exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either
be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two
openings in at least two exterior walls of each enclosed area, having a
total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding, shall be provided; the bottom of all
openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and openings
may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings or devices,
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE Zone shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, together with attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, elevated at or above the base flood elevation plus one foot
or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is more
restrictive.
(2) Within any AO or AH Zone, all new construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, together with the attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities, elevated above the depth number specified in
feet plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade (at least three
§ 200-286 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-287
1:1192
feet if no depth number is specified) with adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures.
B. Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure:
(1) If located in an A or AE Zone, the lowest floor, including basement,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall either
be elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus one foot or as
required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is more
restrictive; or if located in an AO or AH Zone, the lowest floor,
including basement, shall be elevated above the depth number
specified in feet plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade (at
least three feet if no depth number is specified), with adequate
drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters
around and away from proposed structures; or
(2) Shall:
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level plus one foot
or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 6-1, whichever is
more restrictive, the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Secure a certification by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
the applicable provisions of this subsection. Such certification
shall be provided to the official as set forth in § 200-284C.
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with §
200-286A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall:
(a) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(b) Be constructed to minimize flood damage;
(c) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(d) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the
lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation plus one foot
§ 200-287 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-287
1:1193
§ 200-288. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 200-277 are
areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris,
potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is
more restrictive.
A. Encroachments shall be prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development, unless a technical
evaluation demonstrates that encroachments shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
B. If Subsection A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction
provisions of Article XXXIX, Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than two-tenths (0.2) of a
foot at any point. [Amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-15]
§ 200-287 WEST WINDSOR CODE § 200-288
1:1194
Appendix
Chapter A205
COUNCIL PROCEDURAL GUIDELINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4.
§ A205-1. Rule 1: Meetings.
A. Regular business meetings.
(1) Regular business meetings will be held as noted below (generally
on alternating Mondays unless a Monday is a holiday):
January 7, 22* July 8, 29
February 4**, 19* August 19**
March 4, 18 September 3*, 16, 30
April 1, 15, 29 October 15*, 28
May 13**, 28* November 18**
June 10, 24 December 2, 16
* Meeting will be scheduled on a Tuesday due to Monday
holiday.
** Start time adjusted. Business session will begin immediately
after the adjournment of the Board of Health meeting
(2) Unless otherwise noticed, all regular business meetings begin at
7:00 p.m. and will be held in the Council Meeting Room A of the
West Windsor Township Municipal Building.
B. Work sessions. Work sessions will be scheduled as needed.
C. Special sessions. Special sessions will be scheduled as needed.
D. Budget work sessions: Budget work sessions will be scheduled as
needed. Unless otherwise noticed, all budget work session meetings
begin at 7:00 p.m. and will be held in Council Meeting Room A of the
West Windsor Township Municipal Building.
E. Board of Health meetings: February 4, May 13, August 19, November
18. Unless otherwise noticed, all Board of Health meetings will begin at
7:00 p.m. before the start of the business session and will be held in the
Council Meeting Room A of the West Windsor Township Municipal
Building.
§ 200-288 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A205-1
1:1195
§ A205-2. Rule 2: Calling meetings to order.
The Council President or Vice President shall preside at all meetings. In
the absence of both the Council President and Vice President, the members
of Council in attendance shall select one member to serve as presiding
officer for that meeting. The meeting will be called to order at 7:00 p.m. No
meeting shall be called to order unless there is a quorum.
§ A205-3. Rule 3: Order of business.
Business meetings are broadcast on West Windsor Channel 27, Verizon
Channels 41 and 42. The order of business for regular business meetings
shall be as follows:
F. Closed sessions. For meetings where the public is excluded, provision
will be made for public comment before or after the closed portion
takes place. When a closed session is part of another meeting, a
separate public comment session is not required.
A. Call to order and roll call.
B. Statement of adequate notice.
C. Salute to the flag.
D. Ceremonial matters or topic for priority consideration.
E. Public comment (thirty-minute comment period; three-minute limit per
person).
F. Administration comments.
G. Council member comments.
H. Chair/Clerk comments.
I. Public hearings.
J. Consent agenda:
(1) Resolutions.
(2) Minutes.
(3) Bills and claims.
K. Items removed from consent agenda.
L. Recommendations from Administration and Council/Clerk.
M. Introduction of ordinances.
N. Additional public comment (three-minute limit per person).
O. Council reports/discussion/new business.
§ A205-1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § A205-3
1:1196
§ A205-4. Rule 4: Agenda.
§ A205-5. Rule 5: Work sessions.
P. Administration updates.
Q. Closed session (if needed).
R. Adjournment.
A. The business meeting agenda shall be set by 12:00 noon on the Monday
prior to the upcoming Monday business meeting. A Request For Council
Action form must be submitted reflecting the nature of the action
sought, and, if other than a business transaction, the nature of the item
and the anticipated length of time necessary for consideration must be
outlined.
B. Council actions may be initiated by members of the Council, the Mayor,
the department heads and the Clerk's office. All actions other than
those initiated by the Council members and/or the Clerk must be
approved by the Mayor or the Business Administrator prior to
consideration by the Council President for placement on the agenda.
C. The Council President shall review with the Clerk all items received and
will determine the ultimate composition of the agenda. A draft agenda
will be distributed to the Council President at the end of the workday
Monday (preceding the business meeting), and a final agenda will be
distributed to Council upon the President's approval. If Monday is a
holiday, the draft agenda will be prepared on the Friday before and
distributed to the Council President at the end of the day on Tuesday.
D. The final agenda and any supporting materials will be delivered to the
Council no later than the Wednesday preceding the applicable business
meeting. The final agenda shall be posted to the West Windsor website
on the Thursday preceding the applicable business meeting.
E. Except as otherwise authorized by the Council, no resolution or
ordinance shall be considered by the Council unless the proposal has
been previously discussed at a prior meeting; provided, however, that
any resolution or ordinance not discussed at a prior meeting may be
placed on the agenda by vote of the members of Council present at the
meeting.
F. Any matter not submitted to the Clerk's office in a timely manner as set
forth above may be considered and acted on by the Council members
present, if they agree by majority vote to consider the matter.
G. Special Business Session agendas as needed will be set by the Council
President to include form and format.
A. Work sessions will be utilized for the discussion of policy or similar
matters and will be scheduled and/or retained as the Council sees fit.
§ A205-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A205-5
1:1197
§ A205-6. Rule 6: Duties of presiding officer.
The presiding officer shall have general supervision of the meeting.
Members and others given the privilege of the floor shall address the
presiding officer.
§ A205-7. Rule 7: Introduction and passage of ordinances and
resolutions.
There will be a public comment period, the timing and duration of
which shall be at the discretion of the Council; comments are limited
to three minutes per person. Action may be taken if it is noticed to be
considered.
B. Scheduled work sessions may also be used for those matters that, of
necessity, must be considered in closed sessions, and therefore provide
for closed session meetings on other than regularly scheduled business
session evenings.
C. Order of Business for Work Sessions will be as follows: Work Session
meetings are broadcast on West Windsor Channel 27, Verizon Channels
41 and 42. The order of business for work session meetings shall be as
follows:
(1) Call to order.
(2) Statement of adequate notice.
(3) Salute to the flag.*
(4) Public comment (thirty-minute comment period; three-minute limit
per person).
(5) For discussion:
(a) Mayor/Administration.
(b) Council Member/Clerk.
(6) Additional public comment (three-minute limit per person).
(7) Closed session (if needed).
(8) Adjournment.
(*If just a stand-alone work session)
A. General provisions.
(1) Every legislative act of the Council shall be by resolution or
ordinance.
(2) All proposed ordinances and resolutions shall be presented to the
Council in fully prepared form. No ordinance, except general
§ A205-5 WEST WINDSOR CODE § A205-7
1:1198
appropriation ordinances, shall be passed containing more than
one subject, which shall be expressed in its title.
(3) Resolutions and ordinances shall be numbered sequentially at the
time of placement on the business agenda. Two separate
numbering systems shall be used for the two forms of action.
(4) A majority of the whole number of members of the Council shall
constitute a quorum. Recusals are not to be counted towards a
quorum, Abstentions are counted toward a quorum. No ordinance
shall be adopted by the Council without the affirmative vote of a
majority of the full membership of the Council (N.J.S.A.
40:69A-180). In the case of the adoption of a bond ordinance, the
affirmative vote of 2/3 of the full governing body (generally four
"yes" votes) is required. No resolution shall be adopted without the
affirmative vote of a majority of the quorum.
(5) All votes shall be taken by roll call, and the yeas and nays shall be
entered on the minutes. The presiding officer shall vote last on all
questions.
(6) Resolutions shall take effect after final passage by the Council.
Ordinances shall take effect after final passage, publication and the
conclusion (running) of any waiting periods as required by law.
(7) The Township Clerk shall record all ordinances and resolutions
adopted by the Council.
(8) Resolutions and ordinances shall each be maintained in separate
ledgers that are kept on an annual basis and that are permanent
records of the West Windsor Township.
B. Procedure for ordinances:
(1) An ordinance may be presented at any regular meeting, and also at
special meetings, when such special call is for general business or
such ordinance is mentioned in the call for a special meeting.
(2) The action of the Council on ordinances shall be noted in the
minutes.
(3) All ordinances shall be prepared, adopted and published in the
manner required by law. Following the second reading and public
hearing, an ordinance passed by the Council shall, within three
days, be delivered by the Clerk to the Mayor for approval or veto,
and the Mayor shall, within 10 days after receiving any ordinance,
either approve the ordinance by signing it or return it to the
Council by delivering it to the Clerk, together with a statement
setting forth the Mayor's objections thereto or to any part thereof.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-41, no ordinance or any item or part
thereof shall take effect without the Mayor's approval, unless the
Mayor fails to return an ordinance to the Council within 10 days
§ A205-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A205-7
1:1199
§ A205-8. Rule 8: Disclosure of interest.
A member who has a personal or private interest in any question or measure
proposed or pending before the Council which might constitute a conflict
after it has been presented to the Mayor or unless the Council,
upon reconsideration thereof on or after the third day following its
return by the Mayor, shall, by a vote of 2/3 of the members, resolve
to override the Mayor's veto.
(4) Passage over veto. Whenever an ordinance has been reconsidered
by the Council following a veto by the Mayor, the Clerk shall
append to such ordinance a certification of the action of the Council
upon such reconsideration in substantially the following form:
I HEREBY CERTIFY that the above ordinance adopted by the
Council on the _____day of _____, _____, was delivered to the Mayor
on the _____ day of _____, _____ and was returned to me on the
_____ day of _____, _____, together with the Mayor's statement of the
reasons for which the Mayor was constrained to withhold approval
of such ordinance, item or part thereof. On reconsideration thereof
on the _____ day of _____, _____, (the Council duly resolved by the
affirmative vote of 2/3 of its members to enact such ordinance, item
or part thereof notwithstanding the Mayor's veto.) or (the Mayor's
veto was sustained.)
Clerk
(5) Ordinances not returned by Mayor. Whenever an ordinance shall
take effect without the Mayor's signature by reason of the Mayor's
failure to return it to the Council by filing it with the Clerk within 10
days after it has been presented to the Mayor, the Clerk shall
append to such ordinance a certificate in substantially the
following form:
I HEREBY CERTIFY that the above ordinance was adopted by the
Council on the _____ day of _____, _____, and was presented to the
Mayor duly certified on the _____ day of _____, _____, and upon the
Mayor's failure to sign it or return and file it with the Clerk within
10 days thereafter, said ordinance took effect in like manner as if
the Mayor had signed it.
Clerk Dated:
(6) All ordinances shall be sent to the codifier for inclusion in the
codification.
C. Effective date. No rule or regulation made by a department, officer,
agency or authority of the Township, except such as relates to the
organization or internal management of the government or a part
thereof, shall take effect until it is filed either with the Township Clerk
or in such other manner as may be provided by ordinance.
§ A205-7 WEST WINDSOR CODE § A205-8
1:1200
contrary to the Local Government Ethics Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1, shall
disclose such interest and either refrain from voting or shall request a
ruling from the Attorney as to whether a member should vote thereon or
take any part in the discussion of the same.
§ A205-9. Rule 9: Appointments.
A. Appointments to citizens' groups, boards, committees and other.
According to the Administrative Code, responsibility for the
appointment of various boards, committees and commissions shall be as
noted below:
Board, Committee or Commission Appointing Authority
Affordable Housing Committee Mayor, with advice and
consent of Council
Township Council member Council
Agricultural Advisory Committee Mayor, with advice and
consent of Council
Board of Recreation Commissioners Mayor
Alternate 1 and 2 Mayor, with advice and
consent of Council
Township Council Liaison Township Council
Cable TV Advisory Board
Mayor, or Mayor's designee Mayor
Two Council members Council
Member of public Mayor
Member of public Council
Emergency Management Council Mayor
Township Council Member Council
Environmental Commission Mayor
Township Council Liaison Council
Human Relations Council Mayor, with advice and
consent of Council
Parking Authority Council
Township Council Liaison Council
Planning Board Mayor
Planning Board Class III member Council
Shade Tree Commission Mayor, with advice and
consent of Council
Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment,
and Environmental Commission members
The respective Boards
and Commission
§ A205-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A205-9
1:1201
§ A205-10. Rule 10: Minutes of meetings.
§ A205-11. Rule 11: Broadcasting; recording; tapes.
§ A205-12. Rule 12: Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised.
Robert's Rules of Order shall be the prevailing authority in matters of
parliamentary procedure, except to the extent of anything herein to the
contrary.
Board, Committee or Commission Appointing Authority
Stony Brook Regional Sewerage Authority
representative
Mayor, with advice and
consent of Council
Zoning Board of Adjustment Council
Township Council Liaison Council
A. Written minutes. Written minutes approved by Council shall be the
official record of all meetings of the Council.
B. Draft minutes. Minutes which have been prepared but which have not
been approved by the Council shall be considered draft minutes,
subject to correction by the Council. The draft minutes of each meeting
shall be submitted to the Council for approval.
C. Open session minutes. Once open session minutes have been approved
by the Council, they shall be signed by the Clerk and presiding officer at
such meeting (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-180), and certified duplicate copies of
the same shall be available to the public at the rates fixed by law.
D. Closed session minutes. Closed session minutes shall be made available
at such time as the issues discussed therein are resolved and their
disclosure would not subvert any particular exception for convening a
closed session.
A. All open public meetings of the Township Council shall be broadcast on
Comcast Channel 27 and Verizon Channels 41 and 42.
B. All open public meetings of the Township Council shall be recorded.
C. Recordings of meetings. The recordings of open meetings of the
Township Council are maintained for 10 years in the Township Hall.
D. Public use of digital recordings, tapes or CDs of open meetings will be
in accordance with the Open Public Records Act.282
E. Reproduction of open meeting recordings. Reproduction of digital
recordings, tapes or CDs of open sessions may be arranged, with the
requesting party paying a fee for this service.
282. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 47:1-1 et seq.
§ A205-9 WEST WINDSOR CODE § A205-13
1:1202
§ A205-13. Rule 13: Appointments to vacant positions of Mayor and
Council.
A. If the vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor or Council after September
1 of the next-to-the-last year and up to the expiration of the term of the
officer whose office has become vacant, the office may be filled for its
unexpired term by a vote of the governing body as hereinafter provided.
B. If the vacancy in the office of Mayor or Council occurs at any other time,
the vacancy shall be filled for its unexpired term at the next general
election, to be held not less than 60 days following the occurrence of
the vacancy. The Township Council may fill the vacancy in the interim
until such general election, by appointment as hereinafter provided.
C. If the Mayor or a Council member is elected to another position that
would preclude them from finishing their term as either Mayor or a
Council Member in the November General Election and their term does
not expire at the end of that year, the process shall be as follows:
applications for the position shall be submitted no later than 30 days
from the date of the election of that year and each candidate may be
interviewed in the same process as for any other vacancy at the first
Business Meeting held in January of the next year, or at another
meeting within 30 days of the office becoming vacant.
D. If the governing body elects to fill a vacancy in the office of Mayor or
Council, the vacancy shall be filled by Council within 30 calendar days
following its occurrence, without regard to political party. If the
vacancy is not filled within 30 days, then the office shall remain vacant
for the remainder of the term or until the election and qualification of a
successor, as the case may be.
E. While a member of the governing body is free to advocate the candidacy
of an applicant to fill a vacancy, that member must disclose any
affiliation with that applicant and must treat all other applicants in a
fair, equal and ethical manner. Township Council members will consider
all applications for a vacant position and will be free to talk to all
applicants about their candidacy on an individual basis. No third-party
investigation of an applicant shall be conducted without the knowledge
of every member of Council and the applicant and with the approval of
the majority of the Council, in which case the inquiry shall be conducted
by the Township Clerk.
F. Determination of eligibility and application process.
(1) Any citizen of the United States who is 18 years of age or older and
who has been a resident of the Township for at least one year and
has not been convicted of a crime of the third degree, or touching
upon a public office or an indictable offense involving dishonesty, as
provided by N.J.S.A. 2C:51-2, and who desires to be considered for
appointment to the vacancy, shall be provided an informational
package, copies of which can be obtained at the Township Clerk's
office, and shall complete an application provided therein.
§ A205-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A205-13
1:1203
(2) All potential applicants must submit an application to the Clerk's
Office within 10 days following the date on which the vacancy
occurs.
(3) The application and any supporting documents that are furnished
by an applicant will be considered a public record and available for
public inspection.
G. Selection of a replacement for a vacancy not caused by an election.
(1) At a public meeting, which shall occur between 10 and 30 days
after the vacancy, each candidate will be permitted to provide a
public presentation for up to five minutes and respond to any
questions by members of Council.
(2) Public comment period. Public comments will be permitted at this
public meeting only after the applicants have made their
presentations and answered questions from Council. The public
comment period conducted at this public meeting shall be limited
to three minutes per person.
(3) After public presentations are provided by the candidates, but
within 30 calendar days following the occurrence of the vacancy,
each remaining member of Council will be permitted to nominate
one of the candidates. No second is necessary for any nomination.
After the nominations are made, then the Council will be free to
deliberate about the nominees. After deliberations in public are
concluded, then each remaining member of Council may submit a
ballot to the Clerk selecting one of the nominees to fill the vacant
position.
H. Appointment process.
(1) To fill a vacancy in the office of Mayor shall be by a majority vote of
the entire membership of the Council.
(2) An appointment to fill a vacancy on Council shall be by a majority
vote of the remaining members of Council. In the case of a tie vote,
the Mayor may vote to break the tie.
I. Tie votes. A tie vote will occur when there are two votes for each of two
separate candidates. If there are fewer than four remaining members of
Council, a tie vote will occur when there is one vote for each of two
separate candidates. Following a tie vote, Council may further
deliberate and revote. In the event a tie vote still exists, the Mayor may
exercise the right to vote to fill a vacancy, without further voting. An
abstention shall not count as a vote either for or against any particular
candidate.
J. The candidate appointed by Council to fill a vacancy pursuant to this
procedure shall be sworn in and be seated after the vote is taken but
within 30 days following the occurrence of the vacancy.
§ A205-13 WEST WINDSOR CODE § A205-14
1:1204
§ A205-14. Rule 14: Township e-mail.
Council members should use only Township-issued e-mail addresses for
Township business.
§ A205-15. Rule 15: Training.
Council members are required to attend on an annual basis at least one
instructional course covering the responsibilities and obligations of elected
officials (for example: ethics, municipal finance, labor relations, risk
management, shared services, purchasing, land use administration,
personnel, technology, etc.) through a course approved for continuing
education credit by the New Jersey Division of Local Government Services,
or an in-house education provided by a professional, vendor, or staff
member (provided they have significant expertise in their profession and
routinely prepare public presentations). A copy of the certificate received
for any class attended should be provided to the Township Clerk as proof of
attendance.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
98-32 Pending
99-01 1-25-1999 Street vacation NCM
99-02 3-8-1999 Subdivision and site
plan procedures
amendment
Ch. 200, Part 3
99-03 2-8-1999 Fees amendment Ch. 82
99-04 3-8-1999 Subdivision amendment Ch. 200, Part 2
99-05 4-19-1999 Fees amendment Ch. 82
99-06 Fees amendment Pending
99-07 4-19-1999 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. III
99-08 4-19-1999 Bond NCM
99-09 4-19-1999 Bond NCM
99-10 4-19-1999 Purchase of land NCM
99-11 4-19-1999 Purchase of land NCM
99-12 5-17-1999 Bond NCM
§ A205-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1205
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
99-13 6-1-1999 Execution of agreement NCM
Res. No.
99-R163
7-1-1999 Council procedural
guidelines
Superseded by Res.
No. 2006-R142
99-14 7-26-1999 Bond NCM
99-15 7-26-1999 Fees amendment Ch. 82
99-16 Administration of
government
amendment; fees
amendment
No action
99-17 8-9-1999 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 168
99-18 9-7-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
99-19 Zoning amendment Defeated
99-20 Bond Defeated
99-21 9-7-1999 Bond NCM
99-22 9-7-1999 Bond NCM
99-23 9-7-1999 Appropriation NCM
99-24 Zoning amendment Defeated
99-25 Zoning amendment Not yet introduced
99-26 9-7-1999 Appropriation NCM
99-27 11-15-1999 Bond NCM
99-28 11-15-1999 Agreement NCM
99-29 11-15-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
99-30 Fees amendment No action
99-31 11-29-1999 Bond NCM
99-32 11-29-1999 Contract NCM
99-33 11-29-1999 Contract NCM
99-34 11-29-1999 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
99-35 Zoning amendment Adopted as Ord.
2000-08
99-36 Zoning amendment Not yet introduced
99-37 Zoning amendment Not yet introduced
99-38 Site plan review
amendment
Not yet introduced
99-39 12-13-1999 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § DL-1
1:1206
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
99-40 12-13-1999 Appropriation NCM
99-41 12-18-1999 Salaries NCM
2000-01 2-7-2000 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
2000-02 2-22-2000 Bond NCM
2000-03 2-22-2000 Contract NCM
2000-04 2-22-2000 Contract NCM
2000-05 3-6-2000 Appropriation NCM
2000-06 Assisted living facilities No action taken
2000-07 5-1-2000 Site plan review
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 200, Parts 1 and
4
2000-08 5-1-2000 Site plan review
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 200, Parts 1 and
4
2000-09 5-1-2000 Site plan review
amendment
Ch. 200, Part 1
2000-10 5-1-2000 Contract NCM
2000-11 5-1-2000 Contract NCM
2000-12 5-1-2000
(readopted
9-5-2000)
Bond NCM
2000-13 5-1-2000 Appropriation NCM
Res. No.
2000-R143
7-6-2000 Council procedural
guidelines amendment
Superseded by Res.
No. 2006-R142
2000-14 7-24-2000 Salaries NCM
2000-15 7-24-2000 Purchase of land NCM
2000-16 10-2-2000 Bond NCM
2000-17 8-7-2000 Authorization of
referendum for LOSAP
NCM
2000-18 8-7-2000 Fire Companies and
First Aid Squad,
Volunteer: Length of
Service Awards Program
Ch. 12, Art. I
2000-19 8-21-2000 Bond NCM
2000-20 8-21-2000 Bond NCM
2000-21 8-21-2000 Bond NCM
2000-22 8-21-2000 Capital improvement NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1207
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2000-23 9-18-2000 Purchase of land NCM
2000-24 9-18-2000 Bond NCM
2000-25 9-18-2000 Bond NCM
2000-26 10-30-2000 Taxicabs and vehicles
for hire amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2007-22
2000-27 11-13-2000 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
2001-01 1-22-2001 Purchase of land NCM
2001-02 1-22-2001 Purchase of land NCM
2001-03 1-22-2001 Bond NCM
2001-04 4-2-2001 Smoking and use of
tobacco products
banned: school facilities
and properties
Ch. 140, Art. I
2001-05 3-19-2001 Bond NCM
2001-06 3-19-2001 Purchase of land NCM
2001-07 4-2-2001 Salaries NCM
2001-08 4-16-2001 Bond NCM
2001-09 4-16-2001 Purchase of land NCM
2001-10 4-16-2001 Purchase of land NCM
2001-11 4-30-2001 Banning through traffic
on Joanne Street
NCM
2001-12 Deferred
2001-13 5-29-2001 Bond NCM
2001-14 Deferred; not
introduced
2001-15 Deferred; not
introduced
Res. No.
2001-R169
7-1-2001 Council procedural
guidelines amendment
Superseded by Res.
No. 2006-R142
2001-16 7-30-2001 Bond NCM
2001-17 9-10-2001 Bond NCM
2001-18 12-17-2001 Bond amendment NCM
2001-19 10-9-2001 Fees amendment Ch. 82
2001-20 10-22-2001 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
2001-21 10-22-2001 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § DL-1
1:1208
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2001-22 10-22-2001 Capital improvement NCM
2001-23 11-19-2001 Bond NCM
Res. No.
2001-R306
12-3-2001 Council procedural
guidelines amendment
Superseded by Res.
No. 2006-R142
2001-24 12-17-2001 Salaries NCM
2001-25 12-17-2001 Bond NCM
2001-26 Defeated
2001-27 1-14-2002 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
Res. No.
2002-R014
1-14-2002 Council procedural
guidelines amendment
Superseded by Res.
No. 2006-R142
2002-01 3-11-2002 Bond NCM
2002-02 3-25-2002 Contract NCM
2002-03 3-25-2002 Bond NCM
2002-04 3-25-2002 Fees amendment Ch. 82
2002-05 3-25-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2002-06 4-8-2002 Bond NCM
2002-07 4-22-2002 Fees amendment Ch. 82
2002-08 4-22-2002 Fees amendment Ch. 82
2002-09 4-22-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2002-10 5-6-2002 Fees amendment Ch. 82
2002-11 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Tabled
2002-12 Fees amendment Deferred
2002-13 7-29-2002 Fees amendment Ch. 82
2002-14 5-20-2002 Fees amendment Ch. 82
Res. No.
2002-R148
7-1-2002 Council procedural
guidelines amendment
Superseded by Res.
No. 2006-R142
2002-15 9-9-2002 Bond NCM
2002-16 8-12-2002 Bond NCM
2002-17 9-9-2002 Cable television
franchise
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2019-38
Res. No.
2002-R229
10-7-2002 Council procedural
guidelines amendment
Superseded by Res.
No. 2006-R142
2002-18 Not adopted
2002-19 11-12-2002 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1209
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2002-20 Deferred
2002-21 Introduction deferred
2003-01 3-3-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2003-02 3-3-2003 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
2003-03 3-3-2003 Street vacation NCM
2003-04 3-3-2003 Taxicabs and vehicles
for hire amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2007-22
2003-05 3-31-2003 Salaries NCM
2003-06 3-17-2003 Calling for referendum
for Length of Service
Awards Program
amendment
NCM
2003-07 3-17-2003 Length of Service
Awards Program
amendment
Ch. 12
2003-08 3-17-2003 Street acceptances NCM
2003-09 3-17-2003 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
2003-10 3-31-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2003-11 3-31-2003 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 168
2003-12 4-14-2003 Acquisition of property NCM
2003-13 5-19-2003 Salary and wage plan NCM
2003-14 6-2-2003 Capital improvement NCM
2003-15 6-2-2003 Construction codes
amendment; land use
amendment
Chs. 63, 200
2003-16 6-2-2003 Land use amendment Ch. 200
2003-17 6-16-2003 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 168
2003-18 Defeated
Res. No.
2003-R136
7-1-2003 Council Procedural
Guidelines amendment
Superseded by Res.
No. 2006-R142
2003-19 7-21-2003 Hotel usage tax Ch. 98
2003-20 8-11-2003 Bond NCM
2003-21 8-11-2003 Land acquisition funds NCM
2003-22 9-8-2003 Land use amendment Ch. 200
§ DL-1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § DL-1
1:1210
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2003-23 9-22-2003 Salary and wage plan NCM
2003-24 9-22-2003 Bond NCM
2003-25 10-7-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
Res. No.
2003-R216
10-7-2003 Council Procedural
Guidelines amendment
Superseded by Res.
No. 2006-R142
2003-26 11-10-2003 Alcoholic beverages:
public consumption or
possession by minors
Ch. 36, Art. III
2003-27 11-10-2003 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
2003-28 11-17-2003 Contract amendment NCM
2003-29 12-15-2003 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 168
2003-30 12-15-2003 Appropriation NCM
2004-01 No action
2004-02 1-26-2004 Salary and wage plan NCM
2004-03 3-8-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2004-04 3-8-2004 Traffic and parking
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2004-13
2004-05 3-22-2004 Sewer use amendment Ch. 133, Art. II
2004-06 4-12-2004 Subdivision amendment Ch. 200, Part 2
2004-07 4-12-2004 Subdivision amendment Ch. 200, Part 2
2004-08 3-22-2004 Fees amendment Ch. 82
2004-09 4-12-2004 Bond NCM
2004-10 4-12-2004 Bond NCM
2004-11 4-12-2004 Bond NCM
2004-12 6-28-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2004-13 5-24-2004 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 168
2004-14 6-28-2004 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
2004-15 6-28-2004 Bond NCM
2004-16 6-28-2004 Appropriation NCM
2004-17 6-28-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2004-18 6-28-2004 Site plan amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 200, Parts 1 and
4
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1211
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
2004-R171
7-1-2004 Council procedural
guidelines amendment
Superseded by Res.
No. 2006-R142
2004-19 Street acceptance NCM
2004-20 8-2-2004 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 168
2004-21 8-16-2004 Cable television:
programming policies
and procedures for
governmental access
channel
Ch. 60
2004-22 9-7-2004 Salaries NCM
2004-23 9-7-2004 Appropriation NCM
2004-24 9-27-2004 Taxicabs and vehicles
for hire amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2007-22
2004-25 10-18-2004 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing amendment
Vetoed
2004-26 10-18-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2004-27 10-18-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2004-28 10-18-2004 Appropriation NCM
Res. No.
2004-R260
10-18-2004 Council procedural
guidelines amendment
Superseded by Res.
No. 2006-R142
2004-29 11-8-2004 Salary and wage plan NCM
2004-30 11-8-2004 Bond NCM
2004-31 Acquisition of land Withdrawn
2004-32 11-28-2004 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
2004-33 11-29-2004 Acquisition of land NCM
2004-34 11-29-2004 Fees amendment Ch. 82
2004-35 11-29-2004 Subdivision and site
plan procedures
Ch. 200, Part 3
2004-36 12-20-2004 Temporary construction
and access easement
NCM
2004-37 12-20-2004 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 168
2004-38 12-20-2004 Bond NCM
2004-39 12-20-2004 Acquisition of land NCM
Res. No.
2004-R311
12-20-2004 Council procedural
guidelines amendment
Superseded by Res.
No. 2006-R142
§ DL-1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § DL-1
1:1212
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2004-40 1-4-2005 Alcoholic beverages:
public consumption or
possession by minors
amendment
Ch. 36, Art. III,
Editor's note only
2005-01 2-14-2005 Drug-free school zones
amendment
Ch. 74, Art. I
2005-02 3-28-2005 Street vacations NCM
2005-03 3-28-2005 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing amendment
Ch. 36, Art. I
2005-04 4-25-2005 Subdivision and site
plan procedures
amendment
Ch. 200, Part 3
2005-05 5-16-2005 Exceed budget
appropriation limits
NCM
2005-06 6-6-2005 Salary and wage plan NCM
2005-07 6-6-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2005-08 6-6-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2005-09 8-1-2005 Appropriation NCM
Res. No.
2005-R148
7-1-2005 Council procedural
guidelines amendment
Superseded by Res.
No. 2006-R142
2005-10 8-1-2005 Bond NCM
2005-11 8-15-2005 Salary and wage plan NCM
2005-12 9-12-2005 Police mutual aid
agreement
NCM
2005-13 9-12-2005 Sale of property NCM
2005-14 9-12-2005 Transfer title of old
library building
NCM
2005-15 11-21-2005 Street vacation NCM
2005-16 12-19-2005 Fees amendment Ch. 82
2005-17 12-19-2005 Alcoholic beverages:
public consumption or
possession by minors
amendment
Ch. 36, Art. III
2006-01 1-17-2006 Littering repealer;
stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SP3)
Ch. 108, reference
only; Ch. 150
2006-02 2-27-2006 Trees amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 170; Ch. 200,
Part 4
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1213
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2006-03 Taxicabs and vehicles
for hire amendment
Defeated
2006-04 4-10-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2006-05 4-10-2006 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
2006-06 4-10-2006 Subdivision and site
plan procedures
amendment
Ch. 200, Part 3
Res. No.
2006-R142
7-1-2006 Council procedural
guidelines
Superseded by Res.
No. 2007-R111
2006-07 7-31-2006 Street vacation NCM
2006-08 6-26-2006 Exceed budget
appropriation limits;
establish cap bank
NCM
2006-09 8-14-2006 Bond NCM
2006-10 8-14-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2006-11 8-14-2006 Capital improvement NCM
Res. No.
2006-R180
8-14-2006 Council procedural
guidelines amendment
Superseded by Res.
No. 2007-R111
2006-12 9-18-2006 Salary and wage plan NCM
2006-13 11-6-2006 Bingo and games of
chance amendment
Ch. 44
2006-14 11-6-2006 General provisions:
penalty amendment
Ch. 1, Art. II
2006-15 11-6-2006 Traffic and parking
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2011-10
2006-16 11-6-2006 Traffic and parking
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2011-11
Res. No.
2006-R266
11-20-2006 Council procedural
guidelines amendment
Superseded by Res.
No. 2007-R111
2006-17 12-4-2006 Fees amendment;
taxicabs and vehicles for
hire amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2007-22
2006-18 12-4-2006 Bond NCM
2006-19 12-18-2006 Salary and wage plan NCM
2006-20 12-18-2006 Fees amendment Ch. 82
2006-21 1-22-2007 Alarm systems
amendment
Ch. 34
§ DL-1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § DL-1
1:1214
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2006-22 1-22-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 82
2007-01 3-5-2007 Site plan review
amendment
Ch. 200, Part 1
2007-02 3-5-2007 Site plan review
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 200, Parts 1 and
4
2007-03 3-19-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2007-04 3-19-2007 Bond NCM
2007-05 4-30-2007 Site plan review
amendment; subdivision
amendment
Ch. 200, Parts 1 and
2
2007-06 4-16-2007 Exceed budget
appropriation limits;
establish cap bank
NCM
2007-07 Tabled
2007-08 5-14-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 82
2007-09 5-14-2007 Salaries and wages NCM
2007-10 5-14-2007 Bond NCM
2007-11 5-14-2007 Capital improvement
appropriation
NCM
2007-12 6-25-2007 Administration: Cable
Television Advisory
Board amendment
Ch. 4, Art. XIII
Res. No.
2007-R111
7-1-2007 Council procedural
guidelines
Superseded by Res.
No. 2008-R167
2007-13 7-23-2007 Salaries and wages
amendment
NCM
2007-14 Tabled
2007-15 9-4-2007 Salaries and wages
amendment
NCM
2007-16 9-4-2007 Salaries and wages
amendment
NCM
2007-17 9-4-2007 Administration: Police
Division amendment
Ch. 4
2007-18 10-15-2007 Zoning: Municipal
Housing Liaison
amendment
Ch. 200, Parts 1 and
4
2007-19 11-13-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Parts 1 and
4
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1215
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2007-20 11-13-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Parts 1 and
4
2007-21 10-15-2007 Bond NCM
2007-22 11-26-2007 Taxicabs and vehicles
for hire; license fees
amendment
Chs. 82; 165
2007-23 12-17-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 82
2007-24 12-17-2007 Salary and wage plan NCM
2007-25 12-17-2007 Bond NCM
2007-26 12-17-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2007-27 1-7-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2008-01 3-17-2008 Salary and wage plan NCM
2008-02 4-7-2008 Administration of
government
amendment; trees
amendment; subdivision
and site plan procedures
amendment; Council
procedural guidelines
amendment
Chs. 4; 170; 200, Part
3; A205 (superseded
by Res. No.
2008-R167)
2008-03 4-7-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2008-04 4-7-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2008-05 4-7-2008 Animals: dogs
amendment; parks and
recreation areas:
general regulations
amendment
Chs. 40, Art. I; 122,
Art. II
2008-06 5-5-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 82
2008-07 5-19-2008 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
2008-08 5-19-2008 General provisions:
penalty amendment
Ch. 1, Art. II
2008-09 Salary amendment Vetoed
2008-10 6-9-2008 Salary and wage plan NCM
2008-11 6-23-2008 Bond NCM
2008-12 6-23-2008 Recycling amendment Ch. 148, Art. III
2008-13 6-23-2008 Capital improvement NCM
2008-14 Not adopted
§ DL-1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § DL-1
1:1216
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
2008-R167
7-1-2008 Council procedural
guidelines
Superseded by Res.
No. 2009-R156
2008-15 7-7-2008 Trees amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 170; 200, Part 4
Res. No.
2008-R183
7-21-2008 Council procedural
guidelines amendment
Superseded by Res.
No. 2009-R156
2008-16 9-15-2008 Compensation for
Township
NCM
2008-17 8-4-2008 Salary and wage plan NCM
2008-18 Bond amendment Deferred to Public
Safety
2008-19 9-15-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2008-20 9-15-2008 Site plan review
amendment; subdivision
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 200, Parts 1, 2
and 4
2008-21 9-15-2008 Site plan review
amendment; subdivision
and site plan procedures
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 200, Parts 1, 3,
and 4
2008-22 9-15-2008 Site plan review
amendment
Ch. 200, Part 1
2008-23 9-15-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2008-24 9-15-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2008-25 10-6-2008 Salary and wage plan NCM
2008-26 10-6-2008 Bond NCM
2008-27 10-6-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2008-28 10-6-2008 Site plan review
amendment
Ch. 200, Part 1
2008-29 10-27-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2008-30 10-27-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2008-31 10-27-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2008-32 10-27-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2008-33 10-27-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2008-34 10-27-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2008-35 10-27-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2008-36 10-27-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1217
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2008-37 10-27-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2008-38 10-27-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2008-39 10-27-2008 Tabled
2008-40 10-27-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2008-41 10-27-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2008-42 10-27-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2008-43 10-27-2008 Subdivision and site
plan procedures
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 200, Parts 3 and
4
2008-44 Not introduced
2008-45 11-10-2008 Acquisition of easement NCM
2008-46 11-10-2008 Acquisition of easement NCM
2008-47 11-10-2008 Acquisition of easement NCM
2008-48 12-8-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 82
2008-49 12-8-2008 Bond NCM
2008-50 12-8-2008 Contract to acquire
development rights
NCM
2008-51 12-29-2008 Fees amendment;
grease interceptors
amendment
82; 133, Art. IV
2008-52 1-20-2009 Site plan review
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 200, Parts 1 and
4
2008-53 12-29-2008 Stormwater pollution
prevention plan
amendment
Ch. 150
2008-54 12-29-2008 Landscaping Ch. 103
2009-01 2-2-2009 Bond amendment NCM
2009-02 3-2-2009 Parks and recreation
areas: general
regulations amendment
Ch. 122, Art. II
2009-03 Void; see Ord. No.
2009-18
2009-04 3-23-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2009-05 4-2-2009 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
2009-06 3-16-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
§ DL-1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § DL-1
1:1218
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2009-07 3-16-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2009-08 3-16-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
Res. No.
2009-R067
3-16-2009 Council procedural
guidelines amendment
Superseded by Res.
No. 2009-R156
2009-09 4-20-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 82
Res. No.
2009-R067
Revised
4-20-2009 Council procedural
guidelines amendment
Superseded by Res.
No. 2009-R156
2009-10 6-22-2009 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
2009-11 6-22-2009 Defined Contribution
Retirement Program
eligibility
NCM
2009-12 6-22-2009 Salary and wage plan NCM
2009-13 6-22-2009 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 168
Res. No.
2009-R156
7-1-2009 Council procedural
guidelines
Superseded by Res.
No. 2010-R152
2009-14 8-10-2009 Bond NCM
2009-15 8-10-2009 Bond NCM
2009-16 8-3-2009 Capital improvements NCM
2009-17 9-14-2009 Bond NCM
2009-18 9-14-2009 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 168
2009-19 9-14-2009 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 168
2009-20 10-26-2009 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing amendment
Ch. 36, Art. I
2009-21 11-23-2009 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 168
2009-22 11-23-2009 Site plan review
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 200, Parts 1 and
4
2009-23 12-7-2009 Stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SP3)
amendment
Ch. 150
2010-01 2-16-2010 Acquisition of easement NCM
2010-02 2-16-2010 Acquisition of easement NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1219
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2010-03 2-16-2010 Acquisition of easement NCM
2010-04 3-1-2010 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
2010-05 3-1-2010 Capital improvements NCM
2010-06 4-6-2010 Administration of
government
amendment; fees
amendment
Chs. 4 and 82
2010-07 4-6-2010 Site plan review
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 200, Parts 1 and
4
2010-08 4-19-2010 Street vacation NCM
2010-09 4-19-2010 Acquisition of right-ofway
NCM
2010-10 5-17-2010 Fees amendment;
taxicabs and vehicles for
hire amendment
Chs. 82; 165
2010-11 6-1-2010 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
2010-12 6-28-2010 Street vacations NCM
2010-13 6-28-2010 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
Res. No.
2010-R152
7-1-2010 Council procedural
guidelines
Superseded by Res.
No. 2011-R003
2010-14 7-19-2010 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 168
2010-15 9-7-2010 Acquisition of right-ofway
NCM
2010-16 9-7-2010 Land use: site plan
review amendment;
subdivision amendment
Chs 200, Parts 1 and
2
2010-17 9-7-2010 Capital improvements NCM
2010-18 9-20-2010 Bond NCM
2010-19 9-20-2010 Capital improvements NCM
2010-20 9-20-2010 Stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SP3)
amendment
Ch. 150
2010-21 9-20-2010 Land use: site plan
review amendment
Ch. 200, Part 1
§ DL-1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § DL-1
1:1220
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2010-22 10-4-2010 Salary and wage plan NCM
2010-23 11-8-2010 Acquisition of easement NCM
2010-24 11-8-2010 Acquisition of right-ofway
and slope easement
NCM
2010-25 11-22-2010 Appropriation NCM
2010-26 11-22-2010 Acquisition of property NCM
2010-27 11-22-2010 Acquisition of easement NCM
2010-28 11-22-2010 Acquisition of right-ofway
NCM
2010-29 12-6-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 82
Res. No.
2011-R003
1-5-2011 Council procedural
guidelines
Superseded by Res.
No. 2012-R003
2011-01 2-7-2011 Administration of
government
amendment; cable
television: programming
policies and procedures
for governmental access
channel amendment
Chs. 4; 60
2011-02 2-7-2011 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing amendment
Ch. 36, Art. I
2011-03 2-7-2011 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
2011-04 3-7-2011 Creation of Mixed Use
Princeton Junction Train
Station District
Pending court
invalidation of
Redevelopment Plan
2011-05 3-7-2011 Land use: site plan
review amendment;
Princeton Junction
Redevelopment Plan
regulatory provisions
amendment
Ch. 200, Parts 1
2011-06 3-7-2011 Appropriation NCM
2011-07 3-7-2011 Conveyance of property NCM
2011-08 4-25-2011 Appropriation NCM
2011-09 Exceed budget; cap
bank
Not adopted
2011-10 6-13-2011 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 168
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1221
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2011-11 6-13-2011 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 168
Res. No.
2011-R131
6-13-2011 Council procedural
guidelines amendment
Superseded by Res.
No. 2012-R003
2011-12 8-1-2011 Acquisition of sidewalk
easement and
temporary construction
easement
NCM
2011-13 8-1-2011 Acquisition of right-ofway
and slope easement
NCM
2011-14 8-1-2011 Bond NCM
2011-15 8-1-2011 Appropriation NCM
2011-16 9-19-2011 Land use: Princeton
Junction Redevelopment
Plan regulatory
provisions amendment
Ch. 200, Part 5
2011-17 9-19-2011 Land use: Princeton
Junction Redevelopment
Plan regulatory
provisions amendment
Pending court order
2011-18 8-15-2011 Acquisition of sidewalk
easement
NCM
2011-19 8-15-2011 Acquisition of sidewalk
easement
NCM
2011-20 10-3-2011 Refunding bonds NCM
2011-21 Land use: zoning
amendment
Not adopted
2011-22 11-14-2011 Acquisition of sidewalk
easement
NCM
Res. No.
2012-R003
1-3-2012 Council procedural
guidelines
Superseded by Res.
No. 2013-R003
2012-01 1-30-2012 Taxicabs and vehicles
for hire amendment
Ch. 165
2012-02 1-30-2012 Salary and wage plan NCM
2012-03 2-13-2012 Guarantying bonds and
refunding bonds
NCM
2012-04 4-16-2012 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
2012-05 5-14-2012 Salary and wage plan NCM
§ DL-1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § DL-1
1:1222
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012-06 5-14-2012 Sale of real property for
easement
NCM
2012-07 6-11-2012 Appropriation NCM
2012-08 6-11-2012 Bond NCM
2012-09 6-11-2012 Appropriation NCM
2012-10 7-9-2012 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
Res. No.
2012-R189
7-23-2012 Placement of
administration of
government amendment
on ballot
NCM
2012-11 8-6-2012 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 168
2012-12 8-10-2012 Acquisition of road
widening and utility
easement
NCM
Res. No.
2012-R189A
8-20-2012 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
2012-13 9-4-2012 Acquisition of road
widening and utility
easement
NCM
2012-14 9-20-2012 Acquisition of temporary
construction easements
NCM
2012-15 10-15-2012 Fees amendment;
massage, bodywork and
somatic therapy
Chs. 82; 109
2012-16 10-15-2012 Acquisition of
permanent sanitary
sewer easement and
temporary construction
easement
NCM
2012-17 Land use amendment Not introduced
2012-18 10-29-2012 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 168
2012-19 12-10-2012 Salary and wage plan NCM
2012-20 12-10-2012 Lease amendment NCM
Res. No.
2013-R003
1-7-2013 Council procedural
guidelines
Superseded by Res.
No. 2014-R003
2013-01 4-15-2013 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1223
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2013-02 3-4-2013 Appropriation NCM
2013-03 3-4-2013 Bond NCM
2013-04 3-4-2013 Bond NCM
2013-05 3-4-2013 Bond NCM
2013-06 3-4-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 82
2013-07 4-29-2013 Lease of land NCM
2013-08 5-13-2013 Appropriation NCM
2013-09 5-13-2013 Bond NCM
2013-10 9-30-2013 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 168
2013-11 5-28-2013 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
2013-12 9-30-2013 Land use: zoning
amendment
Ch. 200, Part 4
2013-13 9-30-2013 Avalon Princeton
Junction affordability
controls extension
NCM
2013-14 12-9-2013 Cable television
programming policies
and procedures for
governmental access
channel amendment
Ch. 60
2013-15 12-23-2013 Taxicabs and vehicles
for hire amendment
Ch. 165
2013-16 12-23-2013 Lease of land NCM
2013-17 Lease of land Deferred
2013-18 12-23-2013 Smoking and use of
tobacco products
banned: public places
Ch. 140, Art. II
2013-19 12-23-2013 Salary and wage plan NCM
Res. No.
2014-R003
1-1-2014 Council procedural
guidelines
Ch. A205
2014-01 3-3-2014 Salary and wage plan NCM
2014-02 3-31-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 82
2014-03 Exceed budget; cap
bank
Not adopted
2014-04 5-27-2014 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 168
§ DL-1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § DL-1
1:1224
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2014-05 5-27-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 82
2014-06 Princeton Junction
Redevelopment Plan
amendment
Tabled
2014-07 5-27-2014 Salary and wage plan NCM
2014-08 6-23-2014 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 168
2014-09 8-4-2014 Princeton Junction
Redevelpment Plan
amendment
NCM
2014-10 Capital NCM
2014-11 Pulled
2014-12 Capital improvement NCM
2014-13 Bond NCM
2014-14 Bond NCM
2014-15 8-4-2014 Fees amendment;
taxicabs and vehicles for
hire amendment
Chs. 82; 165
2014-16 8-25-2014 Land use: zoning
amendment
Ch. 200, Part 4
2014-17 8-25-2014 Acquisition of sidewalk
easement
NCM
2014-18 11-24-2014 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 126
2014-19 10-6-2014 Stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SP3)
amendment
Ch. 150
2014-20 Pulled
2014-21 11-24-2014 Acquisition of sidewalk
easement
NCM
2014-22 12-22-2014 Nuisances amendment Ch. 115
2014-23 12-22-2014 Noise Ch. 113
2014-24 12-22-2014 Appropriation NCM
2014-25 12-22-2014 Acquisition of real
property
NCM
Res. No.
2015-R003
1-5-2015 Council procedural
guidelines
Superseded by Res.
No. 2016-R003
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1225
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2015-01 2-23-2015 Acquisition of real
property
NCM
2015-02 2-23-2015 Acquisition of real
property
NCM
2015-03 5-11-2015 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
2015-04 5-11-2015 Acquisition of real
property
NCM
2015-05 5-11-2015 Acquisition of real
property
NCM
2015-06 7-13-2015 Bond NCM
2015-07 8-3-2015 Appropriation NCM
2015-08 8-3-2015 Acquisition of real
property
NCM
2015-09 8-3-2015 Acquisition of real
property
NCM
2015-10 8-3-2015 Acquisition of real
property
NCM
2015-11 8-3-2015 Acquisition of real
property
NCM
2015-12 9-15-2015 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
2015-13 10-26-2015 Establishing a mutual
aid agreement for
emergency police
services among and
between the
municipalities of Mercer
County
NCM
2015-14 11-23-2015 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 168
Res. No.
2016-R003
1-1-2016 Council procedural
guidelines
Superseded by Res.
No. 2017-R003
2016-01 2-8-2016 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 168
2016-02 2-8-2016 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 168
2016-03 3-7-2016 Acquisition of temporary
construction easement
NCM
§ DL-1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § DL-1
1:1226
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2016-04 4-4-2016 Dedication of right-ofway
and bridge
maintenance easement
NCM
2016-05 4-18-2016 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
2016-06 5-2-2016 Acquisition of property NCM
2016-07 5-16-2016 Appropriation NCM
2016-08 5-31-2016 Transfer of foundation
stones from the Grover
House to the Thomas R.
Grover Middle School
NCM
2016-09 6-13-2016 Bond NCM
2016-10 6-13-2016 Appropriation NCM
2016-11 6-13-2016 Appropriation NCM
2016-12 6-13-2016 Bond NCM
2016-13 6-13-2016 Bond NCM
2016-14 6-13-2016 Bond NCM
2016-15 7-18-2016 Land use: site plan
review amendment;
flood damage and
prevention amendment
Ch. 200, Part 1; Ch.
200, Part 6
2016-16 8-15-2016 Transfer of title of real
property
NCM
2016-17 8-29-2016 Bond NCM
2016-18 8-29-2016 Land use: site plan
review amendment;
flood damage and
prevention amendment
Ch. 200, Part 1; Ch.
200, Part 6
2016-19 9-12-2016 Bond NCM
2016-20 9-12-2016 Fees amendment Ch. 82
2016-21 9-12-2016 Nuisances amendment Ch. 115
2016-22 10-17-2016 Authorizing the grant of
a permanent bridge
easement
NCM
2016-23 10-17-2016 Authorizing the grant of
a deed of road vacation
NCM
2016-24 11-1-2016 Dedication of a parcel of
land as Sean Kehler Way
NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1227
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2016-25 11-28-2016 Authorizing the grant of
a conservation
restriction/easement
NCM
2016-26 12-12-2016 Appropriation NCM
2016-27 12-12-2016 Salary and wage plan NCM
Res. No.
2017-R003
1-3-2017 Council procedural
guidelines
Superseded by Res.
No. 2018-R008
2017-01 1-17-2017 Authorizing a real
property tax exemption
and payments in lieu of
taxes
NCM
2017-02 2-13-2017 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 168
2017-03 2-27-2017 Authorizing the
acquisition of a
temporary construction
easement
NCM
2017-04 3-13-2017 Authorizing the
acquisition of a
temporary construction
easement
NCM
2017-05 2-27-2017 Authorizing the
acquisition of a
temporary construction
easement
NCM
2017-06 2-27-2017 Land use: zoning
amendment; Princeton
Junction Redevelopment
Plan Regulatory
Provisions amendment
Ch. 200, Part 4; Ch.
200, Part 5
2017-07 2-27-2017 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 200, Part 4
2017-08 2-27-2017 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
2017-09 3-27-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 82
2017-10 3-27-2017 Smoking and use of
tobacco products
banned: public places
amendment
Ch. 140, Art. II
2017-11 4-24-2017 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
§ DL-1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § DL-1
1:1228
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2017-12 5-8-2017 Authorizing the
acquisition of a
temporary construction
easement
NCM
2017-13 5-8-2017 Dedication of land NCM
2017-14 5-8-2017 Acquisition of property NCM
2017-15 5-8-2017 Acquisition of property NCM
2017-16 5-8-2017 Acquisition of property NCM
2017-17 5-22-2017 Acquisition of public bus
stop easement
NCM
2017-18 6-12-2017 Acquisition of public bus
stop easement
NCM
2017-19 6-12-2017 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
2017-20 6-12-2017 Appropriation NCM
2017-21 6-12-2017 Bond NCM
2017-22 6-12-2017 Acquisition of property NCM
2017-23 6-26-2017 Authorizing the
acquisition of a
temporary construction
easement
NCM
2017-24 6-26-2017 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 168
2017-25 7-31-2017 Acquisition of public bus
stop license agreement
NCM
2017-26 9-5-2017 Traffic and parking
amendment
Ch. 168
2017-27 9-5-2017 Acquisition of property NCM
2017-28 9-18-2017 Acquisition of property NCM
2017-29 11-13-2017 Land use: Princeton
Junction Redevelopment
Plan regulatory
provisions amendment
Ch. 200, Part 5
2017-30 11-13-2017 Princeton Junction
Redevelopment Plan
amendment
NCM
2017-31 10-16-2017 Taxicabs and vehicles
for hire amendment
Ch. 165
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1229
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
2017-R295A
11-13-2017 Council procedural
guidelines amendment
Ch. A205
2017-32 12-11-2017 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 4
Res. No.
2018-R008
1-1-2018 Council procedural
guidelines
Ch. A205
2018-01 2-26-2018 Temporary Easement NCM
2018-02 2-26-2018 Temporary Easement NCM
2018-03 2-26-2018 Temporary Easement NCM
2018-04 3-12-2018 Temporary Easement NCM
2018-05 3-12-2018 Acquisition of Property NCM
2018-06 3-12-2018 Acquisition of Property NCM
2018-07 3-12-2018 Acquisition of Property NCM
2018-08 3-12-2018 Conveyance of Property NCM
2018-09 3-26-2018 Acquisition of Property NCM
2018-10 3-26-2018 Land Use: Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 200, Part 4
2018-11 3-26-2018 Redevelopment Plan
Amendment
NCM
2018-12 4-23-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM
2018-13 4-9-2018 Salary and Wage Plan NCM
2018-14 4-23-2018 Streets and Sidewalks:
Excavations Amendment
Ch. 152, Art. II
2018-15 6-11-2018 Bond NCM
2018-16 6-11-2018 Capital Improvement NCM
2018-17 6-11-2018 Land Use: Site Plan
Review Amendment;
Zoning Amendment;
Princeton Junction
Redevelopment Plan
Regulatory Provisions
Amendment
Ch. 200, Part 1; Ch.
200, Part 4; Ch. 200,
Part 5
2018-18 6-11-2018 Princeton Junction
Redevelopment Plan
Amendment
NCM
2018-19 7-30-2018 Bingo and Games of
Chance Amendment
Ch. 44
§ DL-1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § DL-1
1:1230
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018-20 7-30-2018 General Provisions:
Adoption of Code
Amendment;
Administration of
Government
Amendment; Fees
Amendment; Land Use:
Site Plan Review
Amendment;
Subdivision Amendment
Ch. 1, Art. III; Ch. 4;
Ch. 82; Ch. 200, Part
1; Ch. 200, Part 2
2018-21 8-20-2018 Appropriation NCM
2018-22 8-20-2018 Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 89
2018-23 9-4-2018 Administration of
Government
Ch. 4
2018-24 9-4-2018 Salary and Wage Plan
Amendment
NCM
2018-25 9-17-2018 Salary and Wage Plan
Amendment
NCM
2018-26 10-29-2018 Fees Amendment; Land
Use: Subdivision and
Site Plan Procedures
Amendment
Ch. 82; Ch. 200, Pt. 3
2018-27 12-10-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 82
2018-28 12-10-2018 Redevelopment Plan
Amendment
NCM
2018-29 12-10-2018 Land Use: Site Plan
Review Amendment;
Zoning Amendment;
Princeton Junction
Redevelopment Plan
Regulatory Provisions
Amendment
Ch. 200, Pt. 1; Ch.
200, Pt. 4; Ch. 200,
Pt. 5
Res. No.
2019-R003
1-7-2019 Council Procedural
Guidelines Amendment
Ch. A205
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1231
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp No.
2019-01 2-19-2019 Fees Amendment;
Smoking and Use of
Tobacco Products
Banned: Sales of
Electronic Smoking
Devices
Ch. 82; Ch.
140, Art. III
48
2019-02 3-18-2019 Land Use
Amendment
Ch. 200 48
2019-03 3-18-2019 Land Use
Amendment
Ch. 200 48
2019-04 3-18-2019 Land Use
Amendment
Ch. 200 48
2019-05 9-18-2019 Land Use
Amendment
Ch. 200 48
2019-06 3-18-2019 Land Use
Amendment
Ch. 200 48
2019-07r 4-1-2019 Land Use
Amendment
Ch. 200 48
2019-08r 4-1-2019 Redevelopment Plan NCM 48
2019-09 3-18-2019 Redevelopment Plan NCM 48
2019-10 3-18-2019 Land Use
Amendment
Ch. 200 48
2019-11 3-18-2019 Land Use
Amendment
Ch. 200 48
2019-12 3-18-2019 Land Use
Amendment
Ch. 200 48
2019-13 4-29-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 48
2019-14 4-29-2019 Extending
Affordability
Controls
NCM 48
2019-15 4-29-2019 Land Use
Amendment
Ch. 200 48
2019-16 6-10-2019 Bond NCM 48
2019-17 6-10-2019 Capital
Improvement
NCM 48
2019-18 6-10-2019 Bond NCM 48
2019-19 6-24-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 82 48
2019-20 6-24-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 82 48
§ DL-1 WEST WINDSOR CODE § DL-1
1:1232
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp No.
2019-21 7-8-2019 Street Vacation NCM 48
2019-22 8-19-2019 Redevelopment Plan NCM 48
2019-23 8-19-2019 Redevelopment Plan NCM 48
2019-24 8-19-2019 Land Use
Amendment
Ch. 200 48
2019-25 9-3-2019 Salaries NCM 48
2019-26 9-16-2019 Salaries NCM 48
2019-27 9-30-2019 Solid Waste: Refuse
Collection
Amendment
Ch. 148,
Art. II
48
2019-28 10-15-2019 Capital Ordinance
for Acquisition of
Land
NCM 49
2019-29 10-15-2019 Authorization to
Acquire Land
NCM 49
2019-30 10-28-2019 Drug-Free Zones:
Drug-Free School
Zones Amendment
Ch. 74, Art.
I
49
2019-31 10-28-2019 Salaries NCM 49
2019-32 Authorization of
Execution of Lease
Not adopted 49
2019-33 10-28-2019 Bond NCM 49
2019-34 11-18-2019 Solid Waste: Single
Use Plastic Bags
Vetoed by
Mayor
49
2019-35 11-18-2019 Administration of
Government
Amendment
Ch. 4 49
2019-36 12-16-2019 Salaries NCM 49
2019-37 12-16-2019 Administration of
Government
Amendment
Ch. 4 49
2019-38 12-16-2019 Cable Television
Franchise
Amendment
Ch. 59 49
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1233